


Welcome to Times Insider Events — live programming for Times Insiders and their guests. Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into news, features and opinion at The New York Times.

“Inside The New York Times Book Review” is a veritable repository of literary wisdom.

First produced in 2006, it also has the distinction of being the longest-running podcast at The New York Times, one that has featured Toni Morrison, John Updike, Stephen King, Donna Tartt, Tom Wolfe, Jonathan Franzen, Elizabeth Gilbert, Ann Patchett, Patti Smith, Robert Caro, Junot Díaz, E.L. Doctorow, Ian McEwan and many others.

At a recent Times Insider event, Pamela Paul, the editor of The New York Times Book Review and the podcast’s host, spoke with three of the people who were around at its origin: Sam Tanenhaus, the founding host and former editor of the Book Review; Dwight Garner, a book critic for The Times; and Gary Shteyngart, a novelist who served as the podcast’s very first guest.

Mr. Tanenhaus and Mr. Garner recalled asking Mr. Shteyngart if he would participate in the inaugural podcast episode. “And I’ll never forget his response,” Mr. Tanenhaus said, “which was: ‘Yes, or at least find out what one is!’ ”

“Ten years later, I still have no idea what podcasts are,” Mr. Shteyngart quipped.

The conversation covered everything from the podcast’s production value (which has increased drastically), to its music, to what the hosts learned along the way.

Mr. Tanenhaus, for one, learned to play down the importance of preparation.

“There’s a good excuse for not reading the book [in advance], which is that if you haven’t read it, you’ll ask the very simple, basic questions that listeners who don’t know the book — and don’t know the review — are more likely to want to hear.”

“That was Sam’s main advice to me when I started the podcast,” Ms. Paul added.

The hosts also emphasized the importance of spontaneity — and of learning to stifle the fear of sounding stupid.

“If you’re not afraid of making a fool of yourself,” Mr. Tanenhaus said, “it can make for pretty good radio.”

Listen to the podcast in full to catch the rest of the conversation.

Times Insider Events brings live programming to Times Insiders and their guests. If you are not a Times Insider but would like to receive invitations to Times Insider Events, you can subscribe here.


