


Picture a golden domed ring of phyllo pastry filled with creamy cheese, speckled green with sharp spring herbs and dotted pink with bits of brawny prosciutto. Imagine cutting into it, watching the glistening shards of burnished pastry shatter as they meet your knife.

Then contemplate making it.

If your temples start to sweat at the idea of executing such a gilded masterpiece, fear not. Because unlike others of its ilk, this phyllo torte is an absolute cinch to make. It does not require the fussy buttering of each individual phyllo layer. Nor does it matter if any of the gossamer pastry sheets — thin enough to read a recipe through — rip or tear.

In fact, ripping and tearing are part of the process. So is a Bundt pan, which gives the pastry its glorious vaults without any special effort on your part.

Defrost your store-bought phyllo dough, then drape sheets of it over the pan. Use your fingers to make holes to accommodate the pan’s center shaft so you can press the dough to the bottom. Don’t worry if the pastry rumples and snags. Fill the pastry-lined pan with cheese and herbs and cured cubes of meat, then pour on plenty of melted butter.

That’s the key to success: this melted butter bath. As the butter seeps from top to bottom, it infiltrates the phyllo layers as thoroughly as if you had carefully brushed each one. It takes about one minute rather than 20, then bakes up into burnished perfection.

As for the filling, you can use pretty much anything that you think would taste good nestled in crunchy, brittle pastry. In Greece, that often means feta cheese, spinach or braising greens. In Turkey, it can mean meat, vegetables, herbs, cheese or eggs — or some combination of all of the above.

I looked to Italy for inspiration and came up with a base of milky ricotta and eggs into which I mixed pecorino Romano, ricotta salata, mozzarella and prosciutto, adding spring herbs for freshness.

You can skip the meat if you like, or use greens instead of herbs. As long as you keep the ratio of 1½ pounds of ricotta to three eggs, you have room to play with the flavorings.

If you’re planning ahead, you can assemble the entire torte the day before baking, then pop it into the oven a couple of hours before your guests arrive.

Then envision them oohing and aahing as you serve it forth. Because that’s exactly what will happen when this flaky, cheesy fantasy becomes a reality.

Recipe: Phyllo Ricotta Torte With Spring Herbs

And to Drink ...

For picking a wine, the filling of this torte is what counts, not the phyllo. The richness of the cheeses and the herbal accents call for any of the vast category of fresh, lively whites. Start in Italy, and you have choices ranging from Etna Bianco from the island of Sicily in the south to vermentinos from Liguria in the northwest, Soaves and tocai friulanos in the northwest and many in between, including fianos, Orvietos and verdicchios. Look toward Santorini in Greece for an assyrtiko, or toward the Loire Valley for any of the constellation of crisp sauvignon blancs produced around Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé. Other options include grüner veltliner or a savagnin from the Jura, whether made in the oxidized style or not. Leaner sparkling wines would be great, as would rosés with good acidity. ERIC ASIMOV


