


If the dance landscape were a Venn diagram, Reid Bartelme, a dancer turned costume designer who can’t seem to stop performing (he has tried), would fill the center space. Mr. Bartelme bridges worlds.

With his design partner, Harriet Jung, he has brought a fresh sense of fashion to the dance stage, working with Justin Peck at New York City Ballet and with contemporary choreographers including Jack Ferver, Liz Santoro and Pam Tanowitz. But his contribution to the art form is more valuable than costume design alone.

Mr. Bartelme, 35, also bridges two dance worlds: that of uptown (the sometimes rarefied universe of ballet) and downtown (contemporary dance, where conceptual ideas, risk and bare feet are key ingredients). Historically, the two don’t intersect much. But Mr. Bartelme is an undeniable link.

“He’s friends with everyone,” Ms. Tanowitz said. “He is a trained ballet dancer and also works in downtown dance. His costumes are at New York City Ballet and Abrons and everywhere in between. I think it has to do with his personality, his inclusiveness.”

Mr. Bartelme, whose mild-mannered elegance is anchored by humor, is responsible for inspiring ballet dancers including David Hallberg, Isabella Boylston and James Whiteside of American Ballet Theater, and many at New York City Ballet, including Mr. Peck, Adrian Danchig-Waring and Gretchen Smith, to broaden their artistic horizons.

“I wanted my friends in ballet to know more,” Mr. Bartelme said in a recent interview. “I wanted them to have a broader understanding of what dance means, especially in New York. If I bring Justin to a Beth Gill piece” — Ms. Gill is a respected downtown formalist — “it’s because I think that work is going to be really valuable for him to see; and because I admire his work, I want him to have information that’s going to help him grow.”

Mr. Ferver, a writer, director, choreographer and actor, has, under Mr. Bartelme’s tutelage, become obsessed with City Ballet. Specifically, he has fallen hard for the choreography of George Balanchine, who died in 1983 but still remains the guiding light of City Ballet, as well as for two dancers: Sara Mearns and Teresa Reichlen.

“I would never say ‘I’m the next thing for ballet,’” Mr. Ferver said. “That would be like someone from the ballet world saying, ‘I’m going to write a script because I’ve gone to see a lot of plays.’ ”

Nevertheless, he is trying to choreograph a ballet. In his “I Want You to Want Me,” which opens at the Kitchen on June 30 as part of the American Dance Institute — he described it as “a horror play and goth ballet” — the costumes are by Mr. Bartelme, who is also a cast member. His presence as a dancer in the studio has influenced Mr. Ferver to push himself choreographically as he works in the ballet vernacular.

“There’s a solo for Reid in the beginning of the piece,” Mr. Ferver said. “I gave him some ballet steps, and he did them and then he said: ‘It’s too easy. You’re better than this. You have to think of something better.’ I love that.”

Mr. Bartelme grew up in SoHo as “a New York music kid.” He said it gradually dawned on him that he didn’t relate to the theatrical elements of singing and embodying a character. As a voice student in high school at Interlochen Arts Academy in Michigan — he first met Mr. Ferver there — he enrolled in a class called General Dance. “It was a gym credit, and it was only 45 minutes, and it was my favorite period of the day,” he said. “I kept taking it over and over until there was a point at which I was like, I am very good at this.”

Long and lean with flexibility and line, Mr. Bartelme has a natural facility for ballet. He attended SUNY Purchase College briefly but soon realized: “If you’re going to be a ballet dancer, you go be a ballet dancer.”

He was accepted into the School of American Ballet at 18 but opted for the school at Pacific Northwest Ballet, where he was in its professional training program before joining BalletMet in Columbus, Ohio, and then the Alberta Ballet in Calgary. After returning to New York, he danced with Shen Wei Dance Arts for two years. His transition to design came through his love of making things, namely Halloween costumes — Mr. Ferver recalled the time Mr. Bartelme “went as a pregnant male sea horse” — rather than a fascination with fashion.

At the Fashion Institute of Technology, where he met Ms. Jung, he found his point of view. “My direction was simplicity,” he said. “I wouldn’t say minimalism.” He added: “I knew I wasn’t going to be designing anything super futuristic or uncomfortable or bizarre. I was interested in clothes that were beautiful and comfortable and modern.”

While still at the institute, he began receiving commissions for costumes from choreographers. Initially, he brought in Ms. Jung only for Mr. Peck’s costumes; now they collaborate full-time and have a studio at Abrons Arts Center.

Like Mr. Bartelme, Ms. Jung, 31, arrived at the institute with life experience; she had studied visual art and earned a degree from the University of California, Berkeley, in molecular and cell biology. Quickly, she and Mr. Bartelme bonded. “A lot of kids get to F.I.T., and they walk into class day one and they look like normal kids, and a month and a half in they’re fully wearing witch outfits because they’re experimenting with what’s going to be good for them,” Mr. Bartelme said. “Harriet and I came in day one in sweatpants and left school in sweatpants.”

Coming commissions include costumes for dances by Matthew Neenan and Pontus Lidberg, and for Mr. Peck’s “Scherzo,” which is to have its premiere with City Ballet in July at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center.

Costumes are challenging for many choreographers; who in the dance world does Mr. Bartelme think could most use his design help? “I feel like often the companies that need help, I don’t want to help that company,” Mr. Bartelme said with a chuckle. “I feel like a lot of people who get it as dancemakers also often get it aesthetically.”

Whenever they have a break, and it’s increasingly uncommon, Mr. Bartelme and Ms. Jung work on developing clothing — simple, wearable — to sell online. They have no aspirations to develop a big brand; dance is their base.

Mr. Bartelme said that while he and Ms. Jung love the fashion world, they “see the misery and the greed and the insecurity and the pretentiousness.” But dance is different. “There’s a joy and creativity and lack of pretension,” he said. “So many fashion people are so overly concerned with their status. I can’t get on board. It’s too painful.”


