


To mark the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death, The New York Times asked four contemporary writers to envision lost and rebooted scenes from some of the playwright’s works.

This is Shakespeare’s deleted scene from “Romeo & Juliet,” as discovered by John O’Farrell, in which he explored the second meeting of the young lovers.

ROMEO: Oh blessed, blessed night! I am afeared, Being in night, all this is but a dream, Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

JULIET: Thou said that yesterday…

ROMEO: I know, but thou seem’d to like it…

JULIET: Verily. Once; ’twas romantic; Twice ’tis just annoying.

ROMEO: O.K. — uh, Juliet, Juliet … thou art like the morning sun!

JULIET: Art thou saying I am fat?

ROMEO: Nay, nay, thrice times nay, I simply mean that like the sun, um, thou giveth life, and bring lightness all around …

JULIET: Thou sayest I’m a big fat round sun, is that what thou sayest?

ROMEO: Look, pray we just start again? Juliet, oh Juliet, um, how like the dawn are thee? Let songbirds herald my waking life when you kissed me!

JULIET: You’re doing it again.

ROMEO: Doing what?

JULIET: That annoying thing with thy mouth when thou thinks thou said something poetic.

ROMEO: Soft, speak not of human follies when Cupid’s bow aims true.

JULIET: There ’tis again.

ROMEO: I do that not! Anyway, ’tis better than being a nag.

JULIET: Foresooth, I naggeth not!

ROMEO: Count thee the drinks I quoffed? ‘Three goblets of wine Romeo, ’tis surely plenty!’

JULIET: Thou hadst four actually.

ROMEO: See? Nag, nag, nag!

JULIET: Why must thy be like this? Is it because thy family liketh me not?

ROMEO: Leave mine family out of this …

JULIET: Oh fair chance wouldst be a fine thing! Alas, see how love fades? ’Tis but one day and now the red rose of love sheds petals brown and dry.

ROMEO: It’s always damn roses with you, isn’t it? There are other flowers you know …

JULIET: My fears have come to pass, I must speaketh with thee of matters grave.

ROMEO: What monstrous news is this?

JULIET: Oh Romeo, Romeo, I wanteth not to lose thee as a friend …

ROMEO: No — it cannot be?

JULIET: ’Tis not you; ’tis me.

ROMEO: Thou art saying that I am dump-ed!

JULIET: Like th’ albatross who sails o’er the sea; like the solitary moorland tree, I, Juliet, now alone must be.

ROMEO: So I am dump-ed?

JULIET: Too young am I for thy marriage bed; I mean I am supposed to be 13; ’tis actually a little creepy.

ROMEO: But we’re good together, thy and I. ‘Romeo and Juliet’ – it just sounds right.

JULIET: See how you put thyself first again? Why dost no man say ‘Juliet and Romeo?’ No, I must myself discover. I crave to travel, study; maybe stay on a kibbutz.

ROMEO: A what?

JULIET: ’Tis in the Holy Land. Thou rises at dawn to pick grapefruit, and therein finds thyself.

ROMEO: You’ve got really weird. Is there someone else?

JULIET: No. Anyway, Tybalt sayest that monogamy is a social construct.

ROMEO: I bloody knew it. Tybalt. I’ll kill him. Or we could both kill ourselves? — that would be a way to end it?

JULIET: A little overdramatic, thinketh thee not? What say we give just back each other’s poetry books and call it a day?

ROMEO: Farewell; I shall never find love like this again …

Romeo exits then re-enters

ROMEO: Just one last thought — does thy nurse have a boyfriend?

John O’Farrell is the book writer for the musical “Something Rotten!,” which is now playing on Broadway.

In the final moments of “Measure for Measure,” Duke Vincentio proposes to Isabella, and she is given no lines with which to respond. Here is an alternate ending to her story, courtesy of Heidi Schreck.

DUKE:Dear Isabel,

I have a motion much imports your good;

Whereto if you’ll a willing ear incline,

What’s mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.

ISABELLA:My lord, ’ere we met I was a lost girl

Prepar’d with trembling spirit to abjure

The company of men, to the join the wisp

O’ women who live to contemplate

The bright face of God. I wept to think that

Never should I speak a dear husband’s name

Nor kiss his darling bushy-bearded face

Nor bury my nose in his rank T-shirt

Nor live by his side and die in his bed, likely

At tender age, in throes of childbirth

DUKE: Dear Isabel —

ISABELLA:Not finished.

DUKE: Sorry.

ISABELLA: But after all that I have learned of men

During this exceptionally hard week,

I weep no more. For though you all have heard

Me plead for mercy in famous speeches

Not one of your gender has mark’d my voice

But demanded I go to his bed. And

You, Duke, think on all you have demanded

Of me: To trick a most innocent girl

Into sleeping with the sociopath

You left, for no good reason, well in charge

Of your city; to ask forgiveness for

That selfsame sociopath, even though

He ordered my brother’s head be chopped off

And shipped to him by suitcase; Finally,

You asked me to stand up in the town square

And name myself a whore. And in return

Shall I give up my life to be your helpmeet?

You have shown me now the true face of man

And I tell you truly, I would rather

Sink my feet into the earth, grow branches

For arms, sprout buds from my fingers, and live

Within the silent grove of my sisters,

like a Myrtle Tree, than spend one minute

More with any of you. Upon my life,

And with unmeasured joy, I tell you no.

End of Play

Heidi Schreck’s recent play is “Grand Concourse.” She also writes for television, including “Nurse Jackie” and “Billions.”

From “Teenage Dick,” a reimagining of “Richard III” set in high school, by Mike Lew.

Bare stage. Reveille music plays. We see local news clips of youth football teams helping a disabled student to score a symbolic touchdown.

RICHARD: Roseland High School. Home of the Roseland Stallions.

Now that the winter formal gives way to glorious spring fling, which I believe is the Sadie Hawkins dance. I’m not sure, because who’s Sadie Hawkins? And also nobody’s asked me yet.

Now that our football season has ended and the warring Stallions turn to more peaceable pastures, we find our rocks-for-brains hero Eddie — the quarterback — sleeping through his job as junior class president. “Oh? Was I president? I was too busy throwing sacks.” Throwing sacks — is that what quarterbacks do? I’m not sure, because as you can see I am not one who is shaped for sports.

I, Richard, who am but junior class secretary. Third in line behind Eddie the quarter-brains and Clarissa the goodie-goodie vice president. Welllll. Maybe I can’t play football, but I can run a play. The senior elections are upon us and from here I will vault past my current inglorious station. Not by a pity vote. Not by campaigning. But by systematically destroying the competition. I’ll take down Clarissa AND Eddie AND hold dominion over all of this school.

“But Richard,” you whimper. “That’s so so mean. Why would you wish for something so mean?” Because they all hate me, that’s why! I was stamped for their hatred from birth. They see my unpleasant shape and like a magnet I must repulse, whereas Eddie, he too like a magnet draws in their adoration like so many iron shavings. Eddie who is nothing more than a pleasing shell. A Fabergé egg he, all pretty surfaces hollowed of brains.

Well Eddie, dear egg, I will crack thee. I will be senior class president.

I come to bury Eddie, not to praise him.

Is this a ballot I see before me?

Eddie, the love I bear thee can afford no better term that this: thou art a massive stupid jerk.

School bell rings.

Aw, I’m late for English. No matter. Watch this ...

Light shift and we’re in English class. Richard approaches Elizabeth

Sorry I’m late, Ms. York. With my locker all the way across campus, it’s so hard getting to class. You know, with my gait?

Mike Lew has written “Bike America” and other plays. “Teenage Dick” is a commission from the Apothetae, which illuminates the “disabled experience.”

In Christina Anderson’s riff on “Love’s Labour’s Lost” set in the early 1980s, day laborers tired of surviving from moment to moment vow to devote their lives to building an economic empire.

The parking lot of a run-down strip mall.

Men are gathered in the hope of finding day labor. They wear workmen’s clothing: steel-toe boots, hoodies, jean jackets, skull caps, etc.

It’s usually a quiet morning filled with coffee sips and cigarette smoke. But today, a clump of men gather around Lean and Julian in the midst of a lively conversati —

LEAN: I don’t want anything you’re dealing, Julian.

JULIAN: Let’s start fresh, Lean. O.K.? I’ll try to appeal to your gut. O.K.? Just listen to me until a job comes. If it’s a job we can do, me and my boys will take it. I’ll be outta your face. Gone.

Lean considers.

JULIAN: O.K.?

LEAN: All right.

JULIAN: [jumps right to it] O.K. I write with this hand. [Holds up dominant hand] My mother wanted me to write with this one [holds up non-dominant hand]. My father wanted me to use whatever hand God decided for me. He calls this hand my upper hand. “Let him get acquainted with his upper hand! That’s the one that grabs the gold! That’s the one that fights for truth!” I’m 4 years old and kept reaching for things with my upper hand, and my mother kept scolding me for it. So what does she eventually do?

She binds it.

Wraps it up when my father goes to work. Then takes it off when he comes home. This goes on for months. Until my father comes home early one day. Unexpected. He sees the rubber, the plastic around my upper hand. “What the hell is this?” I start to cry. My father got the scissors. Cuts it from my hand. Took me to the sink. Washed it. Dried it. Put lotion on it. My father resurrected my truth. My passion. It was the nicest thing he ever did for me. My upper was back in its rightful place. My real self was brought back to life.

Julian raises his upper hand. Makes a fist. The other men that surround him do the same.

JULIAN: This hand holds honesty. Truth. We make deals. Keep promises. Collect debts with the upper hand, Lean. The soul sleeps in this hand. You reach out to another brother with this hand, and you’re cradling his soul. Which hand holds your truth?

Slowly, Lean raises his upper hand. The men breathe as they gaze into each other’s souls. After a beat, following Julian’s cue, the other men lower their hand. Lean is the last to lower his hand, draped in vulnerability.

JULIAN: O.K., Lean. I spoke to your gut. I showed you my hand. Knowing what you know about me now, I’ll ask you again: Will you work with us? Three years, we study — no drugs, no drink, no women. We acquire knowledge, then we build our fortune.

Just as Julian’s about to speak, sound of a truck pulling into the parking, then stops. A dude enters:

DUDE: We need five guys to do some landscaping!

Julian turns to Lean.

Christina Anderson is author of “The Ashes Under Gait City” and other plays. She teaches playwriting at SUNY Purchase and is a resident playwright at New Dramatists.


