


HOUSTON — Stephen Curry packed light for his most recent business trip.

In a move born of optimism or confidence (or perhaps a mix of both), he chose not to take a suit, dress attire that the N.B.A. requires players to wear if they are injured or inactive and consigned to watch games from the bench. Curry, the luminous star of the Golden State Warriors, was not planning to watch from the bench.

Sure enough, when the Warriors renewed their first-round Western Conference playoff series against the Houston Rockets with Game 3 on Thursday, Curry was nowhere near the bench. Unfortunately for him, he was not on the court, either. He was tucked away in the recesses of Toyota Center, his injured right ankle reducing him to the role of distant spectator for at least another night.

“There was still some healing to be done,” Curry said.

The Rockets took advantage of Curry’s absence, escaping with a narrow win that reduced the Warriors’ series lead to two games to one entering Game 4 on Sunday. Once again, after spending recent days working to graduate to full, pain-free mobility, Curry expects to play — only this time, he has the backing of his coaches and trainers.

“No pain, no limping,” Coach Steve Kerr said after watching Curry scrimmage with teammates at Saturday’s practice. “The conditioning and the rhythm after being off that long, it’s an issue. But we’ll continue to monitor that. Steph doesn’t take too long to get his rhythm back generally, so I think he’ll be fine.”

Curry will be re-evaluated Sunday, Kerr said, but his return would be good news for the Warriors, good news for television viewers and bad news for the Rockets, who stymied their dysfunction just long enough to steal a 97-96 victory against the Curry-less Warriors in Game 3.

It has been a delicate balance for Kerr, who has clearly wanted to treat Curry’s injury with exceeding caution. The Warriors, in all likelihood, do not need Curry to play another minute to win this series. But they do need Curry if they hope to survive three more playoff rounds in their quest for another championship.

Curry has the most famous right ankle in sports, in large part because of its ragged history. His troubles began after his second season as he had surgery on a tendon in May 2011. After a second operation in 2012, his rehabilitation was accompanied by widespread concerns that his ankle could derail his career.

Instead, Curry has been resilient, appearing in at least 78 games in each of the past four regular seasons despite absorbing punishing contact from defenders. By comparison, when Curry sustained his injury in Game 1 against the Rockets — on a simple plant so he could turn to run upcourt — it seemed nondescript except for the hobble that followed.

On Tuesday, a magnetic resonance imaging exam “did not reveal anything of concern,” the Warriors said in a statement, but Curry, who had crammed 24 points into 20 minutes of Game 1, missed Games 2 and 3. He left everyone with the impression that he would have played had it been the finals. He did not sound concerned.

On Friday, Curry participated in a game of three on three against a collection of teammates and the assistant coach Luke Walton. Curry was rusty, a step out of sync. His familiar explosion and rhythm were lacking, he said, not that he was surprised.

“Awful,” he said. “It’s only been five days, but when you miss that much time literally not doing anything, it’s tough.”

Nobody is pitying the Warriors, who have enviable depth and tend to recover from their rare missteps by constructing masterpieces. Not only did they go the entire regular season without losing consecutive games, they rebounded from their nine losses by winning the following game by an average of 14.6 points.

“Our guys are competitive,” Kerr said. “They generally get angry when they lose, and I think that’ll be the feeling come Sunday. Obviously, most teams get angry, but our guys have done a good job of responding with their heads as well as their hearts.”

The Warriors were not exactly crisp without Curry in Game 3. After committing seven of the team’s 14 turnovers and dribbling the ball off his foot in the closing seconds, Draymond Green took responsibility for the loss — an assessment that Kerr described as categorically false. But Kerr appreciated Green’s fire.

“Oh, Draymond will be fine,” Kerr said. “He always takes the blame if he doesn’t play well. I admire that about him.”

Kerr cited precedent in expressing confidence that the Warriors would clean up a lot of their mistakes. And if there has been a benefit to Curry’s two-game absence, consider the early-round playoff experience gained by younger players like Ian Clark, a third-year guard who came off the bench to score 11 points in Game 3.

“I think part of the objective when you play in the regular season is to give guys as much time as you can, up and down the roster, because you never know how things are going to work out,” Kerr said. “Obviously, we didn’t know that Steph would get injured in Game 1. But because he did, Ian’s getting his chance.”

It was a nice opportunity for Clark, an understudy who had prepared for his moment. But the Warriors are still eager for their star to return.


