


Robert A. McDonald, the secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, drew bipartisan criticism after comparing the waiting times for veterans receiving medical care to standing in line for a ride at Disneyland.

At an event with reporters on Monday, Mr. McDonald was asked why the department did not publicly report the so-called create date when veterans first ask for medical care, which could be used to calculate how long they are waiting in lengthy backlogs for their appointments.

“The days to an appointment is really not what we should be measuring,” Mr. McDonald responded. “What we should be measuring is the veteran’s satisfaction. What really counts is how does the veteran feel about their encounter with the V.A.? When you go to Disney, do they measure the number of hours you wait in line? What is important is, what is your satisfaction with the experience.”

He continued: “What I would like to move to actually is that kind of measure. We are in the process of creating that kind of measure, validating that kind of measure.”

The comparison to an amusement park experience did not sit well with some veterans and politicians.

Dale Barnett, the national commander of the American Legion, said in a statement: “People don’t die while waiting to go on Space Mountain. We also disagree with the substance of his comment because wait times are very important to not just the satisfaction quotient, but in some cases the veterans’ health.”

The department has come under heavy criticism and congressional scrutiny for a backlog of hundreds of thousands of benefits claims fostered by repeatedly canceled appointments, unreturned calls and the rapid turnover of physicians. In 2014, Eric Shinseki resigned as V.A. secretary as the scandal mushroomed.

“Clearly the secretary’s comments were not worthy of the veterans that he serves,” the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, said of Mr. McDonald’s comments. “But they are also indicative of a culture of indifference at the V.A.”

Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida and a one-time Republican presidential candidate, tweeted that the comment was “a complete disgrace.”

Senator John McCain, a Republican from Arizona and a Vietnam War veteran, called the comment “outrageous and completely inappropriate.”

“Secretary McDonald’s comparison further erodes what little confidence the American people have left in the Department of Veterans Affairs and its commitment to our veterans,” he said.

While the political response was especially forceful among Republicans (Senator Roy Blunt, a Republican from Missouri, called on Mr. McDonald to resign), some Democrats also protested. Representative Tammy Duckworth, a Democrat from Illinois who was wounded while serving in Iraq, called the words “unbelievably tone-deaf and hurtful to American heroes desperately in need of care.”

Representative Ann Kirkpatrick, Democrat of Arizona, said Mr. McDonald was “wrong to downplay the need to measure wait times,” while Representative Loretta Sanchez, Democrat of California, said she was “disappointed by Secretary McDonald’s callous comments.”

On Tuesday, Mr. McDonald responded to the wave of criticism in a statement: “It was never my intention to suggest that I don’t take our mission of serving veterans very seriously. If my comments Monday led any veterans to believe that I, or the dedicated work force I am privileged to lead, don’t take that noble mission seriously, I deeply regret that. Nothing could be further from the truth.”

Before Mr. McDonald’s statement, the V.A. said in a statement Monday: “We know that veterans are still waiting too long for care. In our effort to determine how we can better meet veterans’ needs, knowing that their satisfaction is our most important measure, we have heard them tell us that wait times alone are not the only indication of their experience with V.A., and that’s why we must transform the way we do business.”

It said the create date “did not reflect the veterans’ preference or what was deemed clinically necessary by a health care clinician.” Now it uses a “preferred date,” which reflects when the patient wants to be seen or when a provider says the patient needs care.

Based on that metric, the department posts some data on its website, including average waiting times and the number of patients waiting for an appointment.


