


LOS ANGELES — The primary Tuesday in California handed victories to Donald J. Trump on the Republican side and Hillary Clinton on the Democratic side. But it was also a reminder of what bad shape the state’s Republican Party is in. No Republican drew enough votes to qualify for the runoff for an open United States Senate seat this fall; the contest will feature only Democratic candidates.

A collection of Wednesday morning headlines hit the same theme: The Republican Party had crashed and burned in California and had done little to address its long-running problems attracting voters in the largest-growing demographic: Latinos. Adam Nagourney, the Los Angeles bureau chief for The New York Times, and Jennifer Medina, a correspondent in the bureau, talked about the results and what they mean for a beleaguered party in the country’s most populous state.

ADAM NAGOURNEY: Jenny. So, it might have gotten overlooked in the late-breaking Democratic presidential contest here (why, oh why, does it take California so long to count votes?), but this was not a good night for the California Republican Party. Or I guess I should say, once again, this was not a good night for the California Republican Party.

Coming into this contest, the Republican Party in California — you know, California, the state of Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan and Arnold Schwarzenegger — did not control a single statewide office. In the contest you covered last night, to replace Senator Barbara Boxer (a Democrat), a Republican did not even make it to the runoff. And the winning campaign Donald Trump ran for the Republican presidential nomination, with its emphasis on battling illegal immigration and his challenge to the “Mexican” judge, is pretty much the stuff of nightmares for moderate California Republicans who have been trying to fashion a party that can appeal to the changing demographics of this state. Just how badly did the Republicans do in the Senate race?

JENNIFER MEDINA: I think it’s fair to say: Downright terrible.

For the first time in a century, no Republican will be on the ballot for the state’s Senate seat. No Republican even approached 10 percent of the total vote, and the top three combined received less than a million votes.

Now, part of the problem for the Republicans was a very crowded ballot — there were more than 34 candidates, a dozen of them Republicans — so whatever support they might have had was divvied up into tiny slices. But judging by last night’s results, even if the party had unified around one candidate, they would have had a hard time making the ballot. This is probably not what Duf Sundheim, a former state party chairman who won 8 percent of the vote last night, had in mind when he backed California’s move to an open primary system in 2010.

NAGOURNEY: No doubt about that. If I’m reading our results correctly, Loretta Sanchez, the Democrat who came in second behind Kamala Harris, got 18.3 percent of the vote — which is more than the three Republicans behind her got combined. Oof. Last time I checked, Republicans made up 24 percent of the electorate; Democrats made up 44 percent. The state party chairman, Jim Brulte, told me that he expected that disparity to get worse this year because Democrats, unlike Republicans, have a contested primary. At this rate, people who don’t register with either party may someday outnumber Republicans.

A lot of people here say that the state party’s downfall should be a cautionary lesson for national Republicans: that it all began when Republican leaders, including Gov. Pete Wilson, championed Proposition 187, a voter initiative in 1994 that would have cut off benefits for illegal immigrants. The initiative, which passed, was thrown out in court, but the damage was done. Does that make sense to you? How much of a big deal do you think Latino voters are here, and how much trouble is the Republican Party in with that part of the electorate?

MEDINA: Almost every Republican and Democrat I talk to in the state points to that anti-immigrant initiative as the beginning of the end for Republicans here. Latinos are nearing 40 percent of the total population in California and by all accounts are registering in record numbers, no doubt largely driven by Mr. Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric. There’s really a sense of “Republicans don’t want us” among many immigrants, not just Latinos. Republican leaders here know that and have been making serious efforts to attract Latino and Asian moderates to run in local races, with some success. But they know that the fall election is going to make that job much, much harder, and it has to have them nervous about the potential for their further demise here.

NAGOURNEY: I’ve learned from the experience not to make sweeping predictions about politics. It’s easy to forget this, but there is a long Republican history in this state. Karl Rove, who was the chief strategist for George W. Bush, used to insist in conversations with me back in 2004 that California was still a competitive state in presidential elections. (It wasn’t. The last time the Republicans won a presidential race here was when Mr. Bush’s father defeated Michael Dukakis in 1988, and the state was only becoming more Democratic.)

All that said, I am wary of falling into the Republican-Party-is-dead-in-California trap. Politics is fluid, and things always change. But I’ll tell you what I think is a real problem for the California Republican Party: It’s going to get tougher and tougher to find good candidates to run if the party is a minor party (and we are close to that) — and more than that, if it is identified with the kind of anti-illegal-immigrant language that is coming from its standard-bearer, Donald Trump. Do you see any bright spots on the Republican horizon?

MEDINA: The Central Valley remains a Republican stronghold. Though the area is heavily Latino, and many of the agricultural business leaders strongly favor looser immigration laws, many there remain wary of Democrats. While several Republican members of Congress have faced fierce re-election battles in recent years, they have managed to hang on to their seats and performed well last night. It’s also the home of Kevin McCarthy, the House majority leader, whose district has its own mixed feelings about immigration. It will be telling to see what Mr. McCarthy and his colleagues say in response to the kinds of comments coming from Mr. Trump. Former Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger said through a spokesman on Monday that he voted for John Kasich, not Mr. Trump.

NAGOURNEY: I’ll leave you and our readers with one final point on this, which may not make Jim Brulte very happy. If you look out over the landscape, there is a generation of younger Democratic candidates who are ready to move up as some of the older elected officials — Gov. Jerry Brown, Senator Dianne Feinstein and Ms. Boxer — move on. It starts with Ms. Harris, who would be the first black woman to serve in the United States Senate in 15 years, and Ms. Sanchez, who is Latina. Beyond this year, the bench includes Antonio Villaraigosa, the former Los Angeles mayor who is looking at a run for governor; Eric Garcetti, the Los Angeles mayor; and Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor who is also running for governor.

But the party’s biggest challenge in the months ahead is maneuvering around the presidential candidacy of Mr. Trump. How it does that may say more than anything about its prospects going forward in a state that is now 40 percent Latino.


