


WASHINGTON — The European telecom operator Altice completed its $17.7 billion deal for Cablevision on Tuesday, its second major acquisition in a year and a step toward its goal of becoming a leading cable and broadband internet provider in the United States.

After its purchase of Cablevision, which includes Newsday and a television station, the Altice subsidiary Altice U.S.A. will have 4.6 million broadband and cable television subscribers, making it the fourth-largest cable and broadband operator in the country, with customers in 20 states, including the New York market.

Altice is a global telecommunications firm based in the Netherlands started 15 years ago by the French-Israeli billionaire entrepreneur Patrick Drahi. In addition to the United States, it operates in Europe, the Caribbean and Africa. The company wants to keep expanding, creating more consolidation in the market for a utility service — broadband — consumer advocates fear is controlled by fewer firms. (Comcast, Charter and Altice now control 52 percent of the cable market in the United States.)

In an interview, Dexter Goei, chairman and chief executive of Altice U.S.A., talked about the company’s plans and how, despite the many regulations recently aimed at the cable and broadband industry, he is not scared off. Below are edited excerpts from the conversation.

In one year, you have closed acquisitions of Cablevision and Suddenlink. What next?

We are going to take our time and be thoughtful about next steps, but fundamentally we are in the business of getting larger. Scale drives better economics and better strategic flexibility. We will look to do more. When we will do something more, I don’t know. In 2016, we are very focused on the integration of, not just the two businesses in the U.S., but the entire Altice family.

In what ways do you want to get larger?

We would like to do more of what we have. Are there things to be done in other revenue streams, whether in content or mobile or technology? Maybe. It is worthwhile knowing that every single one of our businesses in other markets are quad-play, both fixed and mobile broadband (and television and phone).

In places where we have big market share positions, we have invested in media and content. Way too early to tell, but we will be ambitious. We have been built by a prescient entrepreneur who has not been shy to continue to grow our business and we’ve moved quickly when we want to move quickly.

Can you afford to take your time? Your United States cable and telecom competitors such as Comast, AT&T and Verizon are buying content and ad technology.

I don’t necessarily agree that our competitors are out there doing a lot of stuff on content. I would say obviously Comcast for sure, but Verizon is very focused on its mobile content strategy. The Dolans were very involved in content and split the team up. To invest in content is a big word, but you have to be very specific as to what you are talking about. We aren’t at the scale to do what Comcast does. Everything else is beating around the edges. We can be thoughtful.

It would seem like this is a bad time to invest in the United States market if you read statements from cable firms. They complain about too much regulation from the Federal Communications Commission.

It’s too early to tell if we have a strong point of view on any issues. These are, as you may suspect, in other markets we are in. On net neutrality, we have the same directives in Europe that are percolating. On the all-vid, or set-top box proposal, this is a very U.S. type of issue that we aren’t smart enough around today. We don’t have that issue today in other markets.

How about cost-cutting? How is that going to affect customers and employees of Cablevision? Is there concern about how cost-cutting will hurt service and jobs?

On the end-user side, I don’t think end users will expect anything but continued great service and even greater service. We’ve said we’ll invest significant amounts of capital in customer service and the network.

On the Cablevision employee side, people are unbelievably energized and excited about what we are bringing to the table. There is no fear on the cost side. There is a clear understanding that there is a new management team in place that will be very thoughtful about how we deploy our capital going forward. It will be a little bit better than done historically. We aren’t feeling any things you are suggesting people might be feeling.


