


CHRISTIANSBURG, Va. — A former Virginia Tech freshman charged in connection with the kidnapping and killing of a 13-year-old girl described her involvement in the girl’s death as being part of “the best club in the world,” a police detective testified at a hearing in the case Friday.

Police detectives said that the freshman, Natalie Keepers, helped her classmate, David Eisenhauer, plot the killing and hide the body of Nicole Madison Lovell, 13, because Ms. Keepers enjoyed the excitement of the secret bond she and Mr. Eisenhauer shared.

“She told us,” Detective Ryan Hite of the Blacksburg Police said in testimony, “that she was part of a secret club, and it was the best club in the world because Eisenhauer understood her.”

Ms. Keepers referred to Mr. Eisenhauer as a “sociopath,” Detective Hite testified. Ms. Keepers, the detective said, described herself as “a sociopath in training.”

Nicole disappeared from her Blacksburg home on Jan. 27 and was found dead three days later in North Carolina. Mr. Eisenhauer, 18, was arrested at his dorm on Jan. 30. Ms. Keepers was arrested the next day. The case gained widespread attention because of the shocking nature of the allegations and the role that social media played in bringing Mr. Eisenhauer and Nicole together.

A Montgomery County judge certified accessory-before-the-fact and body concealment charges against Ms. Keepers, 19, and a murder charge for Mr. Eisenhauer during a hearing on Friday.

The police said that Ms. Keepers and Mr. Eisenhauer turned off their cellphones and stowed them in the console of Mr. Eisenhauer’s Lexus sedan during crucial hours, apparently in an effort to avoid an electronic record of their whereabouts. But they still left an electronic trail that included GPS data, store surveillance footage and grisly exchanges of instant messages.

“I smell like cleaning supplies,” Ms. Keepers texted Mr. Eisenhauer after she helped move and wash the child’s body, according to the police testimony. “I don’t want to smell like that. I want to take a shower.”

Wearing glasses and a purple hoodie, Ms. Keepers entered the courtroom with her chin planted against her chest. As the evidence against her mounted, however, she looked at the witnesses. Mr. Eisenhauer, dressed in a black suit, displayed no obvious emotion during the three-hour hearing.

Neither team of lawyers for the two called witnesses of their own. The teams spent comparatively little time questioning the electronic road map portrayed by the prosecution.

“As long as they don’t find the body for a week, it will never be found,” the police read from a transcript of messages they said were downloaded from Mr. Eisenhauer’s phone. “We definitely did overkill. Always do overkill when your life is on the line.”

As a capacity crowd in the fourth-floor courtroom watched, a video screen depicted the movements captured by a Garmin GPS device removed from Mr. Eisenhauer’s car. A detective pointed out dates and times that appeared to match the prosecution’s narrative: a visit to a Walmart to buy a shovel, a trip to the local Cook Out restaurant to plot the killing and a pre-disappearance drive past the site thought to be where the killing took place — a remote, mountainous area about a dozen miles north of the Virginia Tech campus. The GPS device showed the car stopping in the vicinity of Nicole’s house around midnight on the evening she disappeared.

Friday’s hearing also included accusations by police investigators that they found blood on the road that investigators have pinpointed as the killing site, on the inside and outside of Mr. Eisenhauer’s car, as well as a bloody palm print on the shovel.

The administrator of the state medical examiner’s office in Roanoke described the death as a homicide caused by a stab wound to the neck.

In her taped confessions, conducted over two days, Ms. Keepers moved from denying any knowledge of the crime to providing motives and key locations in the plot, a detective testified.

The prosecution, led by Mary Pettitt, the commonwealth’s attorney for Montgomery County, said that there was no reason to believe that Ms. Keepers was present but that she did help plan the killing, choose a murder site and then move the body of a girl she had never met.

With Friday’s ruling, the case advances to a grand jury, which meets on July 26.


