


Last summer, Yve Laris Cohen, a visual artist and choreographer who knows how to build things, was broke. When he heard that part-time production work was available at the Martha Graham Dance Company — retaping the studio’s floor and organizing office space — he signed up. He was, as he put it recently, “desperate for anything.” Even a job paying $15 an hour.

The Graham company had no idea that Mr. Laris Cohen, 30, was a 2014 Whitney Biennial artist whose work explores, in part, ideas about labor and value in relation to dance. He’s fond of pointing out the financial discrepancies between uptown and downtown dance, or of showing how a sculpture can be perceived as a set piece in a performance and as a work of art in a museum.

What the company eventually learned was that Mr. Laris Cohen was already well established in the dance world. He had rigorous ballet training while growing up in San Diego: on point at 9 (Mr. Laris Cohen, who is transgender, was a female student) and able to whip off 32 fouetté turns at 11. He studied the Graham technique at the University of California, Berkeley, in the dance department founded by two former company members, Marnie Thomas Wood and David Wood.

“Graham is in my body, and it was actually the Graham technique that moved me into postmodern forms from ballet,” Mr. Laris Cohen said. “It was a major transitional moment for me to be introduced to Graham, and it was really inspiring.”

Both wage working and modern dance figure into Mr. Laris Cohen’s current exhibition, “Embattled Garden,” at Company Gallery on the Lower East Side. As an exhibition, it’s unconventional: Mr. Laris Cohen has spent the last five weeks there reconstructing the set of Graham’s 1958 dance of the same title: a colorful, bisected raked platform and a 12-foot tree by Isamu Noguchi. The gallery is his workshop, the fabrication his performance. The actual Noguchi set is in the space as well.

Mr. Laris Cohen’s intention is to create a replica of the Noguchi set, damaged by flooding during Hurricane Sandy, which the Graham company will be able to use in performance. “This project is very much an outgrowth of my relationship to them as a part-time wage worker,” Mr. Laris Cohen said. “I didn’t approach them as an artist; I approached them as a worker.”

LaRue Allen, the Graham company’s executive director, said the organization supported Mr. Laris Cohen in his project because they knew and trusted him. “We don’t do this willy-nilly for anybody who comes with an inquiry,” she said.

Mr. Laris Cohen had planned to display his replica alongside Noguchi’s set on Saturday, the final day of his show. But completing the set is a race against time. This week, he was behind on the tree’s base because he was waiting for a delivery of metal pieces. “It’s possible I won’t paint the tree base until Saturday,” he said, “hours before the closing reception.”

On Thursday, the Graham Company told him he could continue work on the set, off-site, after the show ended. (There will still be a closing reception at which both sets can be viewed.)

Working during gallery hours has meant continual interruptions for Mr. Laris Cohen. During a recent visit, a deliveryman arrived for a pickup. Mr. Laris Cohen directed him to the back office and said with a sigh: “See? That’s the kind of stuff I do.”

Ms. Allen would not confirm plans to use the set once it’s finished; the organization plans to build its own copy with Hudson Scenic Studio. “It can become the property of the company, yes,” she said. “But we have put no restriction on Yve in that it has to serve our purposes.”

The gallery, which is paying for the set to be rebuilt, will give the replica to the Graham organization. “It’s not going to be sold,” Mr. Laris Cohen said. He is excited to be making, as he explained, “objects that are not sculpture and not sets, not architecture, not art objects, not props — yet are all those things at once.”

Andrew Durbin, the gallery’s assistant director, regards the show as “an ongoing performance that takes the form, at times, of a kind of exhibition,” he said. “But since things move so much, it’s kind of hard to pin it down.”

For Mr. Laris Cohen, too, “Embattled Garden” is a different kind of work; it’s the first time he’s not including a traditional performance element. “The main art object is really the transaction with the Graham company,” Mr. Laris Cohen said. “That’s where the dance is.”


