


For weeks and months, Judge Shira A. Scheindlin had been excoriated by New York City’s highest public officials for her ruling in 2013 that the Police Department’s stop-and-frisk policy had violated the rights of minorities. At the time, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said, in essence, that he hoped the ruling would not take effect while he was still in office, because he did not want to be “responsible for a lot of people dying.”

The attacks on Judge Scheindlin only intensified after a federal appeals panel stayed her ruling, criticized her actions in the case and removed her from continuing to oversee it.

But last week, as Judge Scheindlin prepared to step down after nearly 22 years as a federal district judge in Manhattan, she offered her first extensive interviews about the case and her tenure, with a particularly blunt response to the criticism.

She would never forget, she said, seeing a front-page photograph in a newspaper the day after she released her ruling, showing Mr. Bloomberg and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, as she put it, “looking like two angry white men.”

“They seemed out of touch with the issues that the communities cared about,” Judge Scheindlin said. “They didn’t seem to understand the impact of these policies on real people and real neighborhoods and real communities and the detrimental impact it was having, even on policing. And that’s the point. They didn’t seem to get it. It was all about fear — New York would blow up.”

Judge Scheindlin, 69, who was appointed to her position in 1994 by President Bill Clinton, spent last week packing boxes in her chambers, putting the final touches on several opinions and orders, and even going into court to hold a few last-minute hearings.

She has handled numerous high-profile trials, including that of Francis X. Livoti, a former police officer who was convicted in 1998 of violating the civil rights of a Bronx man who died after a confrontation with the police; and of Viktor Bout, a Russian arms dealer who was convicted in 2011 of conspiring to kill Americans.

Her cases have also involved the First Amendment, terrorism, solitary confinement in New York State’s prisons, and in 2004, even professional football: She struck down an age restriction for the National Football League draft (the ruling was reversed).

Like all federal judges, she had enjoyed lifetime tenure on the bench. Now, she said, she plans to devote most of her time working as a mediator or perhaps a court-appointed monitor, focusing on police, prison, education, housing and voting reform. She also will become of counsel to the law firm Stroock & Stroock & Lavan, where she hopes to do pro bono and commercial work.

“What I hope to do,” Judge Scheindlin said, are “even more good works than I could accomplish here.”

In the interviews, Judge Scheindlin defended her handling of the stop-and-frisk case and cited the drop in the number of recorded street stops, to about 24,000 last year from 685,000 in 2011.

“Think of the lives that that has changed, the lives that that has touched,” she said, “the lives of people who were stopped for no good reason and how intrusive that is.” The policy had “bred nothing but distrust,” she added.

Judge Scheindlin said that, in her view, Mr. Bloomberg was “one of our best mayors,” but he “really never appreciated what was wrong with stopping 700,000 overwhelmingly innocent people as they went about their daily lives.”

In a statement to The New York Times, Mr. Kelly said, “The fact that the judge was completely removed from the case by the appellate division, on their own initiative, for pretrial partiality and violation of the judicial code of conduct speaks for itself.” A spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg declined to comment.

Judge Scheindlin, in the interviews, also ruminated over a judge’s influence and the occasions when it goes only so far. She revealed, for example, that she believed that the 25-year sentence she imposed in 2012 on Mr. Bout was excessive and inappropriate.

But because one count carried a mandatory 25-year minimum sentence, she was unable to impose a lesser term.

Mr. Bout had been arrested in Bangkok after an elaborate government sting operation that relied on informers who posed as representatives of a terrorist group who wanted to buy arms to kill American pilots stationed in Colombia. The evidence showed that Mr. Bout had agreed to sell hundreds of surface-to-air missiles, thousands of AK-47 machine guns and five tons of plastic explosives to the informants. Prosecutors had sought a life sentence, but Judge Scheindlin recalled having reservations.

There was no doubt Mr. Bout had been an international arms dealer, she said, but by the time of his arrest, he was “pretty well retired.”

“The question was, ‘Was he still an international arms dealer, and does that matter?’” she continued.

“I’m not defending him,” she said, “but he’s a businessman. He was in the business of selling arms.” He was not, she said, a fighter or a terrorist from Al Qaeda “who lives to blow up civilians in a supermarket.”

“They reeled this guy in,” she said. “They offered him a lot of money.” She added, “I gave the lowest sentence I could possibly give.”

Judge Scheindlin, who had been a federal prosecutor, said that she agreed that sting operations were often necessary and effective tools for law enforcement.

But she also had serious questions, she said, about the 2009 operation used to arrest four men in a plot to shoot missiles at military airplanes at a National Guard base in Newburgh, N.Y., and to blow up synagogues in the Bronx.

The case, handled by a different judge, spurred criticism about the government’s reliance on a F.B.I. informer who had posed as a Pakistani terrorist and how the defendants had been lured into the plot. Judge Scheindlin said her views were based only on what she had read and heard about the case.

“You entice them with real money and benefits,” she said, and the men eventually “do convict themselves” with incriminating statements. “But,” she said, “you sort of feel if they were never approached and urged on, they didn’t have the brains or the wherewithal to pull this off.”

Judge Scheindlin pointed to a different case to illustrate a judge’s power. A state inmate had complained that he had been placed in isolation for three years as punishment for a minor infraction. The New York Civil Liberties Union represented the man, and the result was a class-action settlement, recently approved by Judge Scheindlin, that will overhaul the way solitary confinement is used in New York State’s prisons.

“I’m not a person who was ever enamored of power,” Judge Scheindlin said, “but I like to exercise it in the public good.”

She also tried to do that in the stop-and-frisk case. In her 195-page opinion, she had concluded that the police had resorted to a “policy of indirect racial profiling” in minority communities, and she ordered that sweeping reforms be developed, including the appointment of a monitor.

The appeals panel, criticizing her after the city appealed, said that she had compromised the “appearance of impartiality” by appearing to have steered the case to herself and in granting interviews to news organizations.

A team of lawyers filed papers defending her handling of the case and objecting to her removal from it. The panel soon issued another opinion, which described Judge Scheindlin as a “long-serving and distinguished jurist,” and said it had made “no findings of misconduct, actual bias or actual partiality” on her part, although she would remain off the case.

Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration later withdrew the appeal, and the reforms are being developed under another judge’s supervision.

“The opinion survives intact in every way,” Judge Scheindlin said. “The remedies are today being implemented. The number of stops sank enormously. Crime did not rise up despite the wild predictions about the city would burn.”

In his 2015 book “Vigilance,” Mr. Kelly questioned the “curious timing” of Judge Scheindlin’s decision — a month before the Democratic primary — saying that whatever her intention had been, its release “was a huge boost to the de Blasio campaign, which was focusing more and more on the police.”

Judge Scheindlin said she had not read the book; told of his assertion, she said, “That just shows that Ray Kelly didn’t know my style as a judge.”

The timing was coincidental, she said, as her self-imposed rule was to give litigants a prompt decision in all cases.

“The fact that it coincided with the mayoral election is not my problem,” she said. “The chips fall where they fall.”

Judge Scheindlin acknowledged that the stop-and-frisk decision would be her legacy, the kind of case that might be inscribed on a judge’s tombstone, she joked. “We judges talk about that — a ‘tombstone case.’”

“I’m very proud of my work in the stop-and-frisk area,” she said, adding, “I have no second thoughts.”


