


A Staten Island woman who supports Senator Bernie Sanders said she received death threats after photos of her wearing a cap with the message “America Was Never Great” were posted widely on social media.

The woman, Krystal Lake, 22, said Thursday that she had ordered the custom-made hat online with the phrase, a play on the slogan “Make America Great Again,” popularized by the campaign of Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee.

Ms. Lake said she had gotten tired of hearing Mr. Trump’s slogan from his supporters and thought America “was never great.” She said that Mr. Trump’s slogan did not make room for bigger aspirations beyond the past and that he was dismissive of groups that did not fit his ideal demographic.

Ms. Lake said the hat arrived on Saturday, and she wore it the next day to work at the Home Depot on Forest Avenue on Staten Island.

She surmised that a photo of her wearing the hat had been taken by a customer. But she did not specifically see anyone snap a picture and heard no complaints from customers, co-workers or managers, describing Sunday as “just a regular day.”

That sense of normalcy was shattered on Wednesday, however. At first, she said, she was unaware of how much attention she was getting. But in short order, Ms. Lake said, she was bombarded with negative comments, including death threats, on social media.

“They were actually threatening to kill me over a hat,” she said on Thursday. “I couldn’t believe it. I was calling my best friend and I was like, ‘How is this happening? It’s just a hat.’ ”

Ms. Lake said she did not take the threats seriously, attributing them to Internet trolls.

“I think I’m hitting them with their own medicine,” she said of Trump supporters. “My whole thing was, I like being different.”

The angry reactions caught the attention of news agencies, including The Staten Island Advance. A spokeswoman for the Trump campaign did not respond to an email on Thursday night.

Some people even called Home Depot to complain, she said. So many calls came in that workers stopped answering the phone. Ms. Lake said that she called in sick on Thursday and that a manager had contacted her to ask about her well-being.

But, she said, she expected to be fired from her job, which she has held for nearly two years.

In a statement, a Home Depot spokesman, Stephen Holmes, did not directly address Ms. Lake’s job status but said that the company did not allow employees to wear political buttons, caps or T-shirts, regardless of the party affiliation or candidate. He said any employee’s refusal to follow company policies could lead to termination.

Mr. Holmes said that the company respected “the personal opinions and beliefs held by our associates and our customers,” but that the store was not an appropriate place for workers “to promote or display personal opinions, beliefs, political and religious affiliations or any type of proselytizing.”

Ms. Lake said she did hear from others who spoke in her defense.

She said she was set to graduate in two weeks with a degree in media studies from the College of Staten Island and wanted to pursue a career in music, radio, social media or journalism. She has already started looking for jobs in those fields.

As for the custom-made cap, Ms. Lake said she had ordered only one but planned to buy many more.


