


PARIS — Paris has never quite gotten over the destruction of Les Halles.

In a morbid spasm of 1970s urban renewal, the soaring 19th-century, Liberty-style, glass-and-steel food market — once the pulsating heart of the city — gave way to a claustrophobic underground shopping mall and flimsy street-level pavilions.

The city’s planners were never forgiven for a mistake that almost instantly took its place in the pantheon of the great architectural blunders, smack alongside the destruction of New York’s old Penn Station.

Since then, Paris’s every attempt to heal the undisguisable wound seemed only to call further attention to the original sin.

Now comes the latest salve — what is called La Canopée — a gigantic curving metallic umbrella rising 72 feet over what was once the essence of not only Paris’s heart, but also its soul and belly. It, too, has already provoked laments over what is no longer there.

But maybe — just maybe, after more than four decades of trying and failing dismally — La Canopée can provide something else at central Paris’s most abused site.

Three weeks after the anxious official unveiling — “we had to fix this broken place,” Mayor Anne Hidalgo of Paris said — and five years after construction began, the appraisal of skeptical Parisians, it seems, is like the face the city presents to the world: reserved and critical, but not unwelcoming.

At least, they are learning to live with it, if only because it is going nowhere.

“Hmm, not bad,” mused François Jouslin de Noray, who was strolling with his wife, a retired couple enjoying a recent sunny, if damp, afternoon. “I don’t like the color. What’s interesting is that it is partly open. Not totally though. Yet, the color …

“But the form, I like it,” he concluded.

As much as anything, the gazers seemed stunned by the structure’s grandiose scale at a time of diminishing public budgets — 7,000 tons of steel and 18,000 sheets of glass, at 238 million euros, or about $269 million, for the structure and $450,000 a year for maintenance.

At 75,000 square feet, it is the size of the historic Place des Vosges in the nearby Marais.

Yet that ambition was a measure of “all the massacres” that have taken place at the site, as the ex-mayor, Bertrand Delanöe, under whom the project was conceived, put it.

The first was in August 1971, when President Georges Pompidou took advantage of Parisians’ summer break to begin demolishing the halls by the famed architect Victor Baltard on the site of what had been the city’s storied market for eight centuries.

“It is impossible to console oneself over the stupid death of this site,” wrote the historian Eric Hazan in his book “The Invention of Paris.”

Relief that nothing worse had now been inflicted predominated on a recent afternoon.

“It doesn’t displease me. More interesting than what was there before,” said Serge Aubignat, a retired banker, peering at La Canopée from an observation deck. “In any case, we are going to make do with it.”

Thousands already were. An immense rainbow-hued crowd, the tributary of multiple suburban train lines converging in the underground transit center-cum shopping mall beneath La Canopée, poured under it on a recent afternoon.

Doubts about France’s ability to entertain a multicultural future are momentarily quelled in one of the capital’s most racially mixed spaces.

Some 750,000 people pass through the transit center every day. The multiethnic crowd appeared unoppressed by a structure already panned in the European and French press, suspicious of any venture with commercial overtones.

Indeed, the glass-fronted facing wings of La Canopée house a number of new high-end restaurants — the chef Alain Ducasse has been mentioned — and the stores Nike, Lego, and Sephora.

The municipality is throwing in a music conservatory, a hip-hop center, a library, rehearsal spaces and other public facilities to mitigate doubts about La Canopée’s commercial vocation.

But the local neighborhood association is unconvinced. “An Inauguration With a Bitter Taste,” was the headline on its newsletter.

“The whole thing is on a Pharaonic scale,” Gilles Pourbaix, one of the association’s leaders, said with disapproval. “It’s a temple of commerce. A monstrous cover of steel. It would have been O.K. next to a superhighway. But in the middle of Paris?”

Yet a feeling of openness under La Canopée helped mitigate the density of the crowded area. The structure gapes wide open on two ends.

One side faces a panorama of sky, the soaring 16th-century St.-Eustache church and the circular Bourse de Commerce — a planned garden between them is still under construction. The other side looks out at the old stone of residential and commercial buildings on the Rue Pierre Lescot.

La Canopée’s 15 “leaves,” sheaths of translucent glass, are open, letting in light and sun. Its combination of undulating curved lines and verticals humanizes the massive structure, as does the irregular wavy shape.

The thick steel beams do not recall Baltard’s airy ironwork in the original Les Halles.

Yet in a city where architectural beauty and uniformity have rendered a catalog of doubtful or disgraceful modern additions — the intrusive Tour Montparnasse skyscraper, the formless Bastille opera house, or the frigid La Défense business district — the gently swerving La Canopée appeared at least to be finding muted favor.

Even if there were snickers for the official description — “like an immense leaf undulating at the level of the tree tops, a fluid, light and translucid envelope” — approval outweighed disapproval, at least among its inexpert visitors.

“It isn’t ugly,” said Alain Urbain, who was there to have a look with his wife, Caroline. “The curves are agreeable. And it isn’t too aggressive.”

Sunlight sets off the mysterious off-yellow color to the best advantage. But when the clouds hide the sun the structure looks touched by Paris pollution. The color, not the form, is the most contentious aspect. “It’s not frank, this color,” said one visitor, Andrée Gasco.

“Piss-like,” said her husband, Bernard, a retired lawyer.

Mr. Gasco knew the old Halles, and could not help lament. “We went to the last flower market,” when Les Halles was abandoned, nearly 50 years ago, he said. “Everybody was crying.”


