


Tragicomedy Central: If you were compiling a list of America’s funniest novelists, you might not think to include Louise Erdrich. That’s no knock against her: Erdrich’s richly layered books, dealing with subjects from rape to war to marital strife to racism, have rightly placed her in the top ranks of the literary pantheon. They just haven’t earned her a reputation for, you know, humor. So it’s striking that reviewers of her latest novel, “LaRose” — new at No. 8 on the hardcover fiction list — have singled out what Mary Gordon, in these pages, described as “this serious novel’s unexpected comedy.” (Gordon cited a scene in which the residents of an assisted-living home tamper with a villain’s medicine to give him “an unstoppable erection and uncontrollable diarrhea.” This in a book about the shooting death of a 5-year-old boy.) In a profile for Erdrich’s hometown newspaper, The Minneapolis Star Tribune, the journalist Laurie Hertzel also praised the story’s comic elements. “Oh, good,” Erdrich said. “I was looking over my notebook a while back, and I had this giant note in the middle of my pages. And it said: ‘Problem. Big problem. There is no humor whatsoever in this manuscript.’ It’s the hardest thing, writing humor into a book. But it’s also essential. I just don’t feel like I’ve got a book unless there’s something funny in it.”

Music Man: Julian Barnes’s new novel, “The Noise of Time,” which channels the real-­life Soviet composer Dmitri Shostakovich, cracks the extended hardcover fiction list at No. 20. Shostakovich (1906-75) is having a bit of a moment in the West — Barnes’s novel follows a collection of letters and Wendy Lesser’s critical study, “Music for Silenced Voices,” both published in 2011. Some of this fascination no doubt stems from the composer’s political context. As an artist in a totalitarian state, Shostakovich was both embraced and reviled in his time, even as his own sympathies remained elusive in a way that must be hard for a novelist like Barnes to resist. “Shostakovich is an appealing figure for any artist to contemplate,” Lesser said via email, “because his flaws seem forced on him by his times and his virtues seem preserved in the face of great personal struggle. It’s tempting to identify with him — as everyone has, from the Russian audiences of his own period to music lovers of all sorts today — but in fact his situation was uniquely his. That’s partly why he makes such a memorable central character, whether in fiction or in nonfiction: He seems to know us well enough to touch us deeply, and yet we can never fully know him.”

Traitor: The highest-ranking newcomer on this week’s hardcover nonfiction list is “Valiant Ambition,” Nathaniel Philbrick’s account of Benedict Arnold, at No. 5. “If he decided this was the right thing to do, it was the right thing to do,” Philbrick told The Wall Street Journal about Arnold’s treason during the American Revolution. “I don’t think there was a lot of introspection.”


