


There may not have been a consensus top player available in this year’s Major League Baseball draft, but faced with several intriguing choices Thursday, the Philadelphia Phillies went with a sweet-swinging high school outfielder, selecting Mickey Moniak with the No. 1 overall pick.

Moniak, a 6-foot-2, 180-pound 18-year-old from La Costa Canyon High School in Carlsbad, Calif., is a force from the left side of the plate and was considered the most natural hitter available in the draft. He is the first high school outfielder to go No. 1 since Delmon Young in 2003, and while he is not expected to develop big-time power, his command of the bat at such a young age makes him a fairly safe pick for a team trying to work its way back into contention.

“It’s undescribable,” Moniak said in a televised interview when asked what it felt like to go No. 1. “It’s always a kid’s dream to get drafted by a major league team, but to be the No. 1 pick is insane.”

During his senior season, Moniak, who has been compared to Steve Finley and Christian Yelich, batted .476 in 29 games, his third consecutive season of batting higher than .400. Some work in the weight room helped increase his home run total from zero as a junior to seven as a senior, and in a conference call with reporters after his selection, he cited further physical development as the biggest key to his future success.

“Collectively, we believe Mickey was the best player available in the draft,” Johnny Almaraz, the Phillies’ amateur scouting director, said in a statement. “He’s a true center fielder with incredible offensive ability and the potential to be a perennial All-Star.”

The Phillies passed on a chance to take Florida’s A. J. Puk, a big-bodied 6-foot-7 left-hander with a high-90s fastball who could be the first player from this draft ready to contribute at the major league level. Despite being the top player available on many prospect lists, including Baseball America’s Top 100, Puk fell to the Oakland Athletics with the No. 6 pick.

There was plenty of talk that the Phillies would have their choice influenced somewhat by signability. The assigned value of the top slot in the draft, according to baseball’s bonus pool regulations, is just north of $9 million, but the Phillies can try to negotiate that figure lower in hopes of applying the leftover money to picks taken later in the draft. The catch is that if the Phillies fail to sign Moniak, as the Houston Astros did with Brady Aiken, the first pick in 2014, they will lose that entire figure from their bonus pool.

Moniak acknowledged that his representation had been in contact with the Phillies in regards to signability, and he said he hoped to sign a contract as soon as possible.

“I talked with them a little bit before,” Moniak said. “Obviously there’s a lot that goes into the whole process. I let my agent handle most of that.”

Unlike other sports, where top overall picks can seem like a sure thing, baseball is far more unpredictable. The volatility of pitchers taken with the pick has never been more apparent than in the last few seasons, as Mark Appel (the top pick in 2013) and Aiken have yet to reach the major leagues. Aiken’s case was particularly dramatic; he had Tommy John surgery after failing to sign with Houston, and was then drafted by the Cleveland Indians with the 17th pick in 2015.

Philadelphia has had a frustrating run over the last five seasons, going 319-389 since setting a franchise record with 102 wins in 2011. But there are signs the Phillies are headed in the right direction: Their organizational talent ranking, according to Baseball America, rose from 22nd last year to eighth this season. With Moniak just their second chance to pick first overall — they picked Pat Burrell with the No. 1 pick in the 1998 draft — they hope to continue building into a contender.

It is the second consecutive season Philadelphia went with a high school position player with its top pick — it took Cornelius Randolph, a shortstop, with the 10th pick last year — after scoring a huge hit in 2014 by drafting a college pitcher, Aaron Nola, with the seventh overall pick.

Nola, who needed just 30 games in the minors to earn a spot in the big leagues, is already the team’s best pitcher despite being just 23, but the clock is running on how long the team controls him. After doubling down on high school first-rounders, the Phillies will have to hope Nola is still around and producing when Randolph and Moniak are ready to contribute.

After Moniak, the top five was rounded out by Nick Senzel, a third baseman from Tennessee, who went second to the Cincinnati Reds; Ian Anderson, a high school right-hander, to the Atlanta Braves; Riley Pint, a high school right-hander, to the Colorado Rockies; and Corey Ray, an outfielder from Louisville, to the Milwaukee Brewers.

The Yankees and the Mets picked back-to-back in the middle of the first round, with the Yankees selecting Blake Rutherford, a high school outfielder from California, at No. 18 and the Mets selecting Justin Dunn, a right-hander from Boston College, at No. 19. The Mets had another first-round selection, No. 31, as compensation for losing Daniel Murphy as a free agent to the Washington Nationals and used it on Anthony Kay, a left-hander from the University of Connecticut, who attended the same Long Island high school as Steven Matz.

Thursday’s portion of the draft consisted of the first two rounds and two competitive balance rounds. On Friday, the draft will continue with Rounds 3 through 10; it will conclude Saturday, with Rounds 11 through 40.

INSIDE PITCH

The draft, which is generally a sleepy affair, produced some controversy when DELVIN PEREZ, a 17-year-old shortstop from Puerto Rico, who was considered a top-five talent, reportedly tested positive for an unnamed performance-enhancing drug. While a positive test does not affect a player’s eligibility for the draft, the news may have negatively affected Perez’s draft position. He was selected by the St. Louis Cardinals with the No. 23 pick.


