


WASHINGTON — T. J. Oshie completed a hat trick in overtime to give the Capitals a 4-3 home victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins on Thursday night in a classic start to a highly anticipated second-round playoff series featuring Alex Ovechkin and Sidney Crosby.

Oshie’s wraparound goal 9 minutes 33 seconds into overtime of Game 1 of the best-of-seven series stood up after a video review showed that the puck had clearly crossed the goal line.

The Vezina Trophy finalist Braden Holtby made 42 saves, and Andre Burakovsky also scored for the Capitals.

Pittsburgh’s Matt Murray stopped 43 shots. Ben Lovejoy, Evgeni Malkin and Nick Bonino scored for the Penguins, who will try to even the series in Game 2 on Saturday night in Washington.

Ovechkin, the 2004 No. 1 pick, assisted on Oshie’s second goal, while Crosby, the top pick in 2005, was on the ice for three goals against. This is the first playoff meeting between the two Eastern Conference stars since 2009.

After days of hype, the Penguins jumped out to a fast start. Chris Kunitz fired a shot off the post in the first minute, and Pittsburgh had five of the game’s first six shots.

A tripping penalty on Pittsburgh’s Matt Cullen did not lead to a power-play goal, but it turned the tide. The game was played almost entirely in the Penguins’ defensive end as Washington had 10 straight shots on goal.

The ninth and 10th in that sequence came off the rush 10:13 in and made the score 1-0 for Washington. With John Carlson and Jason Chimera on a three-on-two advantage, Burakovsky fed Chimera and scored on the rebound off Murray’s left pad.

Burakovsky’s goal was his first point of the playoffs. It was just the start of the scoring.

At 10:40 of the second period, the Penguins got their own rebound goal off the rush. Bonino blew past the Capitals’ third defensive pair, Nate Schmidt and Dmitry Orlov, turning them inside out and giving Lovejoy a putback off Holtby’s right pad.

Just 57 seconds later, Malkin stepped off the bench and took a pass from Kunitz. Malkin strode toward the net and lifted a backhander over Holtby to give the Penguins the lead.


