


LOS ANGELES — Back in the day, sneakerheads had all kinds of homemade methods for cleaning their shoes: a Tide-to-Go pen, a little bleach with toothpaste or some dish detergent with water and a toothbrush to scrub away grime.

Commercial shoe cleaners existed, of course. But treat your prized Air Jordans with chemicals not designed for sneakers? No way.

If you want to see how far sneakers — and the cleaning of them — have come, pay a visit here to a store in the Little Tokyo neighborhood called Jason Markk.

Inside, a wooden shoeshine chair is reserved not for wearers of Italian loafers but men and women in Nike and Adidas shoes. And behind the counter, well-groomed young men in white dress shirts, denim aprons and fresh sneakers have a title known in-house as S.C.T., or Sneaker Care Technician.

Using house-brand cleaning products and considerable know-how, they make dirt stains, heel drag and other street markings disappear, returning busted-looking Superstars and Yeezy Boosts to a state that’s more fresh-out-of-the-box.

“A customer will usually come in with one to five pairs of shoes,” said Jason Markk, 35, the founder, who started selling his cleaning solution in 2007 and opened the store two years ago. “The running record is 54 pairs.”

He and his team see a wide spectrum of sneakers and conditions.

“We’ve had shoes caked in mud,” Mr. Markk said. “Then we get shoes that need a little touch-up. One of our S.C.T.s will say, ‘Let me see what you got.’ Then we’ll tell them, ‘O.K., what we suggest on this material is this, this and that.’”

Jonmarc Francisco, the S.C.T. manager, chimed in to recall one infamous drop-off: a pair of Bapes (sneakers by the fashion label A Bathing Ape) covered in blood.

“Not just a little bit,” Mr. Francisco said. “Soaked. The guy nearly blew up his hand on the Fourth of July.” But after careful scrubbing and buffing, he said, “the shoes looked almost brand-new. The guy was super happy.”

The store offers a “classic clean” ($10 to $15, depending on the shoe material), a “deep clean” ($23 to $28) and, for the truly fanatical, the “purple label detail” ($65 plus), which includes a deep clean, deodorizing and a thorough going-over of the laces, insoles and lining. Standard turnaround for most jobs is three days.

The service has been limited to those willing to brave Los Angeles traffic to drive downtown. But on June 25, Mr. Markk is to open a pop-up shop in the Footaction store on East 14th Street in Manhattan, bringing the white-glove treatment to sneakerheads here. The shop will run through June 30.

If the Los Angeles store is any indication, business will be brisk. Mr. Markk and his technicians have so far cleaned more than 15,000 pairs of sneakers. Two more arrived at lunchtime, carried in by a young woman named Megan Warden.

She stepped to the counter and was met by Justin Familara, a technician who looked over one pair, Nike Air Max 1s, and gave his professional assessment: undersole crud, a common sight.

Her other pair, Nike Roshes, were practically new but they were also white. “They’re supercomf,” Ms. Warden said. “But the stains are very obvious. That’s what I get for buying white shoes.”

She’s tried to clean her shoes at home, she said. But pointing to the staff, she added: “They’re way better at it than me. Before they were here, you just bought new sneakers.”

Mr. Markk’s prescient idea was to treat sneakers like the expensive, fetishized footwear they’ve become. If Bruno Magli oxfords are well cared for, why not Nike Airs? But the drop-off service, if not his foray into sneakers, was an afterthought, he admitted.

Mr. Markk grew up in Harbor City, a neighborhood in Los Angeles, playing basketball, listening to hip-hop and being the D.J. at parties. Sneakers, he said, went hand in hand with that culture.

In his 20s, while working at an ad agency, he had a revelation one night as he cleaned his Nike high-tops with a homemade concoction of warm water and mild dishwashing soap: Why wasn’t there a sneaker-specific cleaner on the market?

He asked around and found that many fellow sneakerheads were also doing the homemade thing. So he decided to create a sneaker cleaning product and hired a chemist. Research and development took 10 months.

“He would call me and say, ‘I’ve got a new sample for you,’ and I’d take it home and test it on my shoes,” Mr. Markk said. “I’d take little notes, like, ‘It foamed up too much.’”

He wanted a versatile product that wouldn’t damage shoes and that could clean suede, pony hair, ostrich leather and any other exotic material sneaker designers use.

Once he had his winning formula, Mr. Markk quit his job and spent a summer selling kitchen knives out of a trailer in the middle of nowhere. It taught him the fundamentals of sales.

In 2007 he began marketing his cleaner, scoring instant raves from streetwear blogs like Hypebeast and collaborations with influential sneaker shops like Undefeated in Los Angeles and the now-closed Nort/Recon in New York.

His store here was intended as a retail flagship, a place to sell his bottled solution, hog-bristle brushes and other products. But the “JM Throne” (the shoeshine chair) made him realize he had an opportunity to create a personal-service experience. For V.I.P. customers, like DeAndre Jordan of the Los Angeles Clippers, he offers bulk sneaker home pickup.

Like Mr. Markk, his aproned technicians, who work behind a wall of shoe-filled cubbies, regard cleaning sneakers as a labor of love. Sneakerheads themselves, they can check the latest styles and handle ultra-rare models, like the pair of original 1985 Air Jordan 1s that a woman brought in. They belonged to her father, and she was having them cleaned as a gift to him.

On this day, Joe Aguilar, a staff member at the store for more than a year, was working the brush on an “iconic” pair of Jordans; instead of the more common Jumpman logo, they had the Swoosh symbol.

“For me to work on this, I get off on the hype of it,” Mr. Aguilar said. “I want to take care of this, and I want it to look brand-new.”

He added: “It’s like a basketball team here. Everyone is good in their own way. It’s like, yo” — he pointed to his co-worker Joseph Henderson — “this dude is the bomb at doing suede. We’ve got somebody who’s great at doing Timberlands. Everybody’s got their finesse.”

Mr. Markk, the man who created the cleaner and assembled the expert crew, said his store’s meticulous process reflects his customers’ love for their kicks.

“It’s like a car: You just don’t mess up a dude’s car,” Mr. Markk said. “It’s respect.”


