


Two veteran Rangers defensemen, Dan Boyle and Keith Yandle, converged on a loose puck in their zone and barely avoided a head-on collision, leaving the puck behind for a 39-year-old Pittsburgh forward named Matt Cullen. He knew what to do with it.

Cullen skated through the slot and flicked a breakaway wrist shot past goaltender Henrik Lundqvist for a go-ahead goal at 4 minutes 16 seconds of the third period, and the Penguins held on for a 3-1 victory Tuesday at Madison Square Garden that gave them a two-games-to-one lead in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.

The Rangers will have to muster a lot more offense to tie the series in Game 4 on Thursday. They managed only 17 shots, scoring on a short-handed goal by Rick Nash.

“The biggest thing I think we need to learn from tonight, more so than anything, is that we did a terrible job of getting through the neutral zone,” Rangers center Derek Stepan said.

A first-period goal by Rangers forward Chris Kreider was waved off after Pittsburgh Coach Mike Sullivan immediately claimed the Rangers were offsides. A replay showed that he was correct, and Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said that the right call had been made.

The third-string goaltender Jeff Zatkoff had started the first two games for Pittsburgh. But with the top goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury still unavailable, the Penguins started Matt Murray, who had not played since he was injured April 9. Murray was hardly challenged.

“Both teams can check well,” Vigneault said. “They checked better than we did. We have to find a way to make plays with the puck. We didn’t make any.”

Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ top defenseman and team captain, returned after missing two weeks with a broken bone in his right hand. But the puck slipped past him when the Pittsburgh captain Sidney Crosby tapped in a critical power-play goal.

Crosby’s goal came with just 42 seconds left in the second period and tied the score, 1-1. Before Kris Letang scored an empty-net goal with 12 seconds left in regulation, the Penguins had clamped down on the Rangers, giving up only four third-period shots.

“We know what makes us successful and what works against this team,” McDonagh said. “We just weren’t able to spend a lot of time in their zone there.”

After a scoreless first period that seemed to get more contentious by the shift, the Rangers took a 1-0 lead while killing a penalty on Kreider, who had thumped forward Patric Hornqvist into the boards 22 seconds into the second period.

Nash collided with forward Evgeni Malkin at the right-wing boards inside the Rangers’ blue line in a scramble for the puck, with Nash knocking it back into the middle of the zone — right at Rangers defenseman Kevin Klein. Nash immediately took off toward the Pittsburgh goal, leaving Malkin in his skate tracks.

Klein then flipped a long pass to Nash. Nash caught up to it and, even with Stepan trailing behind, fired the puck from the left face-off circle, beating Murray with a shot that sizzled over his left shoulder into the far side of the net. It was Nash’s first playoff goal.

But that was it for the Rangers.

“For some reason it was hard for us to create the big chances,” Lundqvist said. “We were hoping to come home and get the building energized and to get ourselves energized. They just played very well defensively. They didn’t give up much. I don’t know what to say.”

With one minute left in the second period, Rangers defenseman Marc Staal took his second penalty of the game when he hooked forward Carl Hagelin, a Ranger just a year ago. The Penguins’ prolific power play took all of 18 seconds to score.

Pittsburgh worked the puck around the perimeter, with Malkin sliding it to Phil Kessel. He whisked the puck to Crosby, who had stationed himself to the right of Lundqvist. Crosby neatly deflected it into the goal.

The Garden fell stonily silent after Cullen’s go-ahead score, as if the fans knew the Rangers were in big trouble.

And they were. After Cullen scored, the Rangers took only two shots — by Klein and Yandle, both defensemen.

“I thought that down the stretch, we had a chance to be aggressive and not sit back,” Crosby said. “We didn’t get caught out there for lengthy shifts where we could get burned.”

Lundqvist was among several Rangers who said the series would be won by the first team to win four games, not just two.

Yandle said the Rangers had not lost any confidence.

“Everyone in here wished the game is tomorrow, and we can get back out there and play,” Yandle said. “It’s one of those things with our group. We know we can be better.”

SLAP SHOTS

Ryan McDonagh had practiced with the team Monday, participated in the morning skate Tuesday and taken part in the pregame warm-up, but he got a big cheer when a camera caught him striding onto the ice minutes before the game. ... The third-string Pittsburgh goaltender Jeff Zatkoff had started Games 1 and 2, posting a 3.08 goals-against average. With Marc-Andre Fleury still working his way back from a concussion, however, the Penguins started Matt Murray, who was injured April 9.


