


Top contenders for the 142nd running of the Kentucky Derby are listed in order of preference, with comments provided by Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert of The New York Times. Churchill Downs has adopted a points system to determine the Derby field, with points being earned by the top four finishers in designated prep races. The odds are from the Churchill Downs futures pool, and the records are starts-win-place-show.

1. Nyquist

Trainer: Doug O’Neill Jockey: Mario Gutierrez

Record: 7-7-0-0 Points: 130 Odds: 3-1

J.D.: The 2-year-old champion is the one to beat. He is also undefeated. Is he bred for a mile and a quarter? No, but few are.

M.H.: Saturday’s Arkansas Derby just reinforced this fact: There’s Nyquist, the Florida Derby winner, and then there’s everyone else.

Next up: Kentucky Derby on May 7.

2. Lani

Trainer: Mikio Matsunaga Jockey: Yutaka Take

Record: 6-3-1-0 Points: 100 Odds: 25-1

J.D.: This Kentucky-bred, Japan-based colt stood out in the U.A.E. Derby. None of the American horses look anywhere close to Nyquist. Why not take a flier with this grandson of Sunday Silence?

M.H.: This Tapit colt has three wins in his last four races and is already at Churchill Downs training. But I think Exaggerator is more talented.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

3. Exaggerator

Trainer: Keith Desormeaux Jockey: Kent Desormeaux

Record: 9-4-2-1 Points: 126 Odds: 27-1

J.D.: He rose seemingly from the dead, running away with the Santa Anita Derby on April 9 after a disappointing third-place finish in his previous race. This colt has some back class.

M.H.: This Curlin colt turned in a dominating performance at Santa Anita and has more races under his belt than any other horse on our list. That experience could help come Derby day.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

4. Mohaymen

Trainer: Kiaran McLaughlin Jockey: Junior Alvarado

Record: 6-5-0-0 Points: 80 Odds: 8-1

J.D.: This colt went from Wonder Horse to What the Heck Happened with an awful performance in the Florida Derby early this month. Do you draw a line through it? Nope.

M.H.: He had a tough trip on a wet track in the Florida Derby, going wide throughout. Can he regain his form in the Derby and show that that was just an off day, or will he continue to regress? I’m leaning toward the former.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

5. Mor Spirit

Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Gary Stevens

Record: 7-3-4-0 Points: 84 Odds: 11-1

J.D.: This Pennsylvania-bred colt is as steady as they come, but he looked ordinary clunking up for second in the Santa Anita Derby.

M.H.: This speedy colt has been high on Baffert’s list since Day 1, and with a clunker of a performance in Arkansas by his stablemate Cupid, we can see why. My money is on Mor Spirit to finish second on the first Saturday in May.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

6. Destin

Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: Javier Castellano

Record: 5-3-1-0 Points: 51 Odds: 16-1

J.D.: He won the Sam F. Davis Stakes and the Tampa Bay Derby, but against whom exactly?

M.H.: He set a track record for a mile and a sixteenth while outdueling his stablemate Outwork in the Tampa Bay Derby last month. Did he do too much too soon?

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

7. Gun Runner

Trainer: Steve Asmussen Jockey: Florent Geroux

Record: 5-4-0-0 Points: 151 Odds: 13-1

J.D.: Meet your West Virginia Derby winner.

M.H.: He swept the two big Derby prep races at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans, but he hardly seems fast enough to win the Derby. His stablemate Creator rallied to win the Arkansas Derby and is getting hot at the right time.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

8. Outwork

Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: John Velazquez

Record: 4-3-1-0 Points: 120 Odds: 30-1

J.D.: He won the Wood Memorial last weekend — albeit by a head in the slowest winning time in the history of the race. He is lightly raced, though, and getting better.

M.H.: He could eventually be formidable but not in time to don roses at the Derby.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

9. Mo Tom

Trainer: Tom Amoss Jockey: Corey Lanerie

Record: 7-3-0-3 Points: 32 Odds: 17-1

J.D.: This talented colt has been buried by terrible rides in his last two races, so look for a rider switch now that Mike Smith and a couple of others appear available. He is a live long shot.

M.H.: The Saints owners Tom and Gayle Benson have two Derby contenders in Mo Tom and Tom’s Ready. Both are already at Churchill Downs, which is a bonus.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.

10. Brody’s Cause

Trainer: Dale Romans Jockey: Luis Saez

Record: 6-3-0-1 Points: 114 Odds: n/a

J.D.: This grinder needs a perfect trip and a grueling pace ahead of him. That’s asking a lot.

M.H.: This Blue Grass Stakes winner rebounded from a seventh-place finish in the Tampa Bay Derby. But he will still have to improve on his performance at Keeneland to have a shot at Churchill Downs.

Next up: Kentucky Derby.


