


LONDON — The new mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said on Wednesday that his election in the face of a divisive campaign highlighting his religion is a lesson to Donald J. Trump that Islam is perfectly compatible with Western values.

Mr. Trump is “playing into the hands of extremists” and is “ignorant about Islam,” Mr. Khan said. “Daesh, ISIS, all those guys, hate the fact that I am mayor of London. Why? Because it contradicts what they say, which is that Western liberal values are incompatible with Islam.”

In a briefing at City Hall and then an interview with The New York Times, Mr. Khan, a member of the Labour Party, said that his Conservative opponent, Zac Goldsmith, “chose a Donald Trump approach and their campaign sought to sow divisions.” But London, he said, “chose unity over division, and a rejection of the politics of fear,” something that he suggested should encourage Hillary Clinton, the probable Democratic candidate for president.

“What we have shown, and I hope it’s a lesson that Hillary and others in America take on board, is hope trumps fear,” he said, adding: “Forgive the pun.”

Mr. Khan, a practicing Muslim whose parents came to Britain from Pakistan, said that he understood that he would be seen as a role model, but did not want or seek to be a spokesman for Muslims or Islam.

He said he intended to represent all groups in London, symbolized by his swearing-in ceremony Saturday in the city’s Southwark Cathedral and his visit the next day to a Holocaust memorial ceremony, and his criticism of the Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, for doing too little to speak out against anti-Semitism in the far left of the party.

“I’ve been the victim of hate crime because of my ethnicity and my faith,” he said. “If somebody is saying views that are appalling, disgusting and clearly anti-Semitic, I’ve got to call it out. The fact that that person happens to be from my party, the fact that the leader of my party is failing to call it out, that’s irrelevant. I have to call it out.”

Mr. Khan’s rise — his father was a bus driver and his mother a seamstress — to become a lawyer, transport minister and now, at 45, mayor of one of the world’s great cities, is a British version of the American dream, he said. “That’s the London promise.”

While he experienced prejudice and racial abuse while growing up, he said, his daughters, 16 and 14, have not. Yet it would be much more difficult now in today’s far wealthier London for his parents’ generation to replicate their success, he said.

“If you go in a time capsule and bring that family forward to 2016,” he said, “I worry about whether” we “could achieve what we achieved.”

His parents were able to live in public housing and put money aside to purchase a home, while the children went to state schools and universities.

But with London’s real estate and rental prices among the highest in Europe, working people are increasingly being priced out of the city, he said, so creating cheaper housing and supporting affordable mass transit are among his highest priorities.

It is also vital for London that Britons vote on June 23 to remain in the European Union, he said, given the many thousands of jobs dependent on financial services. His position on the vote stands in sharp contrast to that of his predecessor, Boris Johnson, a Conservative who is a leader of the campaign to leave the union.

Mr. Khan made no secret of his support for Mrs. Clinton and expressed confidence that she would “trounce” Mr. Trump. “As the father of two daughters,” he said, “I couldn’t imagine a better role model for them than a woman president of the United States.”

Mr. Khan and Mr. Trump have exchanged messages through the media, with Mr. Khan criticizing Mr. Trump’s declaration that he would stop foreign Muslims from entering the United States. Mr. Trump responded by saying that there were always exceptions and that he hoped Mr. Khan would succeed. Mr. Khan responded that he had no desire to be an exception.

Mr. Khan said on Wednesday that many Muslims in Britain wanted to visit Disneyland, invest in America, see family and friends. “I’ve been impressed,” he said, “by the ignorance of the man who could be the Republican presidential nominee.”

He said he loved America and had traveled there many times, and pressed by his children, “have been to all the Disneylands there are.” He wants to consult other mayors for lessons, including New York City’s Bill de Blasio, but given Mr. Trump’s stance toward Muslim visitors, he said, “It may be advisable to go to America before January.”

Mr. Khan said he recognized there was a problem with Islamic radicalism at home and the ability of young people to become radicalized “in your bedroom via the Internet.”

“Something is going wrong,” he said. “We have got a problem with people who are born and raised in Western cities, Western countries, but who are radicalized and turned into violent extremists.” More attention should be paid to giving people a “sense of belonging,” promoting role models and constructing programs, for example, to de-radicalize people in prison.

Mr. Khan has distanced himself from Mr. Corbyn, who did not attend Mr. Khan’s swearing-in ceremony. Asked if Mr. Corbyn had been invited, Mr. Khan smiled and said, “He was probably very busy.”

The Labour Party must reach out to attract non-Labour voters if it wants to win power again, he said. “I do not believe in glorious failure, heroic defeat,” he said. “You can only improve people’s lives by winning elections.”


