


FRONT PAGE

An article on Saturday about a new study of African-American genetic diversity misstated the number of Africans brought to the United States as slaves. Though a precise figure is not known, scholars believe the number to be in the hundreds of thousands, not millions.

NATIONAL

An article on Saturday about efforts by NASA to inflate a new room for the International Space Station misidentified the body of water in which SpaceX has landed four booster stages of rockets on a floating platform. It is the Atlantic Ocean, not the Pacific.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Saturday about the crash of a vintage warplane into the Hudson River misstated, in some copies, Albert J. Parisi’s title at the Army Air Forces Historical Association. He is its operations manager, not its operating officer. The article also misidentified, in some copies, the model of planes he described as being stalwarts of World War II. They were P-47s not P-40s.

•

An article on Thursday about plans to close the Mount Sinai Beth Israel hospital in Manhattan misstated, in some editions, the number of beds at the hospital, using information from its website. It is 825, not 856. The error was repeated in a picture caption in some copies.

THE ARTS

A dance review on Tuesday about the Royal Ballet, in London, misstated the surname of a dancer in “The Invitation,” one of the works performed. She is Francesca Hayward, not Howard.

WEEKEND

An article on Friday about books recommended for summer reading, using information from a publicist, referred incorrectly to Stuart Stevens’s coming novel, “The Innocent Have Nothing to Fear.” It is his second novel, not his first.

SCIENCE TIMES

An article on Tuesday about protecting salamanders in the United States from a deadly fungus misidentified the type of salamander that keeps its gills as adults. They are mud puppies, not hellbenders.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Sunday about the political activist Hedy Epstein misstated part of the name of an organization for which she worked. It was Freedom of Residence, not Freedom of Resistance.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


