


At the Time 100 gala Tuesday night, Mia Farrow and Aziz Ansari chatted about not comedy or Darfur, but a Nicki Minaj performance in which the rapper wore an outfit that left little to the imagination.

Padma Lakshmi and Jenna Lyons danced together, grinding up on Ms. Minaj as she made her way from the stage into the audience.

And Melissa McCarthy toasted Kathy Niakan, a developmental biologist mapping the human genome.

The annual gala, like the magazine’s issue, is nothing if not a series of incongruous pairings.

The proceedings, held at the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle, began around 7 p.m. Reporters lined up to query the year’s honorees, who included the Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton; the Muslim female fencing champion Ibtihaj Muhammad; and the supermodel Karlie Kloss, who was surprised to be named among “The 100 Most Influential People.”

“I thought they made a mistake,” said Ms. Kloss, standing beside her boyfriend, Joshua Kushner, in a cocktail area in a slinky violet dress.

To her left was Trevor Noah, in his black suit. To her right, Matt Lauer. But, of course, it was the prospect of one honoree’s arrival — Donald J. Trump — that created the biggest stir.

Metal detectors and security agents were all around. And guests swapped stories about their encounters with Mr. Trump over the years, back before they had considered the possibility of his presidential run.

“One time I went to the Oscars and I thought, ‘I have a really good seat’ because he was three rows behind me,” the artist Marina Abramovic said.

“I met him with Uma,” said André Balazs, referring to Uma Thurman, as he went on to recall how Mr. Trump eyed her up and down, squeezed Mr. Balazs’s hand and said, “Good job, good job.”

“Better that than, ‘You’re fired,’” Ms. Abramovic said.

A little after 8, honorees past and present headed into a large atrium for dinner and the evening’s program, which also included performances by Ariana Grande.

That was around the time Mr. Trump entered the room with his wife, Melania, just as news broke that he had won primary contests in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Connecticut, Delaware and Rhode Island.

It was mayhem. Throngs of people approached his corner table for selfies and hellos, including Gayle King and Wendi Deng. “Get in, Emily,” Mr. Trump said to the Page Six editor Emily Smith.

He was clearly pleased with the primary results. “It certainly feels good,” Mr. Trump said. “I hear it’s a big victory. Well into the 60s — 67 or 68. Bigger than the polls suggested.”

But he couldn’t stay long. He had another campaign stop to make, more reporters to talk to and a victory speech to give. So after saying hello to Martha Stewart, Mr. Trump left.

He also missed a toast by Caitlyn Jenner, who actually thanked Mr. Trump for allowing her to use the ladies’ room in one of his buildings recently. Don’t ask.


