


MADRID — When she boarded her flight to come here, Louisa Chirico was not sure if she would be able to play at the Madrid Open at all. But Chirico, a 19-year-old from Harrison, N.Y., clinched one of the final spots in the qualifying draw for the tournament, one of the four highest-tier events on the WTA Tour.

Five wins and one walkover later, 130th-ranked Chirico is into her first WTA semifinal after beating 39th-ranked Daria Gavrilova, 7-6 (1), 6-2, on Thursday.

“I don’t like to say that I’m surprised, because I go into every match thinking I can win,” Chirico said. “I definitely thought it was possible, but it’s just sometimes about execution and whatnot. Needless to say, I wasn’t sure if I’d even be able to play here, so I’m just very excited for the opportunity.”

Born in Morristown, N.J., Chirico grew up in Westchester County and played tennis for the first time at 7 at the Lake Isle Country Club in Eastchester. Learning to play on the green clay courts there, Chirico developed an affinity for sliding on clay that Americans typically struggle to master.

Those skills, and the athleticism she had developed by playing soccer and other sports, served Chirico well when she tried out for a spot in the United States Tennis Association’s player development program at 13 at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in Queens, the site of the United States Open.

Jay Gooding, one of the coaches who worked with Chirico as she began training with the U.S.T.A., was impressed by Chirico’s physical and mental tenacity.

“She’s very strong physically, and she can move,” said Gooding, who now works with Chirico in an arrangement separate from the U.S.T.A. program. “And when she was younger, she wasn’t afraid to miss. Normally in junior tennis, especially in America, everyone is pushing, and moonballs, and she was never afraid to miss. She missed a lot, but I liked that. As a coach, I think, O.K., there’s a lot of upside there. You can always tone that down; it’s tougher to get someone to hit the ball than to slow it down.”

Identifying her endurance and physicality as a strength from her early teenage years, Chirico and Gooding worked on developing a playing style that would make the most of those assets.

“As my coach likes to say, I have a big engine,” Chirico said. “So we thought to utilize that as best as possible, we would try and form my game around that, which means playing with shape, playing heavy, and making the rallies as physical as possible. It’s true, a lot of the women like to play fast and flat, so I think it counters that a little bit.”

Chirico’s weapons have been maximized by the conditions in Madrid, where the altitude amplifies her topspin. Against Gavrilova — as well as against previous opponents, including the 2008 French Open champion Ana Ivanovic — her strength outshone her inexperience. Chirico consistently kicked the ball above her opponents’ comfortable strike zones, allowing her to gain quick control of rallies.

In the semifinals on Friday, Chirico will face 38th-ranked Dominika Cibulkova, who beat top-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska in the first round.

Although Chirico has achieved a career-best result this week, and improved her ranking from 130 to inside the top 80, playing in Europe meant she forfeited a chance for the U.S.T.A.-allotted wild card into the French Open, which is awarded to the player who achieves the best results in a series of smaller events on green clay in the United States.

Chirico earned the wild card through that process last year, but she and Gooding wanted a truer, tougher test this year on the surface she calls her favorite. Despite her climbing ranking, Chirico will still have to play in the French Open qualifying draw, a trade-off that she and Gooding are content with.

“At the end of the day, where are we trying to go?” Gooding said. He added, “Our goal is to win Grand Slams, to be top 10, to be No. 1.”

If Chirico’s affection for red clay is atypical for an American, so is her ability to quietly develop away from the gears of the tennis industry’s hype machines.

“I definitely feel like I’ve been a little bit under the radar, and I don’t mind that,” Chirico said. “The other players can have the spotlight; I don’t really care about that. With good results comes more attention, obviously, so I’m going to try to keep it one step at a time, and keep my goals process-oriented. That’s the biggest thing for me. If I get ahead of myself, and focused on results, that’s never good.”

THREE TOP NAMES ADVANCE Novak Djokovic, Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal made their way into the Madrid Open quarterfinals, each with straight-set wins. The top-ranked Djokovic beat Roberto Bautista Agut, 6-2, 6-1, for his tour-best 30th win of the season. Murray, the defending champion, defeated Gilles Simon, 6-4, 6-2, and Nadal topped Sam Querrey, 6-4, 6-2. (AP)


