


WASHINGTON — Terry Collins spent most of his playing career as an infielder in the Los Angeles Dodgers’ farm system in the 1970s. This was a problem, because the major league team was winning pennants with an impenetrable infield of Steve Garvey, Davey Lopes, Bill Russell and Ron Cey.

“When I was in Triple-A, there was no minor league free agency,” Collins said Tuesday in the visiting manager’s office at Nationals Park in Washington. “The Dodgers had an infield that was together for 12 years, and there was a lot of guys that said, ‘If I just had a chance. …’ Well, nowadays you’re going to get those chances, and this is Ty Kelly’s.”

As the Mets’ manager, Collins wrote Kelly’s name onto a major league lineup card for the first time Tuesday. The Mets signed Kelly in November and called him up this week, in his eighth pro season. He was scheduled to bat eighth and play third base on Tuesday.

The opponent: Washington’s Stephen Strasburg, who was born the same day as Kelly (July 20, 1988) and drafted the same year. Strasburg was chosen first over all in 2009 — 385 picks ahead of Kelly, a 13th-round choice by Baltimore. They faced each other in the minors last season, when Strasburg was on an injury rehabilitation assignment, and in college, when Kelly played at U.C. Davis and Strasburg at San Diego State.

“I struck out, I walked and I hit a grounder to short that I beat out and they called it an error,” Kelly said, smiling. “It was Strasburg on the mound, so they couldn’t call it a hit.”

Kelly learned to be versatile in the minors, playing every position besides catcher as he bounced from the Orioles’ farm system to those of Seattle, St. Louis and Toronto. The Mets were his fifth organization at the Class AAA level, but the first to promote him. He was leading all of the minor leagues in batting average (.391) and on-base percentage (.478) for Class AAA Las Vegas.

Kelly has a .280 career average in the minors, and a .382 for both his on-base and slugging percentages. The slugging percentage is low, but his ability to get on base might have called for a promotion sooner. Because of a conversation with a coach, Kelly said, he never saw it that way.

“I was told probably five years ago by Bobby Dickerson with the Orioles that the only way you get moved up is if you beat the league,” Kelly said. “So I never really wondered why I wasn’t getting moved up. I played well; it’s great to play well and put up decent numbers. But for someone that’s not a big-time prospect to get moved up, you’ve got to beat everybody. You’ve got to be the best in the league.”

This year, he was. So when Lucas Duda went on the disabled list, the Mets added Kelly. And when David Wright took a scheduled day off Tuesday, Kelly became a major leaguer. Collins acknowledged that he lived vicariously through such players.

“Oh, no question,” he said. “That’s why you root for those guys.”

Rare Met Lead in Homers When Yoenis Cespedes hit his 15th homer Monday night, he overtook the major league lead in that category. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Cespedes is the first Met to hold the outright lead in the majors in home runs (no ties) this late in a season since Sept. 18, 1982, when Dave Kingman topped the list. Kingman wound up two homers behind the major league leaders, Reggie Jackson and Gorman Thomas.

Cespedes’s production seems even more critical now that Lucas Duda and Travis d’Arnaud are on the disabled list for a lengthy stretch. Duda is out with a stress fracture in his back, d’Arnaud with a strained right rotator cuff.

The Mets were prepared to let Cespedes leave for another team in free agency, but without a robust market for him, he returned to the Mets for three years and $75 million, with a chance to opt out after this season. The Mets prefer not to imagine life without him.

“I don’t even think about it right now — because he is here,” Terry Collins said. “I’ll tell you, he wants to be here. That is just so important. Yeah, we’re paying him a lot of money, don’t mistake that. But he wants to play in New York City. That says a lot, because there are a lot of guys who shy away from that challenge. He’s a star. He does what stars do: When you need them, they’re there.”

Cespedes also has the highest walk rate of his career this season, drawing walks in 10.4 percent of his plate appearances through Monday. Last year, for the Detroit Tigers and the Mets, the figure was 4.9 percent. Collins sounded lukewarm about the walks, emphasizing that Cespedes must stay true to himself.

“I know they’re important, but I know him, and he likes to swing that bat,” Collins said. “I look at the importance of Neil Walker, who’s hitting behind him now. If he continues to swing the bat the way he has been, Yo’s going to get some balls to hit, and that’s going to make it all the more important that he continues to swing.”

Age Not Slowing Colon The Mets’ Bartolo Colon turned 43 on Tuesday. Colon is the oldest player in baseball and, not surprisingly, is the majors’ active leader in wins, starts, innings, hits, earned runs and homers.

But he sets himself apart, historically, for what he did just before this birthday. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Colon earned 47 victories from age 40 to 42. Only four others had more victories from age 40 to 42, and they are some of the most celebrated to ever take the mound: Warren Spahn (62 wins), Cy Young (61), Randy Johnson (51) and Roger Clemens (50). Colon has 222 victories in his career; the others all finished with more than 300.


