


The Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival is entering its second weekend and is expected to draw tens of thousands of people to the California desert, where they will spend a couple of days essentially living inside a glamorous Instagram filter.

At least that’s the view from afar. If you’re not able to attend the festivities in Indio, Calif., it’s possible that you see Coachella as the Kim Kardashian of the yearly festival circuit: It’s flashy, over the top and nearly impossible to avoid on social media.

Attendance figures for the first weekend haven’t been released, but Coachella sold 198,000 tickets last year, according to Billboard. It’s so crowded with acts, so accessible online and so commercialized that the music critics of The New York Times decided to sit things out this year.

But there’s still plenty to talk about, and most of it has absolutely nothing to do with music. Here’s what you can expect to hear about this weekend:

People will still think it’s cute to mail packages from Coachella’s post office.

Last week, officials noticed that last-minute filers were rushing to mail tax returns from the post office, which is designed to look like a log cabin. It’s really just an intermediary between the campground and a real post office.

“Someone dropped off wedding invitations last year that were already stamped,” Megan Hampton, who works at the informal post office, told The Press Enterprise in Riverside, Calif. “They wanted it to say Coachella on it.”

Your friends will all be sharing snaps of themselves in flower crowns.

The festival’s boho-chic aesthetic is so recognizable that fans can play along at home. Last weekend, a flower crown Snapchat filter delighted people who didn’t have the real thing on hand. Naturally, the filter was very flattering.

There will probably be a lot of chokers.

Attention Snapchat: Flower crowns are so 2015. Taylor Swift, who was once so cutesy that she famously used her cat as a fashion accessory, debuted an edgier black-on-black look last weekend, and declared that Coachella is now all about chokers.

Our fashion desk recommends the bucket bag, openwork knit lace tops, floral-embroidered military shorts and practical straw hats for that Instagram-ready festival look. While women are advised to spend their discretionary income on chokers and flower crowns, men are encouraged to wear T-shirts and shorts. No pressure, ladies!

Celebrities will be doing things that you will hear about whether you want to or not.

The big news last week was that Rihanna was photographed standing close to Leonardo DiCaprio, and this set off a canoodling alert heard around the Internet. Rihanna also performed, but the mysteries of her love life drove entertainment journalists into a frenzy. Richard Lawson over at Vanity Fair has so many questions: “Why is DiCaprio wearing a University of Michigan hat? Where did Rihanna get her bejeweled sunglasses? Who is the handsome blond man standing in front of Rihanna? What’s his deal?”

By the end of the weekend, it’s highly likely that a new celebrity couple will emerge from their playground in the desert, and you won’t be able to avoid it.

Maybe there will even be some music news.

Last weekend, Guns n’ Roses brought out the AC/DC guitarist Angus Young. Then it was announced that the former’s frontman, Axl Rose, would be joining AC/DC on tour. And this year, Coachella was the setting for LCD Soundsystem’s reunion after the band broke up in 2011. Missed them in Indio? Never fear: They’re playing at least three other festivals this year.


