


After almost 30 years in the jewelry business, Ippolita Rostagno, founder and creative director of her own brand, is returning to her aesthetic roots with a new collection, Senso.

The focus of the jewelry, which includes the Glamazon unadorned 18-karat gold cuff ($25,000) and the Glamazon Stardust collar decorated with a single strip of tiny diamonds ($14,500), is its gently undulating curves.

During an interview at her Manhattan rooftop office, which displays tribal jewelry and religious sculpture collected on her travels, the Italian-American designer said Senso’s tactile, relaxed-chic look is created through body imprinting. The technique involves pressing pieces of wax against parts of the body, whether it be the belly button or a curve of the wrist, and using them to cast the final pieces in precious metals.

“The idea is not to be literal, but to lend the surfaces of the metal a softness that it wouldn’t otherwise have,” said Ms. Rostagno, 52, dressed entirely in black with her signature black feathers in her hair. She developed the body-imprinting technique during her early days of creating jewelry.

Born and raised in Florence by an Italian father and an American mother, she first studied sculpture at the city’s Istituto d’Arte before moving to the United States in 1982 and establishing a dance company. In 1986, she moved to New York, where, after retiring from dance and looking for a new artistic outlet, jewelry seemed an appropriately sized form of sculpture for Manhattan micro-living.

She recalled wondering: “Where’s the jewelry for real people?”

“There were diamond tiaras and high jewelry at one end, and there was a lot of costume jewelry,” she said. “But not much in between.”

She decided to design what she wanted to wear: gold jewelry that was easy to wear. After what she described as a lucky break, Bergdorf Goodman became her first outlet in 1999; now, her Ippolita brand is a staple of fine jewelry departments in stores across North America. She credits her success, at least in part, to more women buying jewelry for themselves. “They still make up 99 percent of my business today,” she said.

Her design tenets, she explained, are “cool enough to covet, and classic enough to keep.” And in the moment when a purchasing decision is made, “all these things have to be self-evident.”

Ms. Rostagno said she now wants to stress that gold deserves to be valued beyond the season in which a piece is made. The Senso collection, she continued, “is about revolting against this tide of newness without content. I’m going to put a stake in the ground about what’s real and true to my line.”


