


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this piece, the reporter Nikole Hannah-Jones details her experience writing a Magazine story that involved her daughter’s school.

I’ve spent the last four years writing almost exclusively about school segregation, so when two Brooklyn schools became embroiled in an integration battle last fall, my email, Twitter and cellphone lit up with messages: Are you watching this thing in Brooklyn? Are you going to write about it?

Yes, I was watching.

But no, I did not plan to write about the fight over the rezoning of P.S. 8, an affluent, mostly white school, and P.S. 307, a low-income school whose students are predominantly black and Latino. At least not initially.

That’s because unknown to most people, my then 5-year-old daughter was a student at P.S. 307.

It’s strangely surreal to find yourself in the middle of the very thing you write about: Last summer, I spent many evenings attending parent meetings at which mostly white residents expressed anger that their child had been assigned to my daughter’s school; during the day, I was busy writing a story about a Missouri school integration in which parents were voicing precisely the same sentiment about similar school assignments.

I’d long wanted to report on school segregation in New York City, but I had decided early on I was not going to write about my daughter’s school. For one thing, it seemed like a good idea to have a wall between my personal and professional lives, and I thought it important to keep some distance from the subjects I cover.

But as the months went on, I felt increasingly compelled to tell a story about the battle to integrate P.S. 307 precisely because I was both personally involved and deeply aware of the history of contemporary struggles against school segregation.

So, I pitched the story to my editor, who loved the idea. And then I immediately regretted having done so.

To do the story justice, I would have to be honest about the arguments I had with my husband about where to send our daughter to school, and about my own internal conflicts about it. I would have to open our lives not just to all the Times readers I will never know, but to all of our acquaintances, as well. Not only was I giving up my privacy, but I was giving up some of my child’s privacy too. And, I’d have to navigate carefully with parents, teachers and staff at my daughter’s school. I’d have to decide when I was there as a parent and when I was there as a journalist. I did not want anything I wrote to change the way my daughter was treated at school.

As a journalist, I am used to putting words out to the world and having the world respond both kindly and harshly. But it’s different when you put yourself — and your personal choices about your child — into the world and subject them to scrutiny and criticism.

In some ways, writing about your own experience is the easiest thing. Your story is, theoretically anyway, the one you know best. But by writing about yourself, you expose your choices in ways that can be discomforting. Plus the people with whom you have to interact daily may not like what you are writing about them.

In the end, I felt it was important to tell the story I could tell about segregation in this most liberal of cities, through the eyes of a journalist and a parent who is trying to navigate complicated waters. So despite my qualms, I pursued the story.

I started reporting it full time in October and filed a first draft in early February. I then spent months rewriting, re-reporting, rewriting some more. I was trying to balance so many things: a story that was personal but also deeply reported; that was about one family and one school but also about the entire nation; a story that was past and present, that was both familiar and unknown.

In the end, what I produced is probably my most nuanced exploration of the challenges of, and the mandate for, integration. And, as I expected, it touched a nerve with readers, prompting hundreds of emails, comments and social media posts. I am proud of it. But mostly, I am relieved it is done.


