


Odds are that Donald J. Trump and Speaker Paul Ryan will eventually patch together a rapprochement.

Their well-established substantive differences on trade, immigration and entitlements should not be a barrier. There is plenty of room to fudge a unified Republican agenda, especially with Mr. Trump, whose positions and even principles often seem to evolve as he deems politically necessary.

But it is harder to see how their basic approaches to politics can coexist comfortably. Mr. Ryan is the leading practitioner of an optimistic conservatism that reaches out and is inclusive. Mr. Trump has emerged as the presumptive Republican nominee by skillfully appealing to an angry and alienated conservative base that is driven in part by racial and ethnic fears.

The Trump-Ryan schism can be best understood by looking at two proxies: former Representative Jack Kemp, the 1996 Republican vice-presidential nominee who was Mr. Ryan’s mentor and political role model, and former Speaker Newt Gingrich, who is being considered as Mr. Trump’s running mate.

Mr. Gingrich recently claimed that Mr. Trump “is a little bit like Jack Kemp, but so much bigger a figure.” There may be an argument about the latter part, but almost no one who was close to Mr. Kemp believes that the real estate tycoon is anything like him.

This schism has little to do with ideology. Mr. Kemp, who died in 2009, was no liberal; he never met a tax he didn’t want to cut or eliminate and, until his later years, was a foreign policy hawk. But he had a much more inclusive view of conservatism than many of his colleagues.

The contrasts between the views of Mr. Kemp and Mr. Gingrich on touchstone issues over the years illustrate why Mr. Trump and Mr. Ryan will never be soul mates.

In 1994, Mr. Kemp campaigned against Proposition 187, a Republican-led California initiative that barred undocumented immigrants from using public services, including education. Mr. Gingrich said he probably would have voted for it. The measure passed, but it alienated the state’s fast-growing Latino population, and Democrats have dominated California politics ever since.

Mr. Kemp, a former professional football player, was close with some black teammates, marched in civil rights protests and forged friendly alliances with a number of members of the Congressional Black Caucus. Mr. Gingrich had stormy relations with most members of that caucus, including his fellow Georgia lawmaker John Lewis.

The contrast is equally striking when it comes to attitudes toward Muslims. After Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Kemp said he supported a “war” against terrorism but stressed that it was not a war against Muslims.

Mr. Gingrich, like Mr. Trump, sees danger in Islam. He fiercely opposed a proposal to build a multicultural center and mosque in downtown Manhattan near the World Trade Center. “There should be no mosque near ground zero in New York so long as there are no churches or synagogues in Saudi Arabia,” he said.

The former speaker once tried to persuade Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey not to appoint a Muslim judge, warning against the dangers of Shariah. Mr. Christie appointed the judge in 2011 anyway, saying the concern over Islamic law was bogus.

There even is a pronounced Kemp-Gingrich split that mirrors the differences between Mr. Ryan and Mr. Trump over Ronald Reagan, the patron saint of most Republicans these days. Mr. Kemp worked for Mr. Reagan when he was governor of California, helped convert him to supply-side economics and was close to him during his presidency.

When Mr. Gingrich ran for president in 2012, he frequently claimed an association with Mr. Reagan, even though they had little contact with each other and the lawmaker often criticized the president.

Mr. Ryan is not a carbon copy of his mentor. Mr. Kemp, who never worried much about budget deficits, might have recoiled at some of the spending cuts to social services that the Wisconsin lawmaker has proposed. And as speaker, Mr. Ryan was slow to follow Mr. Kemp’s model in reaching out to the poor.

But Mr. Ryan does practice the politics of opportunity and inclusion. By contrast, Mr. Trump, and often Mr. Gingrich, rely on anger, fear and racial and ethnic tensions. It has served them well.

This split is one that cannot easily be negotiated.


