


ORLANDO, Fla. — Ortiz. Rivera. González. Almodóvar. As the names of the victims of Sunday’s massacre here rolled out, this slice of the United States — known as the unofficial 79th municipio, or municipality, of Puerto Rico — felt a communal shudder.

It was a roll call of Puerto Ricans, gay and straight, who had gathered to dance and hear salsa music at the club and died in the barrage of bullets. Like so many others, they were here, in this booming Central Florida metropolitan area of nearly 400,000 Puerto Ricans, because it has become a Puerto Rican touchstone: Spanish flows freely; the smells of Mallorca pastries and mofongo waft from bakeries and restaurants; the hot and humid weather feels like home.

“It’s as though it had happened in our own family,” said Yolanda Rivera, 71, who works at the Melao Bakery, a popular shop in Kissimmee, just south of Orlando. “We are praying to God he heals their pain for the loss of their children. We Hispanics have become a little closer because of this.”

A staggering 90 percent of the 49 victims killed by Omar Mateen, the gunman who opened fire in a gay nightclub, were Hispanic or of Hispanic descent, including Mexican, Colombian and Dominican, community leaders said. Of those, 23 were Puerto Rican. This has stunned Puerto Rican residents across Florida — where there are a million islanders, rivaling the number in New York State — and on the island, where the deaths have set off a national mourning.

For Puerto Ricans here, the heartbreak is especially strong. Orlando was meant to be a haven for Puerto Ricans who fled the island because of its imploding economy and spectacularly high crime rate. The fact that so many young Puerto Ricans died in a spasm of violence during a night of dancing seems a particularly bitter twist.

Ramona Nazario, 67, who arrived three years ago from Ponce, P.R., said the shooting reminded her too much of what she had left behind. “The same things are happening here — the killings, the drugs,” Ms. Nazario said in Spanish. “You don’t feel so well when these things go on. People here fail, too.”

Across Puerto Rico, flags remained at half-staff, and Gov. Alejandro García Padilla extended the mourning to Friday. Victims’ family members on the island are streaming into Orlando, or trying to do so, either to fly home with the dead or to help other grieving relatives. Some have set up GoFundMe sites asking for help with the cost of taking victims home to be buried on the island.

The Puerto Rican community in the Kissimmee-Orlando area has quickly pulled together. Some funeral homes have offered discounts. JetBlue has offered to fly victims’ relatives to and from Orlando. Business and social service groups have put out calls for interpreters to help relatives navigate the thicket of paperwork, particularly difficult during a time of grief. They are also mobilizing to help those from Latin American countries, including the families of three undocumented immigrants who died, said Zoé Colón, director of Florida and Southeast operations at the Hispanic Federation, a nonprofit group.

One of the victims, Franky Jimmy DeJesus Velazquez, 50, came here in 2010 for the same reasons that have driven tens of thousands of Puerto Ricans in recent years: better jobs, health care, housing, friends, relatives and, in his case, greater acceptance of his sexual identity. But he was a proud Puerto Rican — a jibarito, a professional dancer on the island with a fierce devotion to jíbara, a folkloric dance created long ago by workers on coffee plantations and inland farms. Latin Night at the club was a natural fit for him.

“They come here, come to Kissimmee, where you have lechón asado and you can hear Latin music; you can hear our language,” said Maria Hernandez, who is Puerto Rican and was a close friend of Mr. DeJesus. “This is little Puerto Rico. That’s what it’s called.”

But, like many others, Mr. DeJesus had a hard time initially. Although some Puerto Ricans here are bilingual, many struggle with English. Jobs are not always plentiful. Housing is pricey and getting pricier by the month. Social services are limited. And schools, particularly in the Kissimmee area, are bulging with new arrivals.

In the last couple of years, some Puerto Ricans, unable to make ends meet, have returned to the island. Mr. DeJesus went on interview after interview and landed a few jobs, most recently in visual media.

“Puerto Ricans, when they come from Puerto Rico, they hear so much, ‘You need to follow your dreams,’ ” Ms. Hernandez said. “In reality, when they come here, they are lost.”

Their presence has made the Orlando area a remarkably diverse place. So many Puerto Ricans arrived that the Puerto Rican government opened up a branch here to help islanders. And recently, the Hispanic Federation, long active with Puerto Ricans in New York City, set up shop as well. Not all of the Puerto Ricans in the area came directly from the island; many ventured here from New York and Chicago.

Businesses that cater to Puerto Ricans — be it food, health care training, moving needs, travel, language instruction — have also opened and spread across the area. Valencia College is expanding to accommodate the growing numbers. Seven current students or recent graduates died at the club on Sunday.

Puerto Ricans have also expanded their political foothold. In 2012, there was one Puerto Rican in the Florida House. Now, there are four in the House and one in the State Senate, and commissioners in Orlando and Kissimmee.

The growing population of Puerto Ricans is expected to have an effect on the presidential election. Although Puerto Ricans here tend to be less reliably Democratic than Puerto Ricans in New York, they still favor Democrats, and many are displeased by the anti-immigrant rhetoric of the presumptive Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump. While Puerto Ricans are United States citizens, they are sensitive to racism and anti-Latino references.

State Senator Darren Soto, a Puerto Rican who represents this area and is running for a House seat, said the shootings had deeply shaken the community.

“To see one of the staff members of Pulse waving the Puerto Rican flag on the stage,” Mr. Soto said, recounting the Monday evening memorial service at the Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts here, “it struck us quite deeply. It was recognition that our community was particularly hit.”

The profound sense of loss clings to the community as relatives plan funerals or arrange to bring the dead back home. Ana Disla is reeling from the death of her nephew, Anthony Luis Laureano Disla, who loved to dance so much that he moved here from Puerto Rico three years ago to pursue a job as a dancer and choreographer. She wishes now that he had not come at all.

“He came here to try to have a better quality” of life, she said. “And look what happened now.”


