


Is Supreme, the skateboard-inspired clothing brand worshiped by streetwear disciples everywhere, officially over?

Not likely. But that’s the prediction of Brendon Babenzien, who happens to be the former creative director of Supreme. “At the beginning, the guys that hung around the shop and skated more or less for Supreme, they pushed skateboarding culture forward,” said Mr. Babenzien, 44. “That culture has now reached an apex.”

As the argument goes, Supreme’s growing popularity cannibalized its cult status, so hard-core streetwear followers are looking for alternatives. At the same time, those kids who were skating in the ’90s have grown up, and they don’t want to dress like teenagers.

That’s where Mr. Babenzien comes in. Last October, he opened Noah, a boutique at 195 Mulberry Street in NoLIta. On the surface, the merchandise at Noah ($328 reversible hoodies and $228 loudly patterned flannel shirts) may not seem all that different from what’s sold at the Supreme flagship store a few blocks away.

But Mr. Babenzien says his stuff is more authentic. Rather than being produced in China from inexpensive materials, he wants his items to be higher quality.

He points to a pair of corduroy shorts made in England ($228) and a rain-resistant anorak with a wool lining made in Italy ($448). “I buy from those places because I know the people are being treated well,” he said.

Mr. Babenzien has been in streetwear since 1994, when he moved to Miami to help his friend Don Busweiler with Pervert, an influential streetwear brand that Mr. Busweiler abandoned in 1995, along with all his possessions, when he joined a cult called the Brethren.

Mr. Babenzien moved to New York and immersed himself in the skate scene. His Pervert experience helped land him a job at Supreme in 1996.

“I was the first person hired to do any product or design,” he said. “Before that, it was sweats and hats.”

Under Supreme’s founder, James Jebbia, he helped turned Supreme into a globally recognized brand, as well as a talisman for downtown New York. Among a certain set of young men, it has unlimited street cred. They regularly camp outside the shop in anticipation of the next limited-edition deck or sweatshirt.

This is actually Mr. Babenzien’s second swing at Noah, which he started in 2002 and ran for three years. “It was youthful inexperience that was my downfall,” he said. “I had a terrible business sense.”

He was welcomed back at Supreme, where he was named creative director. “Brendon was the captain of the team,” said Angelo Baque, the brand director at Supreme. “He comes from a diverse background. He’s this grumpy dude from Long Island, but he understands hip-hop and can talk about Public Enemy or Gang Starr.”

But in the decade since, Mr. Babenzien said, he has become antsy. Married with a baby daughter, he is more into jogging and meditation than skateboarding these days. “I wanted to do my own thing,” he said.

He left Supreme last year and, teaming up with his friend Chris Gibbs of the Los Angeles store Union, opened a pop-up version of Noah at 393 Broadway, just south of Canal, that featured a halfpipe.

Mr. Jebbia, who is notoriously press-shy, would not comment on his departure but wrote in an email, “There’s no beef or anything.”

Noah has found early fans for its $48 graphic tees and $988 reversible military coats. Among them are the streetwear blogs that zealously chronicle the latest limited-edition sneaker, as well as established men’s wear editors.

“The interesting things to me are these classic silhouettes, and they’re very well done,” said Garrett Munce, a fashion editor at GQ magazine. “He has a distinct point of view.”

Asked what that point of view is, Mr. Babenzien resorts to vague answers. “My vision is evolutionary,” he said. Asked to explain himself further, he turned to his publicist, apoplectic, before relenting, “It’s a stream of consciousness.” But that may be the point.

Ultimately, the same kids who decide whether Supreme is still worth chasing will decide if Mr. Babenzien is a worthy alternative. “The only way to be genuinely cool as a brand is to go to great lengths to deny it’s about being cool and talk instead about other stuff,” said Nick Sullivan, Esquire magazine’s fashion director. “In fact, it is totally about being cool. Cool sells sweatshirts.”

When pressed further, Mr. Babenzien offered more insight into his vision. Or at least his target consumer. “The best way to discuss it is to picture what a teenager’s bedroom looks like,” he said. “It’s all over the place, but it makes sense.”


