


OAKLAND, Calif. — Andy Dolich, a former president of the Golden State Warriors and a longtime pro sports executive, paid a visit to his neighborhood Starbucks on Monday morning, and before he could even order his coffee, the barista hit him with an important question: How long?

“And I knew exactly what he was talking about,” Dolich said.

How long would Golden State’s high-scoring star Stephen Curry be sidelined by his injured knee? That was the question that loomed over the Bay Area like a toxic cloud, from the moment Curry slipped and fell Sunday afternoon in a first-round playoff game against the Houston Rockets until Monday afternoon, when he had a magnetic resonance imaging test.

“Probably the most eagerly awaited M.R.I. in Bay Area sports history,” Dolich said. “I couldn’t believe how many people had become orthopedic surgeons in the last 14 hours.”

The team announced that Curry, perhaps the most dynamic player in the league, would likely miss at least the next two weeks of the playoffs with a Grade 1 sprain in his right knee.

It was, all things considered, relatively good news for the Warriors — and for many basketball fans here, who had feared the worst but came away hopeful that Curry would return in time to help the team chase a second straight N.B.A. championship.

“Watching the Warriors without Steph Curry sort of feels like you’re looking at a beige Ferrari,” said Damon Bruce, a sports talk host for San Francisco’s KGMZ-FM, popularly known as 95.7 The Game. “You want it to be red. But I think the Warriors can survive this. I think they can survive this and buy Curry enough time.”

The Warriors have a three-games-to-one series lead over the Rockets, who will visit Oracle Arena for Game 5 on Wednesday night.

But Curry’s indefinite absence has left many around here taking on the delicate calculus of trying to predict when he might return. Late in the Western Conference semifinals? By the start of the conference finals and a potential meeting with the San Antonio Spurs?

This assumes, of course, that the Warriors will waste little time closing out the Rockets, who came completely unglued in Sunday’s game in Houston, even after Curry left for the visiting locker room at the start of the second half. Without him, and with Shaun Livingston capably filling in at point guard, the Warriors ran away with a 121-94 victory.

“I think fans are fueled by what they saw in the second half of that game, which was a tremendous performance,” said Brian Murphy, the co-host of a sports talk show for KNBR-AM in San Francisco. “There’s a big caveat to that, however: They were playing the Rockets.”

Yet Curry could also benefit from the glacial pace of the postseason. If the Warriors do advance past the Rockets, their second-round series against either the Los Angeles Clippers or the Portland Trail Blazers will not start until Sunday at the earliest.

“On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being a disaster, this rates as like a 6.5, pushing a 7,” Murphy said.

Murphy estimated that a “solid 90 percent” of his four-hour show on Monday morning revolved around Curry, with the remaining 10 percent centering on the San Francisco Giants — but only because of contractual obligations as the team’s flagship radio station.

“Joe Montana’s elbow in the early ’90s,” Murphy said, referring to the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback. “That was the last time a body part meant more to the Bay Area.”

By Monday afternoon, despair over Curry had given way to cautious optimism. A Grade 1 knee sprain, which typically involves microscopic ligament tears, is the most mild type of sprain, with Grade 3 being the most severe, said Alexis C. Colvin, an orthopedic surgeon specializing in sports medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

“I’d say it’s one of the best-case scenarios because he does not need surgery and it’ll recover completely on its own,” said Dr. Colvin, who was speaking generally and without direct knowledge of Curry’s case. “It depends on how quickly he feels he’s up to speed. But he’s in good shape to begin with, and it’s not a very severe injury.”

Curry, the league’s reigning most valuable player, entered the playoffs after an almost superhuman regular season in which he averaged a league-leading 30.1 points while sinking an N.B.A.-record 402 3-pointers. He also led the league in steals and free-throw percentage as the Warriors, under Coach Steve Kerr, went 73-9, setting an N.B.A. record for victories in a season.

Curry also remained remarkably injury-free — until Game 1 against the Rockets on April 16, when he hurt his right ankle pivoting to retreat on defense. He missed Games 2 and 3 before returning Sunday for Game 4. On the final play of the first half, he slipped on a wet spot and tumbled, injuring his knee.

“Clearly, we don’t want to be here getting M.R.I.s at this point in the season, especially with someone of Steph’s stature,” General Manager Bob Myers said Monday afternoon at a news conference at the team’s practice facility. “But mechanically, the knee’s intact, so that’s good.

“It’s one of those things where we attempted to put a timetable on it, which is two weeks; we’re going to re-evaluate it. But we’ll know a little more, hopefully, after the first week. It’s how his body responds to rest, treatment — things like that.”

Injuries are a threat to teams with title aspirations. Consider the misfortune of the Cleveland Cavaliers, who were without two of their top players, Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love, when they fell to the Warriors in the finals last season. Now it is the Warriors’ turn to deal with adversity.

Jeff Goodby, an advertising executive and season-ticket holder, cited the team’s depth as an advantage.

“I think we’re all kind of whistling nervously and taking our lead from Steve Kerr: strength in numbers, baby,” Goodby said in an email. “Seriously, my focus group of friends says we shouldn’t play him until someone ties a series up with us. Won’t happen with the Rockets. Maybe not even with the Clippers. Save him for the Spurs.”

For now, the wait begins for fans who can only hope that the Warriors, absent their best player, continue to win.


