


The actor Wendell Pierce took to Twitter late Monday to dispute reports that he tried to force his way into a woman’s room after a political discussion turned ugly at an Atlanta hotel over the weekend.

The actor known for portraying Bunk, a detective in the television drama “The Wire,” was arrested and charged with simple battery on Saturday after the woman told the police that he had hit her in the head.

Mr. Pierce, 52, has acknowledged that he followed the woman, Maggie Elena Baca, and two of her friends to the room where they were staying at Loews Atlanta Hotel, but he told the police that the group had tried to pull him into the room as he resisted.

“I regret that what started as a civil political discussion escalated to the level that it did,” he said in one of a series of posts on Twitter. “Although what has been reported thus far differs in important respects from what actually occurred. I have confidence that the judicial process will work as it should.”

According to Ms. Baca’s account to the police, Mr. Pierce was with his girlfriend when he encountered her and two of her friends in a hotel hallway.

The two groups “began a conversation about politics, which got Mr. Pierce upset,” a police report about the incident said. The document did not get into the exact nature of the disagreement.

Ms. Baca told the police the actor began to push her, and as she and her friends walked back to their room, Mr. Pierce followed them.

Accounts diverged over who was the aggressor during a tussle that unfolded at the door of the room. Ms. Baca told the police that the actor stuck his arm in the door and tried to get in. As the group attempted to repel him, "he began to hit her in the head and grab her hoodie,” according to her report to the police.

Mr. Pierce said that he was standing outside the room when they attempted to pull him in.

Mr. Pierce has expressed support in the past for Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. Unconfirmed reports that Ms. Baca was a Bernie Sanders supporter led many people on social media to rail against the actor.

Neither Ms. Baca nor a representative for Mr. Pierce responded to requests for comment.

Mr. Pierce was taken into custody early Saturday at the hotel, the police said. He was booked and released on $1,000 bail.

On Monday, Mr. Pierce withdrew from plans to deliver the commencement address at the Newark campus of Rutgers University on Wednesday. The university said he did not want to distract from the celebration.

Mr. Pierce is also known for his portrayal of Antoine Batiste, a trombonist, in the HBO series “Treme,” set in his hometown of New Orleans. He recently played Clarence Thomas in the political drama “Confirmation,” which had its premiere last month on HBO.


