


Every time I send an email, I see myself staring back at me. I always have a slight, knowing smile on my face, even if the content of my email is confused, distressed or brimming with unrestrained glee. I chose the image (maybe unconsciously) because it seemed professional and direct, and also because my hair looked good. Smug email me is not my only online incarnation. There are dozens more of my avatars scattered across the web.

The word “avatar” originates in Hinduism, where it refers to a god descending to the earth in mortal form. In Hindu theology, Vishnu assumes various earthbound avatars — among them a fish; a tortoise; a half-man, half-lion — in an effort to restore order at times when humanity has descended into chaos. Now we’re the gods, reinventing ourselves online in the hope of bringing order to a realm we can’t quite keep under our control.

Our avatars represent a self-image that’s fractured across dozens of sites and text bubbles and email chains. We present ourselves differently on Twitter and Tumblr and Slack depending on the norms built into each space. On Facebook, I’m posed by a professional photographer, waist contorted into a slimmed line, eyes peering up out the window of a skyscraper. On Snapchat, I’m burrowed into my office chair, blankly blinking my eyes open and closed. On Candy Crush, I’m a cartoon man-otter. I don’t particularly know why I’ve selected these avatars as my representatives; it’s some combination of my read on the platform’s sensibility, my emotional state at the time of upload and the suite of photos I had on my phone at that moment.

But as I traverse the Web, I naturally scan for subtle clues in the avatars chosen by friends and strangers, reading their U.S.A.-themed scrapbooks and cat GIFs like leaves at the bottom of a teacup. On Twitter, an avatar flipped to Beyoncé in “Lemonade” or Prince reads like a pledge to a newly materialized online club; a bizarre cartoon points to a person who tweets frequently and with open self-loathing; an unhatched egg that appears automatically upon profile creation has become its own anti-avatar avatar. The latest avatar trend turns you into a cartoon character in your own life. With the Bitmoji app, you can conjure a comic-strip image of yourself to emote over email, Twitter and text. And Mii­tomo, a new mobile game from Nintendo, makes the gamification of our social lives explicit — in it, when your impish avatar socializes, you win piles and piles of digital coins for your trouble.

Before avatars became a technological, almost bureaucratic form of self-presentation, “avatar” was used to single out a rarer embodiment of culture and art. As Britain colonized the Indian subcontinent in the 19th century, the Hindu word became a fashionable metaphorical flourish among the British literati. In “The Life of John Milton,” a seven-volume work published from 1859 to 1894, the literary critic David Masson conjured “avatar” to anoint poets who embodied the spirit of the time, elevating them into something like gods among men. A century later, the word jumped from writers who captured the spirit of the age to geeks who did the same.

The technological use of “avatar” emerged via a spontaneous burst of coinages in the late 1980s and early ’90s, at the dawn of personal computing. It appeared in the video game Ultima IV: Quest of the Avatar in 1985; the dial-up computer community Habitat in 1986; the tabletop role-playing game Shadowrun in 1989; and Neal Stephenson’s breakout novel, “Snow Crash,” in 1992, about a futuristic, anarcho-capitalist Los Angeles in which people projected themselves into a virtual public square called the Metaverse.

The coincidence of a bunch of American video-game, fantasy and science-fiction authors cribbing from Hinduism 101 speaks to the need to describe a truly novel phenomenon. But it also hints at a similar worldview among the men — and they were all men — who came to define it. As Stephenson told me, “That was a time when people had more idealistic notions of what digital technology was going to do for us, sometimes bordering on the mystical.” For socially marginalized science-fiction fans and computer geeks, the virtual world could help people enjoy a level of social status and acceptance they lacked at home. Using a computer granted them a level of godlike power, because they had skills most people lacked. In advertisements for Habitat, the early online community was billed as a “place full of drama and adventure,” where each user could seize the rare opportunity to “reflect his real self-image, from toe to head.” A player could literally snap off his avatar’s head and pop a new one on.

The technological co-opting of the word replicated the power dynamic in the original avatar myth — the avatar helps a higher being interact with a lesser realm, one he or she controls. But it also retained the idea of the avatar’s task of delivering righteousness to a lawless world. Richard Garriott, creator of the Ultima games, said he came across the Hindu concept while looking for a way to encourage moral behavior in gaming. He was disturbed by players who took the easiest possible route to win the game. “They weren’t acting like heroes,” Garriott told me. “They would kill all the local villagers if it meant gaining enough power to kill the bad guy.” So Garriott started framing his hero as an “avatar” instead of a “character.” He served players with a personality test to imbue the avatar with the player’s own attributes and build elements of personal accountability into the gameplay. In James Cameron’s 2009 film “Avatar,” another avatar injects human empathy into a virtual interaction. In the film, an ex-Marine sent to colonize the planet Pandora grows to identify with its native people through his occupation of a body that looks and feels like theirs.

But if an avatar was once a projection of the human body and human values, as the Internet grew in popularity it was flattened into a mask. It became the standard term for a simple image that accompanied a screen name in a chat room or discussion group. In discrete gaming worlds, value systems were strangely authentic: Everyone was building his or her mini-me in the same system and playing by the same rules. But in the mixed-use spaces of the Internet — where some people were playing themselves and others were hoping to play tricks — avatars became ambiguous. Bad actors could sulk under the cover of the Web while they pasted reputation-killing content on a message board or terrifying threats on Twitter. Avatars became tools for stoking chaos instead of enforcing order.

When social networking arose, mammoth platforms like Facebook and Linked­In chose to strip the mask away. The idea of the avatar doesn’t factor into their self-conception, and the word doesn’t appear in their promotional copy. These are “platforms” with “profiles” and “accounts.” On Facebook, you’re supposed to just be “you” — no particular technological prowess required, and no avatar necessary to translate yourself to the new medium.

That’s the new tech fantasy, anyway. But of course, on Facebook, our profile pictures are avatars, too: emblems of our success, our good grooming, our unflap­pable happiness. In fact, proliferating online platforms have prompted us to create more and more conceptions of ourselves to send off into the world. Showing up, looking good, being clever and seeming like you really care in all these different spaces can feel like a video game set to the hardest level, except you only get one life. In Sanskrit, “avatar” is related not only to “descending”; it also means “to make an appearance.” When that becomes too much, your avatar — a being who is endlessly malleable — takes over.


