


OAKLAND, Calif. — Most of the announced crowd of 19,596 fans attending Game 2 of the playoff series between the Golden State Warriors and the Houston Rockets wore golden-colored T-shirts reading “Strength in Numbers.” But the motto written on the Warriors’ latest marketing giveaway carried deeper meaning Monday night.

The positive message did not account for the subtraction of Stephen Curry: the 30.1 fewer points per game, the lost 402 3-pointers this season, the missing 34 minutes, on average, of must-watch playing time.

Curry, the most valuable player on the N.B.A.’s best team, missed Game 2 with an ankle injury sustained in Game 1. Golden State still won, 115-106, but Curry’s absence reminded the Warriors and their fans just how much their success and their hopes rest on Curry’s lower extremities.

It was a few seasons ago, before Curry became the league’s most exciting player and the Warriors became its best team, that Curry was as well-known for his tender ankles as for his rainbow jumpers.

It remains unclear how serious the injury is, and how much it hobbles Golden State’s expectations of a repeat championship, if at all. The postgame mood was light, and Curry walked out of the arena in dress shoes with no obvious discomfort. But there was an undertone of concern sure to linger to Thursday’s Game 3 in Houston, if not beyond.

“He tried to see how it’d feel,” Coach Steve Kerr said of Curry’s aborted pregame warm-up. “He tried to push off on it, and it was tender.”

The exact injury is vague. Team officials described it as a tweak or a sprain. Kerr said he was not sure.

“It’s the back of the foot; it’s underneath his ankle,” he said. “It’s something back there.”

A magnetic resonance imaging exam conducted on Tuesday “did not reveal anything of concern,” the Warriors said in a statement. Curry would continue receiving daily treatment for the ankle, the team added, and he was listed as questionable for Game 3. 

Curry appeared to twist his right ankle late in the second quarter of Game 1. He returned after halftime and played less than three minutes before Kerr pulled him from the court.

“I didn’t like the way he was moving when he went back out there,” Kerr explained. Besides, the Warriors were on their way to blowing away the Rockets, 104-78. Curry was not needed.

But when he did not practice on Sunday, and did not participate in the morning shootaround on Monday, the suggestion that Curry had left the game merely as a precautionary measure took a more serious tone. Bay Area news reports and talk-radio conversations centered on the one piece of kryptonite that could stop the Warriors’ championship aspirations — the loss of Curry to injury.

It was a bit of a flashback for the Warriors and their fans. Curry’s ankle problems began in his second season, five years ago. Curry had surgery on a tendon in his right ankle in May 2011 and another operation in 2012, missing all but 26 games in the season between. More problems came in the 2012 preseason.

In December 2012, the Warriors extended Curry’s contract, gingerly — a four-year deal worth $44 million that made him just the fifth-highest-paid player on the team. Some considered the deal risky for the Warriors, but they and Curry both knew that the team got a deep discount because of Curry’s ankles.

There have been few problems since. Curry has played at least 78 of each regular season’s 82 games and never missed a playoff game.

Then, the ankle.

“He understands that we have, first of all, his best interest at heart — his career,” Kerr said before the game. “We know that he had surgery on that ankle four years ago. He’s got a lot of basketball ahead of him, and there’s plenty of cases in the past where people played through stuff and it didn’t turn out so well.”

Kerr mentioned Grant Hill, who retired in 2013 after 18 enviable seasons, his full potential limited by chronic ankle problems.

“Whether that’s the same type of thing as this, I don’t really know,” Kerr said. “But I do know that we have to look after his health, because the competitor he is, he’s going to want to play.”

About an hour before Game 2, Curry took the court for his usual pregame warm-up: dribbling two balls, shooting from all angles. But he cut short the workout, shook his head as he left the court and was trailed to the training room by General Manager Bob Myers and the team owner Joe Lacob. Within minutes, the team announced that Curry would not play.

Perhaps the Warriors, 73-9 in the regular season, do not need Curry to beat the Rockets, a 41-41 team and the eighth seed in the conference. But the Warriors are much less, and less exciting, without him.

“There’s a smaller margin for error,” Kerr said before the game. “We’re not going to get Steph’s four pull-up 3s from 29 feet that are back breakers.”

The Warriors played three games without Curry during the regular season — two of them in back-to-back road games in Texas. The Warriors lost badly to Dallas on Dec. 30, then beat the Rockets in Houston on Dec. 31, 114-110.

In both cases, Brandon Rush started for Curry and shot a combined 2 of 13, including 1 of 9 from 3-point territory. Klay Thompson led the Warriors past the Rockets with 38 points, Andre Iguodala had 20 points off the bench, and Draymond Green had 10 points, 11 rebounds and 16 assists.

Kerr and the Warriors studied that game before this series began. They studied it harder on Sunday and Monday, when they realized that Curry might not play in Game 2.

This time, Curry was replaced in the lineup by Shaun Livingston, whose highest-scoring game this season was 17 points. Curry scored fewer than 17 points only six times.

But the Warriors displayed their admirable depth, using 11 players in the first half, and they followed the Dec. 31 formula. Thompson scored 34 points, Iguodala 18 and Livingston 16. Green had 12 points, 14 rebounds and 8 assists. The Warriors led most of the game, but struggled to comfortably dispatch the Rockets until the final minutes.

Curry wore a dark suit, not the white home jersey of his teammates. He sat on a folding chair among the army of assistant coaches, and sometimes stood alongside Kerr shouting encouragements in the first quarter. He spent most of the rest of the game sitting quietly in the second row behind a row of courtside fans.

Before the playoffs, the biggest worry was whether the Warriors had expended so much energy to break the regular-season victory record, previously held by the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls, that they would not have enough health and drive to win 16 more games in the playoffs to claim a championship.

The Rockets were not expected to be much of a hurdle in the first round, but there was a hint of intrigue in Curry’s matchup with Houston guard Patrick Beverley, a well-known defensive pest. In 2013, when Oklahoma City was the defending conference champion and was seeded first, Beverley bumped into the All-Star Russell Westbrook just after a timeout whistle.

The collision tore Westbrook’s meniscus, and while Oklahoma City was good enough to get past the Rockets in the first round, the Thunder could not overcome Westbrook’s absence in the second. A title favorite was knocked out. Championship hopes hang on fragile hinges.

Midway through the first quarter of Game 1 on Saturday, Beverley and Curry got their arms tangled, and Curry responded with a shove. Both players were assessed technical fouls. Beverley laughed. It looked as if it might be a tough, physical series for Curry, a slender 6 feet 3 and 190 pounds.

It was the next quarter, though, when Curry twisted his ankle without contact while guarding James Harden. It did not look like much. But a season’s work can come undone in little more than a moment.

The Warriors hope that between now and Thursday, Curry’s ankle will show that such a moment has passed. Their playoff hopes rest with his presence. Their biggest strength is in his numbers.


