


About a quarter of major league pitchers have had Tommy John surgery, and the reason for the epidemic has been unclear.

Various studies have suggested that pitching mechanics, the anatomy of a pitcher’s arm, curveballs, pitching fatigue, pitch velocity or just pitching too many innings could be the problem. But according to research by doctors at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, the explanation is none of the above. Instead, it is throwing fastballs, and throwing lots of them.

The researchers studied the issue by examining the records of 83 major league pitchers who had had Tommy John surgery, which involves replacing a torn ulnar collateral ligament in an elbow with a tendon from elsewhere in the body, and a comparison group of 83 who had not.

Data on all 166 pitchers was collected over two years, before and after surgery. Researchers looked at height and weight, whether the pitchers were right-handed or left-handed, a starter or a reliever, the number of innings pitched, a pitcher’s age at surgery, years of major league experience and the type, number and velocity of pitches they had thrown. Then, to see exactly how they differed, researchers compared the ones who had injured their elbows and needed surgery to the ones who had not.

The two groups were very much alike. In both groups, the average age was 28, about 70 percent of the pitchers were right-handed, and about half were starters and half were relievers. The two groups pitched the same average number of innings, and the average height and weight were the same for those who had had surgery as for those who had not.

The average speed of their pitches did not vary either; in both groups the average velocity was about 91 miles per hour for fastballs, 78 for curves and 84 for sliders and changeups.

But one factor stood out: pitchers who had surgery threw fastballs 46.8 percent of the time, compared to 39.7 percent among those who had not had an operation. The researchers concluded that just throwing fastballs — irrespective of velocity — significantly increases the risk for injury and Tommy John surgery. None of the other factors they looked at made any difference.

The lead author of the study, Dr. Robert A. Keller, the chief orthopedics resident at Henry Ford, said that there had been biomechanical studies looking at the forces imposed by different pitches and that they showed that the fastball put the most torque on the shoulder and elbow.

“Pitchers who throw at their maximum speed, whatever that speed is, they’re hurting their arms,” Dr. Keller said. “The ones throwing fastballs are putting more force on their arms more often.”

Many parents of Little Leaguers believe that the curveball is the culprit in arm injuries, and Dr. Keller said that the findings of his study may not translate to younger players.

“Professional pitchers have great mechanics and know how to throw a curve or a fastball,” he said. “It may be that younger pitchers are at more risk because their mechanics are not as good.”

But for major league pitchers, the researchers calculated that there was a 2 percent increase in the risk for ulnar collateral ligament surgery for every 1 percent increase in the number of fastballs they threw.


