


Until two years ago, when she and her husband signed a lease for the top three floors of a townhouse on the Upper West Side, Diane Paulus, the director of the Tony-nominated musical “Waitress,” knew nothing of life without doormen. And, quite honestly, she didn’t want to know anything of life without doormen.

A New York native, Ms. Paulus, 49, had always lived in buildings where there was someone to take packages and groceries, where the hallways were long and lined with apartments.

“I had never considered a townhouse. It was never on my radar,” said Ms. Paulus, whose Broadway credits include “Finding Neverland” and the Tony-winning revivals of “Hair,” “Porgy and Bess” and “Pippin.” “But we wanted space and quiet, and we’ve always looked for that dream top-floor apartment. So we thought, ‘What about a townhouse where you don’t have neighbors above you?’”

She was taken with the notion of a front door that was for her family and her family alone: her husband, Randy Weiner, 51, a playwright and producer, and the couple’s daughters, Katharine, 9, and Natalie, 11.

“One visit and I knew this was the place,” Ms. Paulus said. She loved the roof deck, and not only because it provided a view of a neighboring rooftop that was the site of her 1995 wedding. And she was delighted by the bike storage possibilities provided by a foyer.

But come on, who was she kidding? What really captured Ms. Paulus’s fancy was the idea of so many floors, so much space on those floors and so many stairs between them. Her children could be in the kitchen; she could be two flights up in her bedroom. And vice versa.

No longer would she have to deal with the inconvenience of work sessions with collaborators in public places like Cafe Luxembourg, Nice Matin or the Lambs Club. No more sotto voce business calls conducted while sitting on the edge of the tub in the bathroom, because it was the one quiet spot she could find in her apartment.

And while we’re on the subject of bathrooms, let the record show that Ms. Paulus’s townhouse has five; she has commandeered the one next to her office as her exclusive province. “My husband doesn’t even get to use it,” she said. “It has a double sink and a shower and a walk-in closet. I feel like I’ve died and gone to heaven.”

Now, under one roof, Ms. Paulus can have a home life and, thanks to an office on the second floor, a somewhat less stressful life in the theater. “I can say, ‘Why don’t you come over to my house?’ ” she said. “I’ve finally grown up. I can host people. We can bang on the piano in the living room or put a track on the sound system. It’s been great to have that studio environment.”

Ms. Paulus exudes decisive competence, the exact quality you’d want in a director. Correction: Ms. Paulus exudes decisive competence when dealing with the many moving parts of a musical or opera. “Swatches are put in front of me constantly,” she said. “I make thousands of choices about set design and props and the colors of costumes.”

But when she was tasked with selecting furniture and accessories for her townhouse, all that enviable certainty went right out the window. “I’ve never been able to make home-decorating decisions with ease. I’ve just never been able to get it together,” she said. “Someone told me, ‘It’s because you use all of that particular energy for your work. You have nothing left for your home life.’ ”

Fortunately, she has friends. They told her to paint all the walls white, and the director took their direction. Those same friends told her about the ABC Carpet & Home warehouse outlet in the Bronx, where she and her husband bought almost everything for the house in one fell swoop. The haul included a glass-and-chrome étagère, a glass-and-chrome coffee table, a dining table and a pair of gray velvet tufted benches that Ms. Paulus has since conceded should have stayed on the showroom floor.

“I sat on them and they were comfortable,” she said defensively. “And then I spent the next six months going into the living room and rearranging them. My husband finally said, ‘I think you’ve made a mistake and we should just start over.’ ”

So it was back to ABC for a sleek gray couch and an easy chair. One of the tufted benches now resides in Ms. Paulus’s office. Its mate was relegated to the foyer, a handy perch for visitors, who are asked to remove their shoes before heading upstairs. This is a nod to Ms. Paulus’s heritage; her mother was Japanese. Further honoring the family’s background, Ms. Paulus’s sister, Janet, made 1,000 origami cranes as a housewarming present for the family’s previous residence. A symbol of good luck and good health, they hang in multicolored strands in a corner of the den/playroom.

Scattered among the many new pieces of furniture is a cache of treasures that Ms. Paulus has taken from place to place: the tiny white rocking chair that was made by her father; a collage of photos from her parents’ childhoods; a picture she painted in high school that her mother and Mr. Weiner had framed. That picture hangs in the kitchen, one of Ms. Paulus’s preferred hangouts, not because she cooks — she doesn’t — but because “so much of our life happens there,” she said. And there’s an adjoining “sweet little balcony,” Ms. Paulus said. “You walk out there and you’re in this enclave of brownstones. Our neighbor has a fountain that runs all spring and summer. It’s a little oasis.”

Her daughters have taken to their new surroundings with gusto. They installed a pulley to haul objects between floors, and have discovered that a gym mat has great pickup when ridden down a flight of stairs.

Ms. Paulus has been similarly inspired. She has worked on so many from-the-ground-up projects since moving in — “Finding Neverland,” “Waitress” and Off Broadway’s “Invisible Thread” — that she now refers to her rental as the “house of new musicals.”

There have been strides on the domestic front as well. “I’m shocked at myself that I got it together to buy roof furniture,” she said. “We went to Fortunoff’s, and while my husband and I were looking at tables and chairs, my kids were sitting on a canopied porch swing. And as we were leaving, Randy and I looked at each other and said, ‘Why aren’t we getting that swing?’ ”

She added: “So we got the swing, and it’s probably my favorite thing in the house.”


