


Gregory Alan Isakov sees a through line between his two passions, music and farming: “I realize that the more I do both, they’re both things that I’ll never master,” he says. Not that he isn’t willing to try. When the singer-songwriter isn’t on tour, as he soon will be in support of his new album, “Gregory Alan Isakov with the Colorado Symphony,” out June 10, he resides here: on a four-and-a-half acre farm outside Boulder, where he and seven friends tend to over 100 varieties of heirloom vegetables, plus beehives, chickens, medical cannabis and a group of sheep they call “the T-Swift pack.” It’s the perfect place for the musician to unwind, if an unlikely one. “I work on music and then garden for a few hours and come back,” says Isakov, who counts several bandmates among the farm’s residents. “It just seems like natural workflow to let things settle that way.”

Born in South Africa but raised in Philadelphia, Isakov is a self-described “outside kid” who dropped out of school in the 11th grade to hike the Appalachian Trail and follow his obsessions (“mostly soil and compost and stuff like that”). In 2000, he came to Colorado to study horticulture at Naropa University and spent a year working at the much-written-about Findhorn Garden in Scotland, which has drawn devotees from around the world since the 1960s thanks to a mixture of what Isakov calls “far-out plant spirit stuff” and “50-pound cabbages.” He later made plans to get a master’s degree in mycology, but deferred after the Delta blues singer Kelly Joe Phelps offered him an opening spot on his tour. “When that happened, I was like, ‘I’ll just go later,’” Isakov says. “I’m kind of still saying that.”

In many ways, Isakov’s collaboration with the Colorado Symphony marks a logical check-in point in his now decade-plus career. Comprised primarily of reworked interpretations of previously released material, including songs from his 2013 indie folk manifesto “The Weatherman,” Isakov’s sixth album finds him surrendering some of his perfectionist tendencies to a process made at once simpler and more complex by the addition of a full orchestra. The 2009 track “Big Black Car,” a new version of which premieres below, is given new life thanks to lush strings that swell as the song reaches its conclusion. And where Isakov may have previously reworked a track endlessly before he could be satisfied, recording with the symphony necessitated a more organic approach. “I love how few choices I have now,” he says.

At home, too, Isakov is taking a more pared-down approach as a lengthy tour nears. Along with his bandmates at the farm, he has begun growing heirloom seeds for a start-up — an attempt to help others avoid the big seed companies, he says, but also to make it easier for the band to be away. And when musical interests threaten to disrupt his bohemian lifestyle, as happened when McDonald’s asked him to use “Big Black Car” in a 2011 commercial, the lifelong vegetarian found a productive solution: He donated all the proceeds to organizations like the Iowa-based nonprofit Seed Savers Exchange, which promote sustainable farming. “We all joke around like, ‘There goes 100 man-hours to save, like, eight bucks,’” Isakov says of the farm’s commitment to all things heirloom. “We don’t know why we do this, but we just know we have to.”


