


Hiring the charismatic and controversial José Mourinho as manager, which Manchester United finally did on Friday, might seem a risky move for a storied club. Unsettled since the longtime manager Alex Ferguson walked away in 2013, and already out of next season’s Champions League, United would seem to face an uncertain immediate future regardless of who sits in the manager’s chair.

But Mourinho’s history at top clubs, including Porto, Chelsea (twice), Inter Milan and Real Madrid, is well established, so much so that one might say the future at Manchester United is almost preordained. If his history holds true, here is what United fans can expect.

MOURINHO WILL BE QUOTABLE At his first news conference after being appointed manager of Chelsea in 2004, Mourinho set the tone for his travels around the elite of European soccer.

“Please don’t call me arrogant,” he said with supreme assurance. “I think I am a special one.”

The nickname “the Special One” stuck, used equally by his detractors to malign him and by his fans to glorify him.

Later, at Inter Milan, he accused rival managers of “intellectual prostitution.” He called Arsenal’s manager, Arsène Wenger, a “voyeur” for paying so much attention to his Chelsea team.

“There are some guys who have this big telescope to see what happens in other families,” Mourinho said. “He must be one of them.”

His opinions have also roved beyond the earthly to the theological.

“He must really think I’m a great guy,” Mourinho once said of God. “He must think that because otherwise he would not have given me so much. He has helped me out so much that he must have a very high opinion of me.”

MOURINHO WILL DO SOMETHING CONTROVERSIAL In the midst of a sideline scuffle between players during a Real Madrid-Barcelona derby in 2011, Mourinho calmly strolled up behind the Barcelona assistant Tito Vilanova and poked him in the eye. He was uncontrite afterward, referring to the well-known Vilanova by the wrong name.

In August, Mourinho took exception to the actions of Chelsea’s team doctor, Eva Carneiro, after she and another trainer raced onto the field to treat the injured Eden Hazard late in an early-season game against Swansea City. Mourinho said the injury was not serious enough for Carneiro to enter the field, a decision that meant that Hazard would have to leave momentarily while Chelsea — already down a player after a red card — defended a free kick late in a tie game. Mourinho labeled Carneiro “impulsive and naïve” in his postgame news conference, and the incident eventually led her to leave the team and to sue. The case remains unresolved.

Mourinho also managed to get arrested during his first stint at Chelsea after a dispute with police officers who were trying to quarantine his dog.

MOURINHO WILL FEUD WITH ANOTHER COACH Mourinho always seems to pick out a rival coach or two to face special opprobrium. “He’s a specialist in failure” is one of the many denunciations he has made of Wenger over the years. Who will be his target this time around? The obvious candidate is the new coach at Manchester City, Pep Guardiola, with whom Mourinho feuded in the Spanish league when Guardiola coached Barcelona and Mourinho its archrival, Real Madrid.

Guardiola’s tenure at Barcelona was hailed from all corners, and his passing tactics were said to have revolutionized the game. Mourinho, perhaps soured from not getting the Barcelona job himself, was much less impressed. He relentlessly denigrated Guardiola, Barcelona and its playing style. Now he will be able to lob his barbs across town, instead of across the country.

MOURINHO WILL TURN ON A STAR PLAYER Iker Casillas, Real Madrid’s longtime captain, has said he did not speak with Mourinho during Mourinho’s last year at the club. Juan Mata was Chelsea’s player of the year in 2013, but when Mourinho arrived, he immediately fell into the doghouse for not focusing enough on defense.

Which Manchester United star will face Mourinho’s wrath next season? A pretty safe guess is, well, Juan Mata, who may not be relishing his pending reunion with his former manager.

THE TEAM’S STYLE OF PLAY WILL BE DEFENSIVE, AND DIVISIVE Mourinho likes his players to press defensively, to play physically and to counterattack. That style does not always leave room for creativity and entertainment. Unlike Guardiola, he does not emphasize possession, to a fault. Such pragmatic play can lead to some grumbling, even when the team wins. If it starts losing, the grumbling will turn into a roar. One of the reasons United’s job was open was that the former manager Louis van Gaal wore out his welcome amid his team’s noticeable lack of flair; United led the Premier League in backward passes last year.

UNITED WILL WIN THE PREMIER LEAGUE TITLE, AND SOON Mourinho has won a league title with every team he has coached since arriving at Porto in 2002. At Porto, Chelsea and Inter, the title came in Year 1. At Real Madrid and in his return to Chelsea, it came in Year 2. With United coming off seventh-, fourth- and fifth-place finishes, fans will be eagerly looking forward to a similarly quick trip back to the top.

UNITED MIGHT WIN THE CHAMPIONS LEAGUE Or at least make the semifinals. Mourinho lifted the trophy with both Porto and Inter and made the last four with Real Madrid and in both of his stints at Chelsea.

MOURINHO WILL QUICKLY WEAR OUT HIS WELCOME Despite his success, Mourinho has not lasted more than three and a half seasons as manager at any club. He thrives on tension, and that can go on for only so long. Friction with players and owners has generally led to a departure “by mutual consent,” if not an outright firing.

ANOTHER BIG TEAM WILL HIRE HIM, AND THE PROCESS WILL START ALL OVER No matter how disastrous his tenure or how messy the ending, there is never a shortage of suitors for Mourinho’s talents, and that will surely be the case at the end of his United tenure. What would come next? Deep-pocketed Paris St.-Germain, desperate for Champions League success, could lure him to the French league. And you cannot rule out a third stop at Chelsea, where, despite everything, Mourinho remains revered by Blues fans.


