


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Happy Juneteenth! It’s a good day for a barbecue, one that can provide leftovers to eat for much of the week. You could head to the market this morning and pick up a big ol’ pork butt, and get it on the grill or into the slow cooker for an evening meal of pulled pork (and sandwiches for days). Or you could make beef ribs, or you could make barbecued bluefish, or barbecued tofu. You could make barbecued chicken.

How about some potato salad to go with it? Some macaroni and cheese? We’re loving this recipe for Lowcountry pickled coleslaw that Kim Severson picked up down in South Carolina. And wouldn’t a banana pudding be a nice thing to eat, tonight?

Come Monday, we’ll downshift into vegetarian fare, go easy on ourselves, and cook this fine recipe for a roasted carrot salad that we learned from the Los Angeles chef Ludo Lefebvre.

And we’ll stick with that program on Tuesday night, perhaps with the recipe for avocado tacos that Jeff Gordinier scored off Enrique Olvera, the chef at Cosme in New York and Pujol in Mexico City. It’s simple, delicate and tremendously good.

Wednesday night may be a good one for salmon. Melissa Clark has a cool recipe for baked salmon with agrodolce blueberries. Or you could try Pierre Franey’s recipe for sautéed salmon with leeks and tomatoes. Those with a grill will enjoy Mark Bittman’s recipe for salmon with salsa fresca.

For a Thursday repast, how about home-cooked Chinese takeout, cheaper and better than anything that comes on a bike? Cold sesame noodles may suffice. Crispy lamb with cumin, scallions and red chiles definitely will. David Tanis’s recipe for vegetarian mapo tofu is aces high, as is Julia Moskin’s recipe for stir-fried shrimp with ginger and snow peas.

Then, on Friday, you could make Pete Wells’s excellent recipe for a butterflied chicken with cracked spices, the closest some of us will come to the chickens he wrote about last week in his review of Le Coq Rico in New York.

Many other recipes to cook this coming week are available on Cooking. And of course there are yet still more on blogs and recipe sites across the World Wide Web. A public service announcement: You can save any recipe from any source to your Cooking recipe box, using this handy extension. (Here’s hoping everything goes smoothly. If not, we are standing by to help: cookingcare@nytimes.com.)

Now, how about some distractions before your kitchen chores? We’ll start with Miley Cyrus singing “Jolene” out in the backyard. I’m not sure you need to read the British naturalist Charles Foster’s new book, “Being a Beast: Adventures Across the Species Divide.” But you absolutely should read Dwight Garner’s sprightly, hilarious review, and decide for yourself. You may read Justin Rohrlich’s “Could Eat a Horse,” in Roads & Kingdoms. And take a gander at these beautiful sweetgrass baskets that Mary Jackson makes down in Charleston, S.C. We’ll be back tomorrow with more.


