


FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Sunday with the continuation of an article about the role Donald J. Trump’s daughter Ivanka is playing in his campaign misidentified one of Mr. Trump’s sons. Eric — not Donald Jr. — was shown seated next to Ivanka. (Donald Jr. was at the far left, partly obscured.)

•

An article on Wednesday about the broadening of a federal investigation into Mayor Bill de Blasio’s campaign fund-raising apparatus to focus on efforts to raise money for Democratic candidates for the State Senate in 2014, using information from the New York Police Department, misstated the number of police officials who have been transferred or placed on administrative leave. It is nine, not eight.

NATIONAL

An article on Tuesday about the 2016 Pulitzer Prize winners misstated the surname of one of the finalists in the Explanatory Journalism category. He is Colin Woodard of The Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday Telegram, not Colin Woodar.

BUSINESS DAY

A Reuters article on Friday about an offer from the Federal Housing Finance Agency to reduce the loan balances of some borrowers who owe more than their homes are worth misstated one of the criteria to qualify for the reduction. The principal balance must be $250,000 or less, not more than $250,000.

•

The Mediator column on Monday, about traditional media’s difficulties in competing for attention with social media stunts, including wild videos, misidentified the country in which a train was shown on video going through a narrow alleyway. It is Thailand, not India.

THE ARTS

A Critic’s Notebook article on Tuesday about the season finale of the television show “Girls” referred incorrectly to the basket Hannah leaves as a peace offering for Adam and Jessa. It is a fruit basket, not a flower basket. The article also misidentified the bed where Hannah and Tally smoke a joint. It is Hannah’s bed, not Tally’s.

•

A film review on Wednesday about the documentary “Streit’s: Matzo and the American Dream” misspelled the surname of the filmmaker at two points in some editions. As the review correctly noted elsewhere, he is Michael Levine, not Levin.

•

A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about Bret Easton Ellis and the Broadway musical based on his novel “American Psycho” misspelled the name of the theater where the show is playing. As the article correctly noted, it is the Schoenfeld Theater, not the Shoenfeld.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed tonytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


