


SPORTS

A picture caption last Sunday with an article about an electronic umpire machine that was tested by the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1950 misstated the surname of one of the umpires shown protesting the machine. He was Augie Donatelli, not Donatello.

•

An Associated Press article in some editions last Sunday about a debate over a historical marker at Philadelphia’s Germantown Cricket Club honoring the tennis champion Bill Tilden, who was convicted in the 1940s over his conduct with teenage boys, referred incorrectly to sanctions against the Penn State football program in another child sex abuse scandal, which involved the assistant coach Jerry Sandusky. While the Penn State program was penalized by the N.C.A.A., including a ban on postseason play, it was not suspended.

•

The On Pro Basketball column in some editions last Sunday, about injuries that plagued the Los Angeles Clippers in their first-round loss in the N.B.A. playoffs, referred incorrectly to an injury to Blake Griffin. He hurt his quadriceps, not his hamstring.

MAGAZINE

An article on April 24 about communal pools in Iceland misspelled the surname of a Ph.D. student who spoke about using them. She is Katrin Gudmundsdottir, not Gudmundsdtottir.

ARTS & LEISURE

An article last Sunday about the difficult string quartets composed by Ben Johnston, some of which are on a new CD by the Kepler Quartet, misspelled the surname of a violinist in the quartet at one point. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, she is Sharan Leventhal, not Levinston. The article also misidentified the city near the farm where Mr. Johnston lives. It is Madison, Wis., not Madison, Ill.

•

A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the actor Ben Foster, who is starring as Stanley Kowalski in “A Streetcar Named Desire” at St. Ann’s Warehouse in Brooklyn, carried a credit that misstated the photographer’s given name. The picture, of Mr. Foster as Kowalski in a 2014 Young Vic production, is by Johan Persson, not Jonah.

•

Two picture captions last Sunday with an article about the film director Rebecca Miller, using information from a publicist, carried credits that misspelled the photographer’s given name. He is Jon Pack, not John.

•

An article last Sunday about the opening of “Dear Evan Hansen,” starring Ben Platt at Second Stage Theater in Manhattan, misstated the name of the film series in which Mr. Platt appeared. It is “Pitch Perfect,” not “Picture Perfect.”

TRAVEL

An article last Sunday about F. Scott Fitzgerald’s time in St. Paul, Minn., mistated the title of one of his books. It is “The Beautiful and Damned,” not “The Beautiful and the Damned.”

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


