


Once you get past places in Vermont on the list of the worst counties for Hillary Clinton so far in the primaries, you quickly arrive at Coal County, Okla., where she won just 19 percent of the vote.

Mrs. Clinton’s profound weakness in a county named “Coal” is not because of her comments about shutting down coal mines, as one might expect. Those comments came after the Oklahoma primary.

It’s because Coal County, like much of the traditionally Democratic parts of the South, has a huge number of registered Democrats who now vote Republican in presidential elections. In the states with closed or semi-closed contests — like Oklahoma — these registered Democrats can participate only in the Democratic primary.

When they do, they have tended to vote against Hillary Clinton (and for Bernie Sanders, the senator from Vermont).

Coal County, Okla., is one of the most extreme examples. There, 80 percent of voters are registered Democrats, yet President Obama won just 27 percent of the vote in 2012. Mrs. Clinton has performed very poorly where the share of voters who are registered Democrats is much greater than the share of voters who supported Mr. Obama.

The same phenomenon dogged Mr. Obama in the 2012 presidential primary, when he won just 22 percent of the vote in Coal County, Okla. That’s not a typo: I mean the 2012 Democratic presidential primary, when he had no major opposition, not the 2008 one, when he had a tough contest with Mrs. Clinton.

These conservative Democrats are a legacy of the old Democratic strength among white voters in the South, where many white conservatives nonetheless remain registered as Democrats. In several states, these voters can be something of a consolation prize to Mr. Sanders, who has often complained that closed primaries prevent many of his younger and independent supporters from voting.

It bodes well for Mr. Sanders’s chances in coal country this month, starting in West Virginia on Tuesday. West Virginia, like Oklahoma, has far more registered Democrats than Obama voters.

Even today, 49 percent of voters are registered Democrats in West Virginia, but Mr. Obama won just 35.5 percent of the vote against Mitt Romney in 2012. Mr. Obama won just 59 percent in the 2012 primary in a one-on-one contest against Keith Judd, who was in prison at the time and who will be on the West Virginia ballot again on Tuesday.

The results of these counties have another odd characteristic: a huge number of votes for minor candidates. In Coal County, around 6 percent of the vote went to the former Maryland governor Martin O’Malley, and obscure candidates like Michael Steinberg (3 percent), Mr. Judd (4 percent), Star Locke (4 percent) and Roque De La Fuente (2 percent) also picked up support. These candidates combined to receive nearly as many votes as Mrs. Clinton — and in other counties, they actually did.

In the open primaries, as in Texas or Alabama, these conservatives tend to vote in the Republican primary — just as they vote for Republicans in presidential elections. But in closed or semi-closed contests like Florida, Louisiana and Oklahoma, such voters must cast ballots in a Democratic primary if they want to vote in a primary at all. The result: Mrs. Clinton’s support surges once you cross the state line from Oklahoma to Texas, but the turnout plummets.

The same effect can be seen across the South. Mr. Sanders fared far better in the Florida Panhandle, where a majority of voters are often registered Democrats but Republicans prevail, than he did on the other side of the state line in Alabama or Georgia, with their open primaries.

In all nine of the Panhandle counties carried by Mr. Sanders, Mr. O’Malley won at least 10 percent of the vote. But these counties have very few voters (and many of them are black Democrats, who have tended to be big supporters of Mrs. Clinton), so it didn’t hurt her to the same extent in Florida as it did in Oklahoma.

The only exception so far is Pennsylvania, where Mrs. Clinton fared well in the traditionally Democratic Appalachian part of the state, and where there were very few votes for minor candidates.

It’s unclear whether these voters sincerely support Mr. Sanders. Demographically similar voters on the other side of the state border aren’t showing up for him, so they’re not exactly “feeling the Bern.”

Exit polls in Oklahoma, which allowed independents to vote in the Democratic primary for the first time, showed Mr. Sanders winning among people who wanted more conservative policies than Mr. Obama, or who trusted neither Mr. Sanders nor Mrs. Clinton in a crisis. These are probably not voters who are getting fired up for the Democratic revolution.

It’s possible that some of the Democratic voters showed up to vote for a Republican, but found themselves turned away.

Perhaps they showed up to vote in a local or statewide primary. Maybe some decided on mischief and were meddling with the Democrats.

Or, they might have simply wanted to register displeasure with a Democratic Party that has largely left them behind.


