


Two days after Staten Island residents were shaken by the sight of a woman’s body being wheeled down the street on a dolly, the dead woman’s husband was taken to Richmond County Supreme Court and arraigned on murder charges.

The man, Anthony Lopez, 31, was charged with one count of second-degree murder in connection with the death of his wife, Obiamaka Aduba, 26, of Staten Island. He was remanded to jail by William E. Garnett, a State Supreme Court justice.

Mr. Lopez was also arraigned on Sunday on a misdemeanor complaint of criminal mischief from earlier this month. The complaint said he had thrown a brick at the windshield and window of a vehicle driven by a person described as a “friend/acquaintance.”

A spokesman for the New York Police Department said Mr. Lopez had 52 prior arrests, 17 of which are sealed. Six of the arrests were related to domestic violence, the spokesman added. Asked if Ms. Aduba had been the victim, he said, “They do have a domestic history.”

Julie Bolcer, a spokeswoman for the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, said the cause of Ms. Aduba’s death was “ligature strangulation.” The manner of death was homicide, she said.

On Friday, just after 7 a.m., the Police Department received a call about a man wheeling a body on a metal dolly. Mr. Lopez fled as officers arrived at Post Lane in the Mariners Harbor neighborhood of Staten Island, the authorities said.

Mr. Lopez was arrested on Saturday morning. At around 10:15 a.m., officers, acting on a tip, spotted Mr. Lopez in Harlem. After a brief chase that began on East 115th Street, Mr. Lopez was caught at East 113th Street, the authorities said. He had shaved his head to change his appearance.

In an emailed statement, the district attorney of Richmond County, Michael E. McMahon, said, “Every loss of life is a tragedy, and the horrific circumstances surrounding the victim’s death makes this case no less troubling.” He applauded the police for apprehending Mr. Lopez and encouraged the public to use his office’s domestic violence hotline.


