


Nadia Marie Gaya and Timothy McKenna Martin were married April 30 by the Rev. Ryan C. Fleenor, an Episcopal priest, who performed the ceremony at St. James’ Episcopal Church in Manhattan.

The bride, 33, works in Manhattan as a senior consultant at Deloitte, where she focuses on tax accounting for insurance companies. She graduated from the University of Chicago, received a law degree from Loyola University of Chicago and a Masters of Laws in taxation from N.Y.U. Her previous marriage ended in divorce.

She is the daughter of Marie L. Brate of Rochester and Sikander A. Gaya of Greenwich, Conn., and the stepdaughter of Dr. Richard E. Bolt and of Kathleen Milne.

The groom, 34, is the assistant comptroller for public finance in the New York City comptroller’s office. He graduated from Rutgers.

He is a son of Christina M. Martin of Bordentown, N.J., and Edward M. Martin of Mount Holly, N.J.

The couple met in May 2013 after Mr. Martin went to look at an apartment in Brooklyn, across the hall from where Ms. Gaya lived.

“I went to get lunch and hit the button on my elevator and out walked Tim,” Ms. Gaya said. “I said to myself, ‘That’s the hottest guy I’ve ever seen.’”

After a quick introduction from the woman showing Mr. Martin the apartment, Ms. Gaya, nervous and disoriented, entered the elevator and immediately regretted not getting the mystery man’s last name. “Something happened in that moment,” she said. “But I figured, that’s it. It’s done. I’m never going to see him again.”

But they met at the elevator a second time in early July when Ms. Gaya, fresh from the gym, crossed paths with Mr. Martin as the elevator opened to her floor.

“I was sweaty and he was wearing a suit and tie on his way to work,” she said. Mr. Martin told her he had taken the apartment he had visited earlier. She was in apartment 3H, he in 3B.

The next evening, Mr. Martin wandered to the roof of the building and found Ms. Gaya having a Fourth of July weekend barbecue. She invited him to join and the two stayed on the roof long after the party ended. The next day he asked her out on a date.

“At the outset, I was nervous about dating the girl across the hall,” Mr. Martin said. “It’s like the first thing you learn in college: Don’t date someone on your floor.”

Those reservations eased over the next eight months as the couple settled into a routine of treating the two apartments as one. They cooked in one apartment, then took the food across the hall, where the air-conditioning had perfectly cooled the room. They watched TV in Mr. Martin’s apartment (since she didn’t have one) and treated her apartment as a guesthouse when visitors came to town.

“He got lucky,” she says. “He moved in and got the girl, too.”

“She came with the apartment, I suppose,” he says.


