


As federal agents tell it, the kickback scheme that led to the arrest on Wednesday of Norman Seabrook, the powerful leader of the New York City correction officers’ union, was hatched one night in late 2013 in a hotel room in the Dominican Republic.

The union president had been drinking and was delivering an earful to a well-connected New York real estate developer, according to the agents. For too long, Mr. Seabrook complained, he had been working hard to invest the union’s money and had not received anything in return.

It was time, he said, that “Norman Seabrook got paid.”

Within months Mr. Seabrook made an investment deal that made even union lawyers uneasy, putting $20 million of union funds in a high-risk hedge fund, according to a criminal complaint filed by the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York. In exchange, prosecutors said, he was given $60,000, delivered in a Salvatore Ferragamo bag — one of his favorite luxury brands.

Over the course of two decades as union president, Mr. Seabrook has gone from a jail guard patrolling the cellblocks of Rikers Island to an influential power broker, forming alliances across the political spectrum including with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat; former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, an independent; and former Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican.

Just looking at him, it is clear Mr. Seabrook enjoys life’s finer things. He is driven around town in luxury S.U.V.s, dines at upscale restaurants, smokes fine cigars and wears expensive tailored suits, often with a pocket square.

Indeed, after Mr. Seabrook was arrested, agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation recovered a Ferragamo bag that matched the description of the one stuffed with cash, along with 10 pairs of Ferragamo shoes.

At least some of Mr. Seabrook’s luxuries were paid for by people seeking favors from him and the union, according to investigators. Plane trips to Las Vegas, California, Israel and at least two to the Dominican Republic were underwritten by Jona Rechnitz, the developer at the hotel that night in 2013. After that meeting, Mr. Rechnitz introduced Mr. Seabrook to a hedge fund financier named Murray Huberfeld, and helped arrange for the kickback, according to federal investigators.

Mr. Rechnitz, who has pleaded guilty and is cooperating in the Seabrook case, is also a central target in one of the investigations that are focused on the campaign fund-raising of Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat. He is not named in the complaint and is referred to instead as Cooperating Witness 1 or CW-1.

Both Mr. Seabrook and Mr. Huberfeld, an associate at the hedge fund, Platinum Partners, have been charged with one count of honest services fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud. Mr. Seabrook was released on $250,000 bond and Mr. Huberfeld on $1 million bond. Both have been ordered to remain in the New York City region.

After the meeting at the hotel, according to prosecutors, Mr. Rechnitz went to Platinum promising to arrange a deal with the union to become a major investor. The catch, he said, was that Mr. Seabrook would have to be compensated. Mr. Huberfeld agreed to the arrangement and was willing to pay Mr. Seabrook 10 percent of all profits that the hedge fund made on the union’s investment.

Mr. Seabrook, whose salary is $300,000 a year with his union stipend, had one overarching concern, according to the complaint: how big his cut would be.

Mr. Huberfeld told him it could be as much as $150,000 a year.

In return, Mr. Seabrook would direct money intended to cover correction officers’ pensions into a high-risk fund. Up to that point the union had maintained a traditional investment portfolio made up of conventional stocks and bond funds, government obligations and a real estate trust fund.

The union’s lawyers reviewed the proposal and pointed out that the union had never invested in a hedge fund before, nor had any other New York City retirement fund that they were aware of been involved in such a risky venture. Even so, they did not stand in the way of the deal.

“The annuity fund, however, is not averse to being a trendsetter,” the lawyers wrote to Platinum in February 2014.

There were other red flags particular to Platinum. Mr. Huberfeld had been convicted of fraud in 1993 for arranging for another person to take a brokerage licensing exam on his behalf. He was fined $5,000 and sentenced to two years of probation. In a separate case, in 1998, he and a partner paid $4.6 million to settle a civil action brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission that alleged bank fraud.

At a news conference on Wednesday, Mr. Bharara said that Mr. Seabrook made his investment decisions “based not what was good for his union members but based on what was good for Norman Seabrook.”

“For a Ferragamo bag filled with cash, Seabrook allegedly sold himself and his duty to safeguard the retirement funds of his fellow correction officers,” Mr. Bharara said.

In the end, it was Mr. Seabrook who made the final decision on where the union money went. Over the years, he had consolidated absolute control over the operations of the union, often bypassing his executive board on even the most significant financial decisions.

According to the authorities, he ultimately invested $15 million from the union’s annuity fund, which is financed almost completely through annual contributions from the city, as well as another $5 million from the union’s $12 million in assets at the time. “The investment decision was made by Seabrook alone,” the union’s treasurer, Michael Maiello, told investigators.

By the end of 2014, according to the complaint, Mr. Seabrook began demanding a payout for his services. The hedge fund, however, was performing worse than expected, and Mr. Huberfeld could not immediately get his hands on the money. Instead, Mr. Rechnitz fronted his own money to pay off Mr. Seabrook with a promise from Platinum that he would be reimbursed. For accounting purposes, Mr. Rechnitz disguised the kickback as a $60,000 payment for a block of New York Knicks tickets.

On Dec. 11, 2014, Mr. Rechnitz bought the bag from a Ferragamo store in Manhattan for $820. The handoff was made a few blocks away in Mr. Seabrook’s Chevrolet Suburban, which is registered to the union.

When Mr. Rechnitz “told Seabrook how much money was in the bag, Seabrook was angry that it was not as much money as he was initially promised,” the complaint said.

After the handoff, the men went out to dinner and attended a Torah dedication ceremony at a local synagogue.

As the months went on, Platinum representatives kept pressing Mr. Seabrook to invest more union funds. According to investigators, the hedge fund was having cash flow problems and needed $44 million for investors seeking to pull out their money.

On Jan. 27, 2015, Mr. Huberfeld, speaking on a phone that federal agents had wiretapped, told an associate to press Mr. Seabrook for more money during a lunch meeting.

“I’m under some pressure,” he said, according to the complaint.

On May 19, 2015, the marketing director of Platinum sent an email to other executives noting that the meeting with Seabrook went great and that he “said he will send us more money shortly.”

But before Mr. Seabrook could transfer more money, federal agents served subpoenas on the union and Platinum. “No further investments were made,” the complaint said.

The complaint does not make clear what happened to the $20 million the union invested.

In a filing for a lawsuit brought last year by a former union official over alleged financial improprieties, he boasted that the investment had returned $475,000 in a recent three-month period. A union financial statement listed a return of just $47,529 for the same time.

The union recently mailed out ballots for an election this summer listing Mr. Seabrook as running unopposed for president. But his future is unclear.

On Wednesday, he was suspended as a correction officer, relieved of his shield and gun. He sat in a packed courtroom looking relaxed. He was dressed more modestly than usual: jeans, a collared shirt and sandals.

When asked by a reporter at the courthouse how he felt, Mr. Seabrook replied, “I feel like a million dollars.”


