


Noah Syndergaard announced his presence on Sunday by striking out Denard Span with a missile at 98 miles an hour. That is the average fastball speed for Syndergaard, the Mets’ hulking right-hander, who throws harder than any other starter in the major leagues.

Three innings later, Syndergaard threw another fastball at 98. The San Francisco Giants’ Hunter Pence drilled it over the right-field fence for a homer, helping to give Syndergaard his first loss this season, by 6-1, at Citi Field.

Syndergaard, 23, knows plenty about the art of pitching. As much as his fastball hums, he throws his other stuff — changeups, curveballs and those wicked new sliders — about half the time. Pitching coaches like Frank Viola and Dan Warthen have taught him well.

But in Madison Bumgarner, who blanked the Mets for six innings on Sunday, Syndergaard had a model to study, a refined version of the pitcher he can be.

Both finished their rookie seasons by winning a game in the World Series — Bumgarner in 2010, Syndergaard last fall — but the similarities end there. Bumgarner is left-handed, and his average fastball this season, according to Fangraphs, is 90.5 m.p.h. That ranked 69th out of 99 pitchers who qualified for the E.R.A. title.

The Mets’ Neil Walker said it seemed as if Bumgarner really throws 94 or 95, because hitters never see an across-the-body arm angle quite like his. But the single thing Bumgarner does best is put his fastball exactly where he wants.

“I would say that’s accurate, yes,” said Buster Posey, his catcher, who could have added temperament to Bumgarner’s list of virtues. The demeanor of the ace with the 0.25 World Series E.R.A. — the lowest ever — stood out to Syndergaard.

“The one thing I really took notice of is the amount of poise and calmness he has out there at all times,” Syndergaard said. “He’s just stone-faced out there. No emotion.”

Syndergaard did not betray his emotions on Sunday, either, though he was bothered by his failure to control the Giants’ running game. They exploited him, over and over, with three easy stolen bases.

The Giants had two already before Posey ran on the pitch with one out and runners at the corners in the fourth. Brandon Belt rolled a grounder to Walker, the second baseman, who had no play at the plate — and no double play, either. A run scored then, and two more came in when Pence homered. That was the difference in the game.

“I think my mechanics are good when I’m out there,” Syndergaard said. “But when I go back and look at it, I’m not really doing the exact job I should be doing. That’s the more frustrating part about it.”

Syndergaard said he could easily fix the problem — a slow leg kick — and seemed not to think he needs a drastic overhaul. He said that he was quick enough to the plate in his first start, at Kansas City, and that he believed that if he finds those mechanics, “I don’t see any point in having a slide step.”

Essentially, Syndergaard wants to work around the issue without changing much. He spoke with Jacob deGrom on Saturday about holding the ball longer with a man on first; base runners, he said, get uncomfortable staying in their lead after four seconds. He tried to do that on Sunday, he said, but it clearly was not working.

Years ago, Manager Terry Collins said, power pitchers cared little about base stealers because strikeouts could thwart any rally. But that was before the advent of the slide step, he acknowledged, and Syndergaard should probably learn how to use it — not all the time, but just enough for opponents to respect that he might keep them close.

For now, they do not. Syndergaard leads the majors in stolen bases allowed, with 12 in 13 tries and the lone out coming at third base. But might a true slide step diminish the prized fastball?

“That’s always been the issue,” Collins said. “Anytime you have a guy out of the stretch and you take his leg kick away, a lot of times you’re looking at a different velocity. But the one thing that concerns me more than anything is if we start to lose command, we start to lose release point, because we’re trying to hurry up the arm.”

Collins added that Syndergaard’s long levers — he is 6 feet 6 — could cause him to lose command if he shortens his arm stroke to be quicker to the plate. But Bumgarner, at 6-5, is nearly as tall, and Collins noted that he varies his approach from the stretch, mixing slide steps and a high leg kick, to keep runners honest.

This, too, is part of what makes Bumgarner so extraordinary, and something Syndergaard could emulate. It did not come naturally. The Giants won a championship in 2012, and Bumgarner did his usual shutout pitching in the World Series. But he also led all major league left-handers in stolen bases allowed. He said he was forced to develop a slide step, which solved the problem.

“You just got to believe in your slide step,” Bumgarner said. “That’s just tough because you might not have as much on your ball unless you find a really good one that fits your delivery. You got to do it. That’s the way I felt about it, anyway. It’s hard when you’re giving guys free bases every time.”

Syndergaard is already one of the best pitchers in baseball. He could be even better at a slightly lower speed, and a master showed how.


