


It lasted about five minutes, comprising seven questions in all, and it was not one of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s finest, or most expansive, moments.

The queries about a series of investigations into his political fund-raising came one after another on Monday, with the mayor sticking to a still-evolving strategic defense: He said “unequivocally” that no laws were broken, that any suggestion that he sought to circumvent state campaign finance laws was “outrageous,” and that the big question was what or who had prompted the inquiries.

A spokeswoman for the mayor then abruptly ended the news conference, and he headed to his car, trailed by cameras and more shouted questions from reporters.

His answers on Monday seemed to follow a road map to his administration’s strategy that was laid out in a fiery letter written over the weekend by a lawyer for his re-election campaign.

The letter, which was sent to the State Board of Elections, sought to rebuff the latest series of accusations against the administration: that Mr. de Blasio’s team in City Hall had committed flagrant violations of campaign finance laws during the mayor’s unsuccessful push in 2014 to win a Democratic majority in the State Senate.

The letter came in response to the leak on Friday of a confidential report by the board that accused a team formed by Mr. de Blasio of illegally funneling money to various candidates through county Democratic Party committees and a statewide party committee, in order to evade limits on campaign contributions.

Monday’s news conference, held on a sunny street in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, showed how Mr. de Blasio seems to be growing increasingly frustrated as the investigations divert attention from his agenda. (The mayor was in Brooklyn to talk about a homeowner credit for water and sewer bills.) And while his administration struggles to find a way to respond, the mayor remains unable to escape the growing cloud of investigations and questions.

Mr. de Blasio has consistently stated that his campaign and his administration did nothing wrong but he added a new element to his message on Monday, questioning whether some of the accusations against him, and the leaks to the news media that have aired them, are politically motivated.

“A lot of very good people are having their names dragged through the mud over these last few weeks, a lot of people that I respect greatly and have worked with for years,” Mr. de Blasio said. “I’m quite convinced that the facts will show that everything was done legally and appropriately.

“But when you see something done in this kind of fashion, when you see an inappropriate leak, when you see the law being misconstrued in such an obvious fashion, of course it begs the question of motivation,” Mr. de Blasio said. “But I’ll leave it to all of you to uncover those motivations.”

That statement echoed the letter written on Sunday by Laurence D. Laufer, a lawyer for Mr. de Blasio’s 2013 campaign and his re-election campaign.

Mr. Laufer’s letter questioned the integrity of the report’s author, Risa S. Sugarman, the elections board’s chief enforcement counsel, and accused her of failing to understand state law. He called her report a “blatantly political document” and suggested the leak was a “politically motivated act.”

While the letter offers a full-throated defense of Mr. de Blasio’s actions, it was notable that it did so without ever mentioning the mayor by name, except in reference to the headline of a Daily News article in which the board’s allegations were reported.

Neither the letter nor Mr. de Blasio said explicitly what potential political motivation they were referring to. But the implication was that Ms. Sugarman has ties to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who is locked in a bitter feud with the mayor, a fellow Democrat. Mr. Cuomo nominated Ms. Sugarman to her job at the elections board. Before that she held jobs in his administration, most recently as a deputy commissioner in the Department of Taxation and Finance, and when he was attorney general.

In his letter, addressed to Ms. Sugarman, Mr. Laufer made a request under the state’s Freedom of Information Law for any emails or other documents that might show how the confidential report reached the hands of someone outside the elections board — and eventually wound up in the press.

In the report, Ms. Sugarman recommended that the board refer the matter of the State Senate financing to the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr. Mr. Vance confirmed on Monday that he had received the referral and had begun an investigation into the state board’s allegations.

Mr. Laufer’s letter said that the fund-raising for the State Senate races was fully in compliance with state law. But it failed to address or even mention the statute that Ms. Sugarman said had been violated — a section of the law that classifies certain efforts to evade contribution limits as a felony.

In response to a question about that omission on Monday, Mr. Laufer said through a spokesman that the statute cited by Ms. Sugarman “has no bearing” on the fund-raising in the Senate campaign.

Besides the investigation into the 2014 Senate race, Mr. de Blasio faces a slate of other inquiries by state and federal authorities. They have focused in part on the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit that Mr. de Blasio created to promote his mayoral agenda, as well as two businessmen involved in raising funds for or donating them to that group or his mayoral campaign.

William T. Cunningham, who was head of communications for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, said that Mr. Laufer’s letter served only to briefly shift the focus of news coverage away from the mayor and onto the question of potential political motivation.

“He changed the narrative until, of course, the mayor then cut off the questions and left the press conference, giving the press something else to write about,” Mr. Cunningham said. “The mayor can’t be seen to be running away from the press.”

“That’s not the image you want,” he added, “so you either have to take questions or you don’t take questions.”

Through it all, Mr. de Blasio has sought to press forward with his programs and policies. The event on Monday featured a giant blowup of a water bill showing the $183 credit that would go to hundreds of thousands of homeowners, although Mr. de Blasio referred to it more than once as a check that consumers would receive.

The mayor then delivered what had to be an unintentional straight line: “A large check is a glorious thing, don’t you think?”


