


Of Pennsylvania Ballet’s 43 dancers, 17 will not return next season, the company’s artistic director, Ángel Corella, confirmed on Tuesday. He said he chose not to renew 12 dancers’ contracts, a decision based partly on the performers’ physiques, technical abilities and versatility. Five others quit.

Mr. Corella has made no secret of his mission to revamp Pennsylvania Ballet, of which he became artistic director in 2014. But these are his starkest changes yet.

Dancers are hired on annual contracts, but because of union rules, Mr. Corella had to spend a full season with the company before he could act. “It’s always hard to do these things,” he said. “But we have to do what’s best for the whole company, not individuals.”

Francis Veyette, a principal dancer who decided to retire when he learned that his contract would not be renewed, said that while he was sad to leave, Mr. Corella’s decisions were his prerogative. Mr. Veyette’s wife, Lauren Fadeley, a principal who quit, is joining Miami City Ballet.

Mr. Corella said that his time with Pennsylvania Ballet so far had been a “good opportunity” to see who was on board with his artistic vision. In rehearsals, he said, he saw unhappy faces, as well as petulant gestures like hands on hips and crossed arms. “Sometimes you have to do things that are not your favorite,” he said. “There were ballets I didn’t like doing, but you do it because it’s your job.”

In The Philadelphia Inquirer, Evelyn Kocak, a soloist whose contract was not renewed, described similar comments made by Mr. Corella as unfair. “Knowing how short a ballet career is, and how difficult it is to get a job elsewhere, everyone was professional about the changes,” she said in an interview.

Among Mr. Corella’s changes has been what departing dancers described as putting his own stamp on repertory works, especially those by George Balanchine, whose protégée Barbara Weisberger founded Pennsylvania Ballet in 1963. Brooke Moore, a principal who was let go, said, “We were always called the sister Balanchine ballet company, and we worried that would dissipate.”

Mr. Corella denied any move away from the company’s legacy, and pointed to the prevalence of Balanchine works in repertory, as well as having the Balanchine dancers Charles Askegard and Kyra Nichols on staff as ballet masters.

In the future, he said, each program will include a Balanchine dance alongside works by living choreographers like Christopher Wheeldon. The spaces left by departing dancers will be filled by new hires that so far include Sterling Baca of American Ballet Theater and, Nayara Lopes, of Dance Theater of Harlem.

Mr. Corella said he hoped the changes would lead not only to a more vibrant company, but also to higher ticket sales. But whether or not he’s successful, Ms. Moore said, “that’s just not the company that Barbara Weisberger founded.”


