


A minivan with out-of-state license plates rolled up to a hospital two miles from the scene of a fatal shooting last week, the police said. Out hobbled a Brooklyn rapper known as Troy Ave with a gunshot wound to his leg.

Investigators obtained a warrant to search the van, and the police said they found a secret compartment hiding three firearms, including a Kel-Tec PF-9 semiautomatic pistol.

The New York Police Department said on Thursday that ballistics tests confirmed the pistol was the sole gun used in a shooting on May 25 at Irving Plaza, a nightclub near Union Square in Manhattan where the rapper T.I. was headlining a concert. The gun matched six shell casings recovered after the shooting, which left Troy Ave, whose name is Roland Collins, and two other people wounded, the police said. Mr. Collins’s longtime friend and bodyguard, Ronald McPhatter, was killed.

Robert K. Boyce, the Police Department’s chief of detectives, said there was no evidence any other weapon had been used. But he cautioned that investigators were not prepared to rule out the possibility that someone other than Mr. Collins, who was seen shooting on surveillance video, had fired the pistol.

It is “difficult to say at this time,” he said at the Police Department’s monthly crime briefing. “DNA swabs have been taken on the gun,” he added.

The shooting started a debate over the role of violence in rap music, and rekindled a racially charged discussion about safety at hip-hop events.

The gun and two others were found in a “trap,” a secret compartment in the center console of the van, Chief Boyce said. One of the weapons was a defaced 9-millimeter pistol loaded with 10 rounds. The other was a stolen Charter Arms .38 revolver loaded with five hollow-point rounds, Chief Boyce said.

At a court appearance on Monday, Mr. Collins pleaded not guilty to charges of attempted murder and criminal possession of a weapon stemming from the shooting. He was ordered held without bail. He is due back in court on June 9. His top charge could be upgraded to murder.

The shooting unfolded around 10:15 p.m. in an upstairs V.I.P. area of the nightclub just as T.I. was about to go onstage. A 26-year-old aspiring R&B singer was shot in the leg when a fight broke out in a green room, and a 34-year-old man was struck by a bullet that pierced the floor.

The police said Mr. Collins’s manager drove him to the NYU Langone Medical Center in the van, which Chief Boyce described as a 2003 Chevrolet with Virginia plates registered to the rapper.

Mr. Collins’s lawyers, John B. Stella and Scott E. Leemon, have asked the public for help finding witnesses and photo or video evidence to support his defense. Mr. Leemon said some people may be mistrustful of the police and reluctant to cooperate with the official investigation.

“Our problem,” he said, “is that this information might be helpful for us to show that the real victims here are ‘Banga’ McPhatter, who died a hero, trying to protect his lifelong friend Troy Ave, and Troy himself, who was shot in the leg.”


