


The rookie right-hander Michael Fulmer, a former Mets prospect who was sent to the Tigers’ system last season as part of a trade for Yoenis Cespedes, dominated the crosstown Yankees Sunday in Detroit’s 4-1 victory at Yankee Stadium.

Fulmer, 23, has been sharp recently, and on Sunday he gave up no runs, three walks and two hits over six innings, extending his scoreless innings streak to 28⅓ and his winning streak to five games. His scoreless innings streak is the second-longest by a Tigers rookie in franchise history, behind John Hiller’s 28⅔ innings in 1967.

According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Fulmer is also the only pitcher since 1893 to record four straight starts in a single season with at least six shutout innings while also allowing no more than three hits.

Fulmer improved to 7-1 and lowered his E.R.A. to 2.52 in 53⅔ innings for the season. He seems to be enjoying his success.

“It’s always fun to win,” Fulmer said.

Fulmer was not upset when the Mets traded him last year; it was nice to be wanted, he said. He added that he enjoyed seeing the success of the Mets’ major league pitchers while he was in the Mets’ minor league system — including success among some of his former teammates.

“It was awesome to see guys like that succeed and get to live their dream,” Fulmer said. “I knew if I kept at it and pitched the way I could, then my time would come. Whether it was with the Mets or this Tigers team.”

Now, Fulmer is making his own mark. He said the biggest factor in his recent success was just getting outs when he needed to.

“If a guy gets on, I try not to panic,” Fulmer said. “I just try to locate my pitches and get good action on my pitches.” He then lets the defense do its work, he added, “and they usually come up pretty big.”

The Yankees tried to put something together against Fulmer in the fifth inning Sunday. Austin Romine led off with a ground-rule double to right field. Two outs later, Fulmer walked Jacoby Ellsbury and Brett Gardner to load the bases. Carlos Beltran popped up to end the inning, however, and Fulmer’s scoreless streak continued.

Afterward, Beltran praised Fulmer’s fastball and slider.

“For me, especially, I was having trouble picking up the spin on the slider,” Beltran said after the game. “He got me chasing a couple of times.”

The loss pulled the Yankees to one game under .500, at 31-32. They finished their seven-game homestand at 5-2 after succumbing to the strong pitching performances of Fulmer on Sunday and Justin Verlander on Saturday.

Michael Pineda went six innings for the Yankees, striking out eight and allowing six hits and two runs. He got into trouble in the fourth and fifth innings but was able to limit the damage. After Pineda yielded three straight singles at the opening of the fourth, Nick Castellanos’s sacrifice fly scored Miguel Cabrera from third, giving the Tigers a 1-0 lead. But after another single by Justin Upton, Pineda got Jarrod Saltalamacchia to line out and struck out Mike Aviles swinging.

Pineda gave up one more run in the fifth. With two on and one out, Victor Martinez’s groundout toward first was enough for Ian Kinsler, who had walked to lead off the inning, to score from third base and build the Tigers’ lead to 2-0.

In the sixth, Pineda, whose record fell to 3-7, retired the side in order, striking out Upton and Saltalamacchia.

“My slider the last couple of starts is good,” Pineda said. “It’s way better than the first couple of months. I’m more consistent with my slider, and my fastball location too.”

Yankees reliever Anthony Swarzak came on to start the seventh, giving up a leadoff single to Mike Aviles. Kinsler followed with a two-run home run to left field, making Detroit’s lead 4-0. Kinsler had also homered on Saturday.

The Yankees scored their only run in the eighth when Chase Headley singled, driving Ellsbury in from second. But it was not enough.

After a stretch of 40 games in 41 days, the Yankees will have Monday off before beginning a two-game series against the Rockies at Coors Field on Tuesday.


