


On a recent Friday, members of the improv show “The Cast” were swept from a rehearsal space in Midtown Manhattan to the medieval fantasy world of HBO’s “Game of Thrones.” After being assigned a name befitting a George R. R. Martin character, the performers improvised monologues. “I am Chessalind Algolith, and I own this brothel,” began one.

This role-playing game was more than a rehearsal exercise; the next night the troupe would stage an entirely improvised episode of “Game of Thrones.” The show’s overall conceit was that its fictional theater group had somehow acquired the script to an episode of “Game of Thrones” and decided to perform it live.

Most long-form improv uses audience suggestions to assemble a series of loosely connected scenes, like a sketch show. In “The Cast,” which runs Saturday nights at the Magnet Theater in Chelsea, the goal is to present a 50-minute performance every week, each in a different discipline. The parameters are fairly loose, allowing for shows in the style of professional wrestling, motivational seminars and Cirque du Soleil, as well as films and television series.

Whatever the week’s selected discipline, certain elements are constant: The all-female cast members wear black and sport bright red lipstick; they arrive onstage to the Barbra Streisand song “Don’t Rain on My Parade”; and their show has two narratives, the onstage portion (say, a completely original episode of “Game of Thrones”) and a peek backstage.

The troupe also produces more cohesive narratives than what is seen in most improv, partly because of one theatrical touch: Actors leave the stage when not in a scene. (It’s standard for improvisers who are not in a scene to perch along the back wall or a side wall — a practice known as “sidelines” — where they can watch the proceedings and jump in at any time.) Offstage, they consider the show’s progress, ensuring that certain genre tropes are being fulfilled or coordinating the resolution of plot threads.

“The Cast,” which recently celebrated its one-year anniversary, began life as part of the Magnet’s Directors Series, a program that gives a four-performance run to “something we’re not doing right now at the theater,” said Megan Gray, the theater’s artistic director and a member of “The Cast.”

The show’s director, Hannah Chase, who studied theater in college and sometimes performs with the group, developed the idea as a way of bringing multiple styles of improv to one show: both a “more heightened dramatic, emotional narrative style in the play portion,” she said, “and then a slightly more grounded, patient, realistic style in the backstage” scenes. Ms. Chase also handpicked her cast, selecting Magnet Theater performers with various years of experience. The current lineup consists of Ms. Gray, Geri Cole, Ali Fisher, Alexis Lambright, Devin O’Neill, Elena Skopetos and Elizabeth Slack; for the “Game of Thrones” performance, they were joined for the first time by Carly Monardo.

It’s the rare New York City show that has an all-female cast, incorporates different genres and forgoes sidelines. While selected disciplines and genres bring in new fans, the show has also slowly built a regular audience.

Nick Kanellis, a fellow improviser at Magnet, likens the appeal of “The Cast” to that of an anthology television series. “You get the sense of consistency because you know the performers,” he said. “It’d be like, I love the cast of ‘Friends’, and this week, the cast of ‘Friends’ is doing ‘Game of Thrones.’”

When new performers, in improv terminology, “play” with the actors, they all discuss everyone’s comfort level for interactions like touching — conversations, the “Cast” members say, that rarely happen on other teams. The highly sexualized nature of “Game of Thrones,” for instance, found them discussing the best way to portray sex scenes and basic etiquette for onstage kissing.

Each performance requires preparation, and the team credits Ms. Chase, whose hours of research each week are essential. The goal is to ensure that die-hard fans of a particular genre leave satisfied; the “Game of Thrones” show was filled with references to dragons and otherworldly creatures like White Walkers for the many enthusiasts in the audience, as well as plenty of meta-commentary on the show’s brutality. In one scene, Ms. Gray portrayed Cersei Lannister, and Ms. O’Neill was her brother and lover, Jaime Lannister. “I want you to kill the people that killed our daughter,” Cersei said to Jaime. “And also, I have a list of others.”

At rehearsal for the following week’s show (devoted to Jane Austen), the actors reflected on other differences that set this endeavor apart. Being on an all-female improv team, they said, was a special and positive experience, but one that felt incidental to the show itself.

Mostly, they spoke of how their camaraderie fosters an environment that helps them to thrive. “I’ve been on other teams, and it felt like people were being competitive,” Ms. Lambright said. “It wasn’t a team, it was like, this is my moment to show whoever’s in the audience that I want to be on ‘S.N.L.’”

While they once feared they would run out of genres to perform, new ideas keep coming — future shows will derive inspiration from Anton Chekhov, ’90s sitcoms and the interactive theater piece“Sleep No More” — and their ambitions keep growing: The group would like to try outdoor theater (à la Shakespeare in the Park) or a visual album (like Beyoncé’s “Lemonade”).

The fun, the cast members said, is the challenge of taking on such a wide variety of styles with so little time to prepare. “Because we’re doing a different genre every week, at least one person is terrified every week, and it’s a different person all the time,” Ms. Chase said. “That there’s a level of risk and level of bravery required to do this show makes it feel like the platonic ideal of improv in my mind. Everybody is really doing something that feels sort of scary.”


