


The concept for Kamasi Washington’s set at Greenpoint Terminal Warehouse on Sunday night was simple, effective and rare, as well as a perfect example of form meeting function. The stage, in the middle of a large, rectangular, high-ceilinged industrial space, had been set up in the round. Mr. Washington’s eight-piece jazz band — including a singer, two drummers, and Mr. Washington’s father, Rickey, on soprano saxophone — arrayed itself in a circle on it, looking inward.

Maybe you’ve seen a concert like this before, but think about it. The circular formation gave the band communal power: The tenor saxophonist Mr. Washington writes the music, but the spirit of the band is essentially collective. And it gave the audience communal power, too, because as a member of it you faced the same way as the musicians. As you watched and listened, you conducted your energy in the same direction as they did: across the circle, or toward its middle.

Any performance engages a kind of two-way ritual between artist and audience, but this circular arrangement came closer to something like collaboration. You might have been standing behind the pianist Cameron Graves, who was looking across the circle at the drummer Tony Austin and the trombonist Ryan Porter; you had Mr. Graves’s view. Because you were relatively close to him, you sensed (as well as saw and heard) when he was becoming excited, and because you were watching Mr. Graves and Mr. Austin head-on, you had a quickened sense of what Mr. Graves was responding to. You were a little more connected than usual to a desire for the music to work.

The set did work. It had lyrical grace, funk, gospel crescendos and gnashing collective improvisation; it also broke out into a unaccompanied solo passages for Mr. Washington and for the drummers, Mr. Austin and Ronald Bruner. All of it was as intense as I’ve seen since Mr. Washington’s life became a torrent of gigs after the release a year ago of his triple album “The Epic,” a jazz record that engaged interest far beyond the usual jazz scope.

The performance was the final act of Sunday night’s three-band bill, “Where Spaceways Meet: A Night of Spiritual Jazz,” part of this year’s Red Bull Music Academy Festival New York. It was a clarifying concert, tying histories together. Mr. Washington, from Los Angeles and now 35, is an indirect descendant of the spiritual, energetic jazz tradition of the 1960s. Some of his music — not all — contains the strong, dire melodies and collective surges of power, polytonal and polyrhythmic, that suggest the work of John Coltrane and Pharaoh Sanders.

It made sense that Mr. Sanders, now 75 and still in possession of his full and lacerating tenor saxophone sound, played in Sunday’s concert too, with his own band. And it also made sense to see the Sun Ra Arkestra, now directed by Marshall Allen, open the show. In the early 1960s, Sun Ra (who died in 1993) hired and briefly worked with the young saxophonist then called Farrell Sanders. But it’s not just that their paths crossed; they were engaged in a common purpose.

“Spiritual jazz,” if that’s what you want to call the 1960s music of the Coltrane-Sanders-Sun Ra axis, was partially expressing black pride and resistance. (In that spirit, Mr. Washington’s set included Terence Blanchard’s “Malcolm’s Song,” for which he and the singer Patrice Quinn recast Ossie Davis’s eulogy to Malcolm X.) It also expressed a challenge to the perceived limitations of the jazz business, as well as its harmonic conventions and standard repertory. In any case, spiritual jazz has always had significant extra-musical meanings; that’s partly why its appeal hasn’t slackened.

Some of those meanings are illustrated by the circle, an eternal symbol of resistance and unity. Another is superstrength romanticism. Mr. Sanders, with his quartet, opened his set with a version of the pop ballad “The Greatest Love of All,” then later drove into Coltrane’s folkish modal-vamp piece “Olé” — seriously different songs both designed to elicit some kind of catharsis. And the Sun Ra Arkestra, under Mr. Allen’s direction and conducting (and with the charismatic singer Tara Middleton), played raucous improvisations over swing rhythm and extended its romanticism to the cosmos; their greatest-hits set ended with “Space Is the Place” and a ceremonial parade through the audience.


