


The Times’s announcement that we will join The Associated Press this week in changing our style rule to lowercase the word “internet” could prompt many questions:

• Does this reflect a fundamental shift in society’s view of technology?

• Does it signal some milestone in the history of online communication?

• Is a “legacy” news organization finally acknowledging the ubiquity of digital information?

Well, no. The real reason is more mundane. Others are doing it, so we think we should, too.

Readers often assume that The Times’s decisions on matters of language reveal something deep about our worldview (why does The Times write “Nascar” instead of “NASCAR”?).

It’s certainly true that our style guidelines maintain some distinguishing features, like the regular use of courtesy titles. But the truth is, we want our rules for spelling, punctuation and usage to be largely invisible. We don’t want quirks or inconsistencies to distract readers from the point of an article. For the same reason, we avoid rushing to embrace neologisms, jargon or faddish buzzwords. On the contrary, our usual goal is to reflect settled, familiar usage among educated readers.

So it is with “internet” in place of “Internet.” While most publications capitalized the word when it first came into widespread use, the lowercase form has become steadily more common in recent years.

When we undertook a thorough revision of our style manual a couple of years ago, we considered changing to “internet,” but decided to hold off (though we did lowercase “web” and “website” at that time). Now that The A.P. (and The Wall Street Journal) are making the switch, my colleagues and I agreed that the time had come.

Given the wide circulation of A.P. stories, readers will be seeing lowercase “internet” more and more often. While the switch might be briefly disconcerting, in the long run we think the uppercase “Internet” would seem out of step.

That’s the main point of the switch. But for usage fans, the issue does touch on interesting questions about how language changes.

In some ways, uppercase “Internet” was always a bit of an anomaly, since it is not really a proper noun comparable to a company name or an official place name. The term internet (short for internetwork) described any linked network of computers, so the capital “I” served to distinguish the global network from other internets — a pointless distinction now, since “internet” is rarely used anymore in the generic sense.

Uppercase “Internet” also reflected a common tendency to capitalize newly coined or unfamiliar terms. Once a term becomes familiar and quotidian, there is a tendency to drop the capital letter.

More broadly, modern usage tends to favor less capitalization — along with fewer hyphens and less punctuation in general. Capitalizing words when it isn’t strictly necessary can seem archaic to contemporary readers. The Times used to capitalize “Federal” in phrases like “a Federal judge,” and even “Government” when referring to the national government. Now both of those uses would be lowercase under our rules.

And for those still puzzling over “Nascar”: We don’t use all capital letters for acronyms of more than four letters, like Nascar and Unicef. The goal there, too, is to avoid distraction — we feel that long strings of capital letters are ungainly and stick out too much, especially in headlines. But since many NASCAR fans are distracted when they see “Nascar,” we may not be succeeding in that case.


