


Anchorage, Alaska isn’t known as a hotbed of French culture, and yet that’s where Jaimee Anderson, who recently joined Le Bristol in Paris as a sommelier, developed an abiding interest in all things French thanks to the influence of her Francophile mother. A college semester in Paris and tour of France’s vineyards later fueled her passion, which led Anderson to stints at wine bars and restaurants in Scottsdale and Los Angeles, and eventually, the Four Seasons Beverly Hills, where she was the beverage director at Cut — until last month, when she packed up her life and moved to Paris.

“Everything is about timing, of course, and this opportunity was a rare moment when the stars aligned,” says Anderson. Along with West Coast optimism, she brings a fresh perspective on Californian wines that might shake up the classic Palace hotel culture. “If given the opportunity, I’d love to expand people’s perception beyond Napa Valley and highlight small producers from places like Edna Valley, Mendocino County, Anderson Valley.” Below, she shares some of the Californian and French wines that she will recommend to guests this spring and summer.

Scribe Estate Riesling, Sonoma County, Calif. 2014

“This is a dry riesling, so fear not a wine rich in fruit and sweetness. Instead, expect to find fresh lime juice, citrus peel and subtle stone fruit with elevated acidity and pronounced minerality.”

Tatomer “Meeresboden” Grüner Veltliner, Santa Barbara County, Calif. 2014

“Lemon zest and Yuzu complement white pepper, radish and a refreshing salinity that’s reminiscent of ocean spray. The waxy texture on the palate innately intensifies the high-toned minerality and prominent acidity of this wine.”

Château de Brézé Crémant de Loire Brut Rosé NV

“Bright strawberry and pink citrus with smoke, rose petals and subtle brioche. This sparkling rosé from Loire Valley offers a soft, elegant mousse with a pristine chalky minerality.”

Thierry Richoux Bourgogne Rosé 2014

“Wild red berries, iron and blood-orange peel make this a versatile rosé, built for food but perfectly suitable to enjoy by itself!”

Yann Bertrand “Cuvée du Chaos” Fleurie, Beaujolais 2014

“Candied red cherry and cranberry give way to persimmon and lilacs. Fleshy yet precise on the palate, a mouthwatering acidity dominates the finish and leaves behind remnants of pepper and crushed rock.”


