


To most, they are known by their public personas as speechwriters, political consultants or, in one case, a United States ambassador to South Africa.

But to the office of New York’s mayor, they have another identity: agents of the city.

What makes them unique, the office argued on Thursday, is that the communications between Mayor Bill de Blasio and the five close advisers should be as immune from public scrutiny as those of any city employee.

City Hall described the designation amid mounting scrutiny over its shielding of communications between the mayor and Jonathan Rosen, whom the counsel to the mayor described at a news conference on Wednesday as an “agent of the city.” Mr. Rosen, who corresponds and meets with the mayor regularly, is also a principal at a public affairs consulting firm, BerlinRosen, whose clients include real estate developers and nonprofits.

Others on the list provided on Thursday rounded out a who’s who of figures often cited by government watchdog groups as representing New York’s “shadow government” under Mr. de Blasio: Nicholas Baldick and Bill Hyers, of Hilltop Public Solutions, a political consulting firm; John Del Cecato, of AKPD Message and Media, who has helped Mr. de Blasio write important speeches; and the United States ambassador, Patrick Gaspard.

None received payment from the city, the mayor’s office said. But with the exception of Mr. Gaspard, each represents a firm that got large payments from Mr. de Blasio’s political nonprofit, the Campaign for One New York, now at the center of several inquiries into the mayor’s fund-raising efforts.

One firm, BerlinRosen, has received subpoenas in connection with investigations by the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York and the Manhattan district attorney into Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising on behalf of Senate Democrats in 2014.

The notion of designating a special class of unpaid advisers — many of whom also represent clients with business before the city — appeared to be an unusual, if not novel, approach to city governance, former officials said. City Hall, however, was careful to clarify that “agent of the city” is not an official designation.

“During the years I was corporation counsel, from ’98 to 2001, the concept of agency with a private person is not something that I recognize or remember,” said Michael D. Hess, who was a top city lawyer under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, referring to the concept of an outside adviser whose communications would be considered privileged.

The criteria for becoming an “agent of the city” was not immediately clear. The list provided on Thursday did not include other frequent confidants and advisers to the mayor, such as Peter Ragone, who left the administration last year but remains in regular contact. Mr. de Blasio said on Wednesday that infrequent advisers, offering advice “twice a year, or three times a year,” would not be included.

The determination rankled government watchdogs, who have taken issue with the mayoral consultants paid by the Campaign for One New York, in part because some of their clients do business with the city. “The public has no guarantee that he or other outside consultants are not discussing that business with the mayor,” said Susan Lerner of the nonpartisan Common Cause, referring to Mr. Rosen. “Or that he is using what he’s learned from the mayor for the benefit of his clients.”

The subject emerged on Wednesday after a story from NY1 highlighted the city’s refusal to disclose emails between Mr. Rosen and the mayor in response to requests made under the Freedom of Information Law.

At the news conference on Wednesday, the mayor and his counsel, Maya Wiley, defended the city’s approach. “Jonathan Rosen is someone who I have consulted with for years and years,” Mr. de Blasio said, “and we made a legal determination that that was a category that was different and appropriate.”

The result is that each email from those consultants must be scrutinized by the mayor’s office to determine whether the subject is advice to the mayor, and therefore exempt, or whether the consultant is acting on behalf of a client, in which case it would be turned over. The mayor’s office has provided certain emails from Mr. Rosen in the past.

Dick Dadey, the head of the government watchdog Citizens Union, said the approach appeared intended to thwart public scrutiny. “This is part of an increasing pattern of the mayor to parse legal definitions that result in the mayor being less transparent and less accountable,” he said.


