


He arrived through a back entrance, heading to the fourth floor for a prearranged event — on time, it might have been noted.

But for Mayor Bill de Blasio, matters of punctuality seem almost trivial now, with a swirling series of investigations by state and federal prosecutors being conducted into his fund-raising efforts.

The inquiries have turned even the most routine appearances on his schedule into a dramatic event. On Thursday, the Democratic mayor briefly took part in a call-in for those with immigration questions, at a City University of New York building in Midtown Manhattan.

As Mr. de Blasio answered the phones, he sat behind a huge banner bearing the logo of the event’s main sponsor, The Daily News, whose front pages have for days been dominated by unfavorable headlines for his administration. (“Crime Time for Blaz,” one read.)

Shortly after, he emerged from a narrow lobby onto the sidewalk, and into a crush of microphones and cameras, before walking to his car, trailed by reporters.

The bizarre moment for New York’s mayor — a scene more common to celebrity appearances or on courtroom steps — was the latest chapter in a story of investigations, but as yet no criminal charges, that has hounded Mr. de Blasio for weeks and has threatened to consume his administration’s third year.

It obscured, on Thursday, a bit of good news about homelessness, one of the mayor’s biggest challenges of the past year: an annual federally mandated count, conducted in February, found a 12 percent drop in the number of men and women living on the street, to 2,794. But rather than hold a news conference to promote the reduction, his office announced the development via email.

After the Midtown event, reporters, told to wait for Mr. de Blasio outside the building, peppered him for 1 minute 4 seconds — the time it took the mayor to deliver a brief statement and then walk to his car.

“Mr. Mayor, anything you can say about the subpoenas?” one reporter asked, referring to those received by his top aides and advisers from federal prosecutors and the Manhattan district attorney.

“Sure,” Mr. de Blasio said, stepping into the unwieldy scrum and seeking to project a calm demeanor.

“As I’ve said before — hey guys, don’t knock each other over — guys, as I’ve said many times we hold ourselves to the highest standard of integrity,” he said. “Everything we’ve done from the beginning is legal and appropriate.” He added that, because the investigation was continuing, he could not comment further on the details.

“We look forward to the speedy conclusion of it, but we’ll fully cooperate,” he said, before turning to make the short walk east along Bryant Park to his car.

As he walked, he responded to questions. How did he feel about receiving the subpoenas?

“I feel fine,” he said. “I feel fine because everything we’ve done is legal and appropriate.”

Was he personally subpoenaed? Mr. de Blasio said he was not. He did not say whether he had seen the subpoenas, which were received by a top political aide, Emma Wolfe, as well as his campaign finance director, Ross A. Offinger, and his outside consulting firm, BerlinRosen, according to several people familiar with the cases.

(A spokeswoman, Karen Hinton, said afterward that she, too, did not know the details about the subpoenas. “Our attorneys have asked us not to get into the details of the investigation,” Ms. Hinton said. “This is not a distraction in terms of getting the work done that we need to do,” she added.)

Do you think the appearance of these investigations, the mayor was asked a few steps later, will be bad for your political future?

“I feel comfortable that everything we’ve done is legal and appropriate, and we’re going to fully cooperate,” he said.

What are the investigators looking for? What did they specifically ask for?

Mr. de Blasio at that point reached his waiting car. He took off his jacket, sat in the front seat and closed the door.


