


Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont grappled with tough and narrowing choices about campaign strategy and fund-raising on Wednesday after his crushing loss in the New York primary and with a series of difficult contests ahead.

While Hillary Clinton’s campaign carefully avoided any suggestion that he quit the Democratic presidential race, many of her prominent supporters argued that the moment had come for Mr. Sanders to ease off attacks for the good of Democrats in the November election.

Mr. Sanders, who took the day off to rest and regroup with his advisers, is under intense pressure to win the Pennsylvania primary on Tuesday or fall even further behind Mrs. Clinton’s sizable lead in pledged delegates needed to capture the nomination. A new Pennsylvania poll put Mr. Sanders 13 percentage points behind Mrs. Clinton, despite heavy spending by the Sanders campaign on television advertisements. Another loss could hamper his formidable fund-raising, which Sanders advisers described as steady but not as strong as it could have been with a New York victory.

In addition to Pennsylvania, four other states hold primaries on Tuesday, and Sanders advisers say that all of the contests will be tough for them. While Mr. Sanders has a strong shot at winning the Indiana primary on May 3, given his popularity with white voters and independents there, he has limited opportunities to pick up many more delegates than Mrs. Clinton, according to several Sanders advisers.

“If we get to a position in a week or two where our path to victory with pledged delegates doesn’t look credible, I think we’ll need to stand up and say that in public, and then assess how we can get that lead in delegates,” said Tad Devine, a senior adviser to Mr. Sanders. “But I don’t want to speculate about what may happen.”

Given Mrs. Clinton’s lead, several of her allies contended that he should shift his focus from criticizing Mrs. Clinton to championing Democratic policies that might help the party beat Donald J. Trump, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas or another Republican nominee, and also win back control of the House and the Senate.

“There does come a point when Democrats, and those who believe we can’t afford a Trump or Cruz presidency, should recognize that we need to start thinking about what’s best for the presumptive nominee going forward,” said Gov. Jack Markell of Delaware, a Clinton supporter whose state holds its primary on Tuesday. “The good news is that Bernie Sanders will remain in the Senate, where he can continue to speak out and continue to inspire new people into the process.”

Gov. Dannel P. Malloy of Connecticut, which also has a primary Tuesday, said he was concerned that the fight between Mr. Sanders and Mrs. Clinton could hurt the party’s congressional candidates and candidates for governor if the Democratic contest comes to be seen as fractious and divided as the Republican presidential race.

“I think we all need to back up and take a breath, because this shouldn’t be a personal battle that damages the party,” said Mr. Malloy, also a Clinton supporter. Referring to some recent attacks by Mr. Sanders, he said, “You don’t get votes by saying someone is not qualified to be president.”

Sanders advisers and supporters reacted to the Clinton pleas with varying degrees of incredulity, noting that Mrs. Clinton and her advisers have been criticizing the senator daily on issues like gun control. The Clinton campaign on Wednesday released a new ad in Connecticut that features the daughter of the principal who died in the Sandy Hook shootings, an indirect attack on Mr. Sanders’s record on guns.

Mayor Bao Nguyen of Garden Grove, Calif., a Sanders supporter, said the senator should continue in the race through the delegate-rich California primary in June and further sharpen his focus on policy issues that matter most to Americans.

“Fighting for the people — not the millionaire and billionaire class — is what helped him win eight primaries in a row, defy pundits’ predictions of a Hillary coronation and pull even in national polls,” Mr. Nguyen said.

With the Democratic race at a potential crossroads as Mr. Sanders weighs his next steps, Mrs. Clinton and her advisers walked their own careful line on Wednesday. The Clinton camp described her delegate lead as all but insurmountable — more than twice as large as Barack Obama’s lead over her in 2008 — but also took pains to avoid appearing overly antagonistic toward Mr. Sanders. Mrs. Clinton has roughly 1,450 pledged delegates and Mr. Sanders has about 1,200; 2,383 are needed to win the nomination.

Instead, her allies pleaded with Mr. Sanders to stop doing anything that could be used by Mr. Trump or Mr. Cruz in the fall, and cease running advertisements, like one now in Pennsylvania, that question Mrs. Clinton’s toughness against big banks like Goldman Sachs.

“The Republican will take every one of his most negative statements and use them as ads in the general election,” said Rosalind Wyman, a longtime Democratic National committeewoman from California and a Clinton supporter.

Not all major Clinton supporters were pushing Mr. Sanders to shift gears, though. Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, a longtime liberal like Mr. Sanders, said, “It’s not up to me or anyone else to tell him what to do with his race.”

Michael Briggs, a spokesman for Mr. Sanders, said the campaign planned to continue to ask questions about Mrs. Clinton’s ties to Wall Street, her speeches at commercial banks and her changing stances on policy issues. He also shot back sarcastically when asked whether Mr. Sanders might change the tone of the campaign that in recent weeks has become more contentious.

“I’ve seen their, I’m sure, heartfelt concerns about the tone of the campaign,” Mr. Briggs said of the Clinton campaign. “All I would ask them to do is look in the mirror.”

Mr. Devine, the senator’s senior adviser, said Mr. Sanders’s focus was likely to be on policy issues crucial to Pennsylvania, Connecticut and other states voting in the coming days.

“I have no doubt that judgment issues will come up, but I don’t think it will come up the way it did in New York, which is a fundamentally different media environment than in other states,” Mr. Devine said. He added that there had been no direct conversations between the two campaigns about the future of the race or either candidacy.

Jeff Weaver, the Sanders campaign manager, said that the senator would continue to vigorously defend his record and that advisers were confident that he would win the “vast majority” of the states remaining based on the campaign’s internal polling and Mr. Sanders’s past ability to close gaps in places like Michigan and Iowa.

The Sanders campaign signaled on Wednesday that it was still fighting hard: Mr. Weaver sent a fund-raising email noting that an unnamed Clinton campaign aide had hurled a swear word at Mr. Sanders in a Politico story. “It’s outrageous,” Mr. Weaver wrote before asking for donations to “send our own message back to the Clinton campaign in a language they’re certain to understand.”

The Sanders campaign says it raised almost $46 million in March, outpacing the Clinton campaign, which raised $29.3 million. The Sanders campaign reported more than $17 million cash on hand while the Clinton campaign says it began April with about $29 million cash on hand.

While supporters of Mr. Sanders have been exceptionally loyal donors, with the campaign breaking online fund-raising records, some Clinton supporters questioned the Sanders solicitations when his ability to overtake Mrs. Clinton in delegates is so slim.

“Sanders has run a stunningly strong campaign fueled by passionate supporters,” David Plouffe, Mr. Obama’s former campaign manager, wrote on Twitter on Wednesday. “But raising $$ stating you have path to nomination is fraud.”

Mr. Devine of the Sanders campaign responded: “Fraud is a hard word to put out there. I respect David, but I don’t believe we’re lying or being fraudulent in saying we think we still have a path to the nomination.”


