


WASHINGTON — The stunning split between Speaker Paul D. Ryan and Donald J. Trump might be bad for Republican unity, but good for constitutional democracy.

Mr. Ryan’s refusal to endorse Mr. Trump was a reminder of a lost Washington art — not just the willingness to take on the political opposition, but a readiness to publicly challenge the leader of one’s own party.

If sustained, it would break dramatically with the recent pattern of lawmakers’ regularly deferring to a president of their own party and ceding power from Capitol Hill to the White House.

In raising concerns about Mr. Trump, Mr. Ryan seemed to acknowledge the potential for Republican-on-Republican clashes should Mr. Trump prevail in November. And the fights could come not just on discrete policy issues like taxes and trade, but also over Mr. Trump’s very interpretation of the powers of the presidency.

“I think conservatives want to know, does he share our values and our principles on limited government, the proper role of the executive, adherence to the Constitution,” Mr. Ryan said during his memorable appearance on CNN last week.

Mr. Trump, a businessman accustomed to acting quickly and independently, has repeatedly expressed an expansive view of the Oval Office’s reach.

“Well, I will say this: There’s a lot of precedent based on what he’s doing,” Mr. Trump said this year when pressed about President Obama’s penchant for executive orders to accomplish his agenda.

Such statements have Mr. Ryan and other Republicans worried that their nominee would pick up where Mr. Obama leaves off. After years of aggressive challenges to the president’s use of executive power on health care, immigration, environmental regulations and more, the prospect of quietly standing by if Mr. Trump did the same must unsettle members of his own party.

But congressional Republicans were not overly concerned about the “proper role of the executive” during previous Republican administrations, most notably the presidency of George W. Bush.

The Bush White House asserted its executive prerogative on multiple domestic and national security issues, and the Republican-led Congress, in the aftermath of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, showed little interest in holding the administration accountable, despite widespread criticism.

“You have tended to get a complete abdication of oversight during periods of Republican unified government,” said Thomas E. Mann, a longtime congressional scholar affiliated with the Brookings Institution.

It has not always been this way. In the not-too-distant past, lawmakers viewed themselves as more independent, separate and even superior to administrations that came and went while members of Congress built long careers on Capitol Hill.

They were more than willing to take on a president of their own party as Democrats did over the conduct of the Vietnam War. And Republicans were full participants in bipartisan inquiries into Watergate and, during the Reagan era, the Iran-contra affair. The readiness of the parties to cooperate in serious joint investigations gave them much more credibility as opposed to the partisan recriminations surrounding the now two-year-old House Benghazi investigation.

Much of the most serious scrutiny of any administration came during the annual appropriations reviews, when members of both parties held the feet of agency officials to the fire.

But that process is badly broken now. And the increasing polarization of American politics has led to a partisan “we’re all in this together” mentality where members of Congress have been very reluctant to show any separation between them and their party’s leader for fear of providing the slightest political opening to the opposition.

For instance, Republicans with reservations about conduct during the invasion of Iraq or the response to Hurricane Katrina did not want to give ammunition to Democrats by airing their grievances despite very real misgivings. And Democrats have been careful about criticizing Mr. Obama publicly even when they sometimes found the administration’s actions amateurish and counterproductive.

How deeply ingrained this sentiment has become was reflected in the response to Mr. Ryan’s position by some fellow Republicans. They were incredulous the speaker would not simply fall in line behind Mr. Trump given the political ramifications. It just seemed foreign to them.

Despite the pitfalls of disunity, there is a potential benefit to Mr. Trump in the Ryan stance. Republican voters nervous about backing such a relatively unknown quantity when it comes to governing could take some solace in the fact that congressional Republicans led by Mr. Ryan could team up with Democrats to provide a check on a Trump presidency.

Mr. Ryan’s approach could be a temporary interruption in what has become the normal course of business or a power play to try to force Mr. Trump’s embrace of Mr. Ryan’s favored agenda. He and others who share his view may quickly get behind Mr. Trump.

Republicans have more than demonstrated they will be aggressive adversaries of Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders should one of them win the presidency and Republicans keep majorities in the House and Senate. And a Democratic Senate or House would no doubt be a nightmare of oversight and opposition for a President Trump.

Those same lawmakers could reclaim ground they have surrendered to the executive branch and reassert the independence of the legislative branch by showing they were willing to apply those same standards to a president of their own party.


