


The average performance of the nation’s high school seniors dropped in math from 2013 to 2015, but held steady in reading, according to results of a biennial test released Wednesday.

The results, from the National Assessment of Educational Progress, also showed a drop in the percentage of students in private and public schools who are considered prepared for college-level work in reading and math. In 2013, the last time the test was given, 39 percent of students were estimated to be ready in math and 38 percent in reading; in 2015, 37 percent were judged prepared in each subject.

In a survey attached to the test, 42 percent of students said they had been accepted to a four-year college, suggesting that the need for remedial courses in college will remain stubborn.

“This trend of stagnating scores is worrisome,” said Terry Mazany, the chairman of the governing board for the test. Mr. Mazany is also a former public schools superintendent in California, Michigan and Illinois and is now the president of the Chicago Community Trust, a large foundation.

“A strong foundation in math and reading is essential to a student being prepared for college academics and for most careers,” he said.

Scores improved for students at the top percentile in reading, but scores in both subjects dropped for students in the lowest percentiles. And the number of students scoring below “basic” in both subjects increased from 2013.

The tests are given to a representative sampling of about 30,000 private and public school students nationwide every two years in Grades 4, 8 and 12. Known as the Nation’s Report Card, the tests are administered by the federal government and are the largest national sampling of what American students know and can do in reading and math.

The lower-grade results were released last fall, and they showed a similar decline in math.

The math tests are scored from zero to 300, and in 12th grade, the average dropped to 152 in 2015 from 153 in 2013, a statistically significant decline. The 2015 average was two points higher than in 2005, the first year a comparable test was given.

Students who scored at the average were likely to be able to use proportions to calculate height, but unable to use an algebraic model to predict cost using a calculator.

On the reading test, which is scored from zero to 500, the average score in 12th grade in 2015 was 287, down from 292 in 1992, the first year of a comparable test in that subject. Students were evaluated on how well they could comprehend literary and informational texts. An average student was likely to be able to make an inference based on details in the text, but was unable to recognize details that were related to the purpose of the text.

The survey attached to the test indicated that those who scored better were the students who took advanced math courses like calculus and read more pages in and out of school. Higher-scoring students also read for fun almost every day.


