


The Museum of Modern Art has acknowledged it wrongly canceled the New York debut of “Under the Sun,” a documentary about North Korea that has been criticized by that country and Russia.

A slyly subversive look at the reclusive state by the Russian filmmaker Vitaly Mansky, the film had been scheduled to be shown at the museum’s 2016 Doc Fortnight festival on Feb. 19-29. But an email exchange provided by the film’s German producer to The New York Times shows that a festival organizer, Sally Berger, an assistant curator at MoMA, expressed concern in late January about screening the film after reading an article suggesting that any organization that did so risked retribution from North Korea.

In the emails, Ms. Berger referred to a major hacking attack on Sony Pictures that the United States has described as retaliation by North Korea for a 2014 film satire of the country, “The Interview.”

She followed up a few days later to tell the documentary’s distributor that it would not be included in the festival. “It just simply came in too late to review all the possible ramifications of showing it here at MoMA,” she wrote.

Asked about the decision to withdraw the film, Rajendra Roy, the chief curator of MoMA’s film department, said Thursday in a written statement: “‘Under the Sun’ is a remarkable documentary that was wrongly disinvited.” He added that the decision was “made by the festival’s curator without my knowledge or input.”

The museum said on Friday that Ms. Berger was no longer working there. Margaret Doyle, a spokeswoman for the museum, declined to elaborate, and Ms. Berger, reached by telephone, said she would not comment.

While there have been dozens of documentaries about North Korea, few have been produced with the permission of its government. Mr. Mansky negotiated with North Korea for two years before settling on a contract that allowed its government to provide the script and cast, assign minders to direct Mr. Mansky’s crew, vet daily footage and approve the final version of the film.

North Korea is listed in the film’s opening titles as one of the five producers along with representatives from Russia, Latvia, Germany and Mr. Mansky’s own production company, Vertov Films.

The documentary’s subversive quality lies in how Mr. Mansky chose to shoot it. With the scenes completely staged by the North Koreans, he simply let his cameras run all day, every day. Thereby he captured the staging, multiple takes and more general manipulation that constitutes the reality North Korea reveals to the outside world.

Mr. Mansky argues that North Korea nullified their accord when it canceled his third and final trip to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, during which he planned to shoot the last part of the story. “They didn’t allow us to finish filming as was spelled out in the contract,” he said in a Skype interview from his home in Riga, Latvia.

Mr. Mansky estimated that at the time that North Korea stopped cooperating, he had only 30 percent of the total footage he needed. He nonetheless managed to edit it into a 90-minute film.

“Under the Sun” has been well received on the international festival circuit, winning awards and drawing admiring reviews. The Hollywood Reporter called it “a fascinating study in state propaganda and the darker truth that hovers just outside the frame.” In May, President Park Geun-hye of South Korea watched the film in a commercial theater in Seoul, along with an audience of children and North Korean defectors. “We must help the children of North Korea who have lost their hopes and dreams and are struggling to survive,” she said afterward.

“Under the Sun” has been criticized by North Korea and the Russian government. North Korea asked Russia to destroy the film and punish Mr. Mansky; Russia’s Ministry of Culture, which helped finance the film, subsequently asked for its name to be removed from the credits. Mr. Mansky declined to make the changes. The ministry has not granted permission for the documentary to be screened in Russia.

In the email exchange from late January about including it in the MoMA festival, Ms. Berger drew a comparison between “Under the Sun” and “The Interview,” a Sony Pictures comedy in which American television journalists plot to assassinate the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un.

“We need to look over this very carefully before making a final commitment to keeping the film in the program,” Ms. Berger wrote before ultimately notifying the distributor that it would not be included.


