


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. How about a little reading before we figure out what to cook tonight? Alan Richman has a terrific profile of the restaurateur Joe Allen in today’s Food section. And big Pete Wells is back from vacation with a review of Café Altro Paradiso, a new Italian restaurant from Ignacio Mattos and Thomas Carter, the duo behind Estela. Read those and maybe you’ll be singing like the Schuyler sisters.

Then, for dinner, consider Pierre Franey’s recipe for linguine with lemon sauce: simple, rich, amazing. Alternatively, try his recipe for Baltimore crab cakes, a riff on the ones served at Obrycki’s, which Franey served, as you should, with rémoulade. Too much work? Try Nigella Lawson’s recipe for seared fish with toasted almonds instead, 20 minutes very well spent.

We’re excited this week to cook David Tanis’s recipe for stir-fried spicy asparagus – if not tonight, as a pairing for Nigella’s fish, then some night soon, maybe to accompany a platter of miso chicken. We scored a jar of home-canned yellowfin tuna recently from a sharpie who fishes and cooks out of East Hampton, N.Y., and have been plotting for days about dinner sandwiches made with the meat, off David Tanis’s recipe for Italianate tuna subs.

It’s springtime at last. We’re feeling the urge to grill lamb on rosemary skewers. We’d like to make some rhubarb focaccia as a breakfast changeup. We’d enjoy devouring our first pasta primavera of the 2016 season.

And, if all else fails, we’ll hit the farmers’ market at lunchtime and spend the early evening putting together a groaning table of prosciutto, mozzarella and spring vegetables, what our kids call a party board. Sure, it’s a recipe. But you don’t need to follow it. Just get the best vegetables you can find on the stands. Serve some raw, some roasted, others steamed, as you like, alongside some deli meats and good cheese. (For added flavor, eat it while listening to this crazy Tullio De Piscopo ’70s disco madness.)

Whatever you cook, tell us about it. You can engage with our cooks, reporters, critics and editors on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest. Just use the hashtag #NYTCooking. You can rate the recipes you cook on our site and apps, and leave notes on them for yourself or for others if your kitchen experimentation has led to interesting or helpful emendations to our recipes. And, of course, if you really get jammed up, you can reach out to us for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

We started with reading. We’ll end with it, too, and apologize in advance because the news is horrible and grim and has nothing to do with food. But everyone should read The Boston Globe’s Spotlight report on sex abuse at New England prep schools. See you on Friday.


