


Many children under 10 know nothing about punk rock. Many of their parents probably prefer to keep it that way.

But punk doesn’t have to be ornery and obscene. It can express wholesome values like independence, resilience and creativity, which are what the Queens Museum and the nonprofit organization Cool Culture would like to project on Sunday when they present Catch the Cool: Punk Rock Edition, a free, G-rated indoor-outdoor family festival.

“The way we’ve interpreted it is the idea that anyone can be a musician and be a creator of arts,” said Barbara Palley, director of education for Cool Culture, which works with museums to make their offerings free to low-income families. When you look at punk, she added, “there is a D.I.Y. aesthetic at the heart of it.”

That will be reflected at Catch the Cool, an annual event that this year draws inspiration from “Hey! Ho! Let’s Go: Ramones and the Birth of Punk,” the museum’s new show on those native Queens rockers.

Children attending can make their own percussion instruments — shakers filled with dried beans — and play them during a concert by the drummer Joe Dyson’s Truth N’ Light Project, a group offering West African rhythms as well as numbers by punk progenitors like Jimi Hendrix. They can also design fabric patches to decorate their clothing — inspired by the graphics in the Ramones exhibition — and strike rock star poses at a photo booth.

And just as the museum’s show traces the Ramones’ roots in Forest Hills, young visitors can chart their own paths in “A Day in the Life in Queens.” In this workshop, they’ll make a giant collaborative floor map patterned after Mariam Ghani’s museum mural, “The Garden of Forked Tongues.” “They’ll talk about their family’s journey and their experience of that day,” Ms. Palley said.

Other attractions on Sunday won’t touch on punk. Adults and children together can go on a hunt for sites in the museum’s renowned “Panorama of the City of New York” or try a watercolor workshop inspired by its Tiffany glass collection. And if frazzled parents find themselves thinking of the Ramones’ “I Wanna Be Sedated,” they can opt for quieter activities like bilingual storytelling and children’s yoga.

“We’re trying to signal to all different communities that the museum is there for them,” said Jason Yoon, its director of education. He’s hoping for a Ramones kind of response: Hey! Ho! Let’s go!

(11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 718-592-9700, queensmuseum.org. A free shuttle bus will run all day between the Mets-Willets Point subway station and the museum.)


