


PATERSON, N.J. — The young national park in this once-booming industrial city is unusual for its twin features — one natural, the other historical.

A mighty waterfall, one of the largest by volume east of the Mississippi River, tumbles nearly 80 feet over basalt cliffs, where the Passaic River flows through a narrow chasm. It is the river that spawned the country’s first planned industrial city, founded by Alexander Hamilton in 1792 to end the reliance on Britain for manufactured goods.

The two attributes of Paterson Great Falls National Historical Park — natural wonder and machine-age crucible — are at the center of differing visions for the 52-acre site. The National Park Service is now weighing alternative plans for Paterson Great Falls, which was established as a national park in 2011 after decades of lobbying by local politicians and advocates.

One option would pour more resources into the natural landscape, creating opportunities for recreation along the river and educational programs about the waterfall, the habitat and the city’s past.

The other would give visitors a more in-depth immersion in the city’s industrial history.

“It’s really a matter of emphasis,” said Darren Boch, the superintendent of the park, as he strode along the rim of the falls, where two billion gallons of water cascade each day.

“Part of our job is to maintain and preserve the beautiful view of the waterfall,” he said. “But it’s also to let people understand the significance of the area around the falls. Why is Paterson’s story integral to the history of the United States? There are resources in need of investment and we need to prioritize those resources.”

Over the next two years, the Park Service has committed to restoring some of the parkland along the river near the bottom of the falls — much of it now scraggly, forlorn and closed to the public.

A two-and-a-half-acre stretch of shoreline, to be called the Great Lawn, will be constructed with $4.3 million in local and federal funds, while another $1.5 million will go toward an adjacent space called Overlook Park, where a stage and amphitheater will be built.

Representative Bill Pascrell Jr. of New Jersey, a former mayor of Paterson, worked for years to turn a patchwork of public lands in and around the falls into a national park. He called the plans for the shoreline restoration a “milestone” for this city of 146,000, adding that the outdoor space for performances and events would give visitors another reason to come to the park.

“This is Paterson’s shot,” he said. “We have to make this city a destination, just as it once was.”

But how future expenditures will shape the park over the next 20 years is the larger question with which park officials are now grappling. Earlier this year, the federal agency released a Draft General Management Plan and Environmental Assessment. After a series of meetings, the public was invited to weigh in.

Park officials say that the two options under consideration are not mutually exclusive. While their capital investments differ, there would be recreational amenities under both, as well as historical signage and programs. Mr. Pascrell said he believed the end result would likely represent a hybrid of the two plans.

For the national park, the connection to Hamilton, the first secretary of the Treasury, is serendipitous. Hamilton is enjoying a resurgence of interest — largely thanks to the flattering depiction of the founding father in the stunningly popular Broadway show “Hamilton.”

On July 10, 1778, a young Hamilton picnicked on cold ham, tongue and biscuits here with General George Washington and the French general the Marquis de Lafayette. It was then that Hamilton became acquainted with the setting of his future industrial city, one that would be powered by water and churn out everything from textiles and paper to locomotives and guns.

Located 15 miles west of New York City, Paterson became Hamilton’s incubator for an economy rooted in industry rather than agriculture. At the heart of his plan was a canal system, which was created not for transporting goods, but for powering the water wheels that turned the cam shafts that drove the industrial equipment inside scores of mills.

While the mills produced sailcloth, jute, flax and hemp, silk was dominant. From the 1880s to the 1920s, Paterson became known as “Silk City,” with mills attracting workers from across Europe. The quality of the luxury fabric was such that President Theodore Roosevelt’s wife, Edith, donned a robin’s egg blue gown made of Paterson silk for his second inauguration.

Thousands of locomotives also were made here, including the “General,” the engine celebrated for its role in the Civil War’s Great Locomotive Chase. (The chase was a military raid in 1862, in which Union Army volunteers hijacked a passenger locomotive in Georgia in an effort to damage a rail line used by Confederates.) Colt, too, made its first repeating firearms, or revolvers, in a four-story brownstone at the base of the falls.

“Paterson had an outsize influence on American manufacturing for a very long period of time,” Mr. Boch said. “Most New Yorkers in the 1800s would have known where Paterson was and why it was important.”

Under the proposal focusing on the city’s industrial role, a mile-long “raceway,” which channeled the powerful waters near the top of the falls to the mills, would once again flow with water. Some of the derelict, burned-out mills would be preserved.

Under this scenario, the national park would be turned into a “destination for experiencing the continuum of industrial uses,” the draft plan says. A newly landscaped “raceway walk” would lead visitors along the canal system, it says. The Colt Gun Mill would be rehabilitated and some other mills and ruins would be stabilized, with interpretive programs offered.

Both proposals would be expensive to execute, however. The draft management plan estimated the capital costs at $32 million for the natural landscape and recreation alternative and $46 million for the one focused on industrial history.

The plan also seeks to dampen expectations about a quick or comprehensive turnaround, saying that the approval of either does not guarantee that “funding and staffing” would be “forthcoming.”

Nonetheless, the people who had long pined for a national park in Paterson, a multiethnic city where a quarter of the residents live in poverty, say they are encouraged that the planning has come this far.

Leonard A. Zax, a Paterson native who is president of the nonprofit group Hamilton Partnership for Paterson, helped draft the legislation that authorized the park’s creation. “It’s much too slow for me, but this is a project for the long haul,” he said of the progress. “And what’s striking is that it’s starting to take on the look and feel of a real national park.”


