


The head of the National Association for Music Education, an advocacy group, left his post on Wednesday after participants at a recent meeting on diversity said that he had told them that his organization was not diverse partly because “blacks and Latinos lack the keyboard skills needed for this field.”

The remark, which was attributed to Michael A. Butera, the executive director and chief executive of the association, created a firestorm after it circulated online. The association placed him on administrative leave on Tuesday while it investigated the allegations, and announced on Wednesday that its board and Mr. Butera had “agreed that he will not be returning.”

His departure comes as many sectors of the music industry — from leading orchestras to conservatories — have lagged in achieving diversity, particularly when it comes to hiring black and Hispanic musicians.

The events that led to Mr. Butera’s departure began at an April 26 meeting in Washington of arts service organization leaders arranged by the National Endowment for the Arts. Participants broke up into small groups to discuss diversity.

Keryl McCord, the operations director of Alternate Roots, an Atlanta-based arts group, wrote online that she had sat at a table with Mr. Butera, who said his board was all white and that he could not diversify it because its members were elected, not appointed. She said that he added the comment about blacks and Latinos lacking necessary keyboard skills.

Mr. Butera later responded on Facebook that “the reporting of these comments was a deeply inaccurate portrayal of the dialogue which took place that day.” He added that since the association’s board was elected by its members, he could not unilaterally diversify it.

“I also mentioned that the field of music educators, much like the general population of educators, is skewed toward white individuals,” he wrote. “We have had ongoing and rich discussions in our association community about how best to address this issue, but have not yet been able to actualize a solution. This is not for lack of trying, but simply because of the enormous complexity of the issue.”

Another participant who sat at the table, Jesse Rosen, president and chief executive of the League of American Orchestras, confirmed Ms. McCord’s account in a post he wrote on the league’s website. “Mr. Butera indeed said that he could not take action to diversify his board, and that African Americans and Latinos lacked keyboard skills needed to advance in the music education profession — two statements which many of us around the table challenged,” Mr. Rosen wrote. “The group was unable to further pursue the meaning of his comments as Mr. Butera abruptly and angrily walked out of the room, well in advance of the meeting’s scheduled end time.”

Mr. Butera, reached through a message on his Facebook page, said that he had left the meeting early because he had a prior engagement, and declined further comment. A former public school music teacher who worked for the National Education Association before becoming executive director of the association for music education in 2010, Mr. Butera earned more than $250,000 in base compensation and benefits, according to the association’s most recent tax filing.

In announcing his departure, the association thanked him “for his service to our purpose and mission” and announced that he would be succeeded by Michael Blakeslee, who has worked with the group for nearly 30 years.

Mr. Blakeslee said in an interview that the organization, more than a century old, would renew its focus on inclusion and diversity, from looking again at the makeup of its board to working to ensure equal access to music education for all students. “Our mission statement is ‘music for all,’ and we take that very seriously,” he said.


