


A VILLA ON THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC’S NORTH COAST

$1,275,300

This three-bedroom three-and-a-half-bath house, called Casa de Cana after the type of palm used in its roof, is on the country’s north coast, in the town of Cabrera, which has a population of about 25,000. It’s in a lush, secluded area, said Jennifer Cabot, one of the owners, whose primary home is on the island of Nantucket in Massachusetts.

A winding road leads to the property, which sits on two and a third acres. The 3,700-square-foot house, built in 2010, is made up of three pavilions that are connected by open-air walkways.

An antique mahogany door gives way to the central pavilion, which has the living room, dining room and kitchen. The décor of the living room includes surfboards affixed to the walls, Indonesian-style daybeds and African textiles. The kitchen has a 48-inch Viking range and double oven. The wall closest to the ocean is made of multiple bifold glass doors that lead to a terrace. “As soon as you walk in the front door, it’s just ocean everywhere. You almost feel like you’re on the bow of a big boat,” Ms. Cabot said.

To the left of the central pavilion as you face the ocean, a raised outdoor walkway leads to the master bedroom pavilion, which has an oceanfront terrace and an en-suite bath with two showers. One, combined with the bathtub, is inside, and the other is outdoors. To the right of the central pavilion, a walkway leads to the third pavilion, with two bedrooms, each having a terrace and an en-suite bath. The house is being sold furnished.

Walls, floors and the kitchen counters of the house are made of concrete; the palm roof has weatherproofing beneath the leaves. For electricity, the property relies on solar power and a backup generator.

The property has a swimming pool and a rocky area of the shoreline, reached by stairs, where swimming is sometimes possible, Ms. Cabot said, adding that the water there is often rough. There is also a detached garage. The current staff of six includes a cook and two security guards, their salaries paid by rental income from the house, Ms. Cabot said.

The area is less developed than the country’s south, Ms. Cabot said. Cabrera has banks, supermarkets, restaurants and medical facilities. Playa Grande, a five-minute drive, has two high-end resorts, Amanera and the Playa Grande Beach Club. Samaná El Catey International Airport is approximately an hour’s drive, and the international airport in Puerto Plata is about an hour and 40 minutes away.

MARKET OVERVIEW

The Dominican Republic’s real estate market has not yet fully recovered from the 2008 global financial crisis, agents said. But Cesar Herrera Gutiérrez, the president and chief executive of Provaltur International, the exclusive affiliate for Christie’s International Real Estate in the Dominican Republic, which has this listing, said prices for top luxury homes are stable, and in some cases have begun to rise. He defined these homes as being in the top 1 percent of their local markets and typically having an asking price of at least $5 million.

“The bottom has been hit and now, up it goes,” Mr. Herrera Gutiérrez said of the market for those most exclusive properties. For properties priced between about $1 million and $5 million, it’s a buyer’s market, with stable prices that are often negotiable, he said.

Mr. Herrera Gutiérrez said that the prices per square foot of luxury homes in the Dominican Republic are among the lowest in the Caribbean. Supply is ample, he added.

The Dominican Republic is a second-home market for North Americans, so its performance is tied to the United States and Canadian economies, said Sandy Parekh, an owner of Re/Max Coral Bay Realty. The volume of luxury transactions has picked up by about 10 percent in the last year, but it is “certainly nowhere near 2008.” That trend also holds true for the general market, he said.

Luxury home buyers want properties in gated beachfront developments and with amenities like security, restaurants and utilities included in a membership fee. Agents said Punta Cana, Casa de Campo, Cap Cana and Sosua are desirable.

The lower end of the luxury market begins at around $100 per square foot and reaches around $420 per square foot for a prime oceanfront home, Mr. Parekh said. The highest-priced home he knows of is listed at $25 million, but typically listings do not top $5 million in the north and $9 million in the south, Mr. Parekh added.

WHO BUYS IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Mr. Parekh said most of his clients come from North America, because they are familiar with the Re/Max brand. There has been a slight drop in the number of Canadian buyers recently, and an increase in the number of United States expatriates moving from the Bahamas, Turks and Caicos, and Bermuda, which have a higher cost of living, he said.

Mr. Parekh said that, as a rough estimate, 30 to 50 percent of homeowners in luxury developments are Dominican. Foreigners are split evenly between buying for retirement and for vacation, he added.

Mr. Herrera Gutiérrez said that in the last six to eight months he has seen rising interest from Europeans. He has been working recently with prospective buyers from Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and Italy, he said.

BUYING BASICS

Home sales in the Dominican Republic are handled by a lawyer, who customarily charges 1 percent of the purchase price, said Alfredo Guzmán-Saladín, a partner with Guzmán Ariza, a law firm with offices throughout the country. Each party hires its own lawyer. Services of a notary, for authenticating signatures before the title transfer, are usually included in the attorney fee, he said. (A new law mandates progressive notary fees, but its application is being disputed in court, he added.)

Aside from those fees, the buyer also pays a title transfer tax, which is 3 percent of the property’s government-appraised value.

The Dominican Republic does not have a stamp duty, unlike many other Caribbean countries. The seller pays the real estate agent’s commission.

Mr. Guzmán-Saladín urges buyers to ensure their lawyer performs due diligence. This includes, in particular, checking that the property’s title is clean, meaning that there are no title liens, mortgages or third party rights, and that it is definite, meaning that its boundaries have been accurately surveyed. He also recommends checking for tax liens.

Parties can choose their preferred currency. Transactions for high-end properties, whether buyers are local or foreign, are typically done in United States dollars, Mr. Guzmán-Saladín said.

WEBSITES

Cabrera tourism: gocabrera.com

English language newspaper: dominicantoday.com

Dominican Republic tourism: godominicanrepublic.com

LANGUAGE AND CURRENCY

Spanish: Dominican peso ($1 = 46 pesos)

TAXES AND FEES

Property taxes on this house are $1,500 per year, Ms. Cabot said.

CONTACT

Cesar Herrera Gutiérrez, Provaltur International, (829) 473-0000; provaltur.com


