


It was my own fault. I was careless with language and did exactly what I have so often cautioned others against: repeated conventional wine wisdom.

“Barberas are versatile partners with food,” I wrote last month in introducing our current Wine School subject, the barberas of the Piedmont region of northwestern Italy. That’s what has been said and written often, and I believed it without really considering what that meant. Barbera Versatile would be a great sitcom name for the annoying neighbor constantly spouting clichés.

Now that I actually think about it, I realize I had never gone beyond the canon of tried and true barbera matches, which in fact is somewhat narrow: pizzas, meat and tomato sauces, grilled meats and sausages. These are somewhat simple, straightforward foods, the sort that are flattered by the acidity, fruitiness and modest bitterness of barbera, and not out of place in the Piedmont region. When you begin to complicate dishes with piquant, pungent flavors, barbera turns out to be not as versatile as billed. Several readers discovered this to their evident consternation.

One of the purposes of Wine School is firsthand learning. So much of what passes for wine knowledge is simply stuff that is read and repeated, often with authority and volume. For readers who are somewhat new to wine in its seemingly limitless variety, Wine School offers an opportunity to experience it in a natural setting, with a meal, and to form their own immediate, unmediated impressions, which I invite you to share by commenting at nytimes.com/food.

For readers who already know their way around, Wine School offers an opportunity to reassess beliefs and perhaps to develop new insights. That’s how it worked for me this time.

The three wines I recommended were: Vietti Barbera d’Asti Tre Vigne 2013, Alessandro e Gian Natale Fantino Barbera d’Alba Superiore Cascina Dardi 2013 and Bruno Giacosa Barbera d’Alba 2013.

Each of these, I thought, showed the characteristics that can make barberas from the areas surrounding Alba and Asti so distinctive and rewarding. The Vietti seemed the lightest-bodied of the three even though it had the most alcohol at 14 percent. It showed bright cherry flavors and perhaps even a bit of citrus, but it lacked the energy of the other barberas.

The Giacosa seemed plumper and rounder, with earthy cherry flavors streaked with what reminded me of orange zest. Perhaps that accounted for the sweetness that at least two readers, Martin Schappeit of Amherst, Va., and Dan Barron of New York, detected in the wine, though it didn’t strike me that way.

The Fantino in particular was beautiful, I thought, fresh and juicy with the aroma and flavor of red cherries and a buzz saw acidity that cuts through rich foods. The combination of this acidity and a slight bitterness to the fruit flavor is a defining characteristic of many Italian reds. The combination seems to cleanse the palate after each sip, refreshing the mouth for the next bite. The exquisite balance in the Fantino between sweet-bitter fruit and acidity made it thrilling to drink.

Why harp on how the barberas paired with food? European wine genres in general, and Italian wines even more than most, were made to go with food. You can drink these wines any way you want, alone or with a chocolate dessert. But if you want to enjoy them at their most delicious and transcendent, they require the sort of food with which they go well.

I single out Italian reds because the acidity and dry bitterness in particular need food to bring out their best. This is particularly true of barbera, which can often seem too acidic on its own. But if the acidity is leavened with simple, rich food, you have beautiful harmony.

The wrong sort of food can make even a wine I liked as much as the Fantino seem strange, or at least underwhelming. Mr. Barron called the Fantino boring after pairing it with ravioli in a sauce of sun-dried tomatoes and black olive pesto, served with sautéed kale. “Versatile with food?” he fumed. “Only in a make-do sort of way.”

I’m not one to fetishize food-and-wine pairings, but a meal like that is outside the comfort zone of barbera. He probably would have been better off drinking a good Provençal rosé, which was created to go with the pungent, oily flavors of these dishes. On the other hand, I found the Fantino to be brilliant with a meaty lasagna that I made.

Mr. Schappeit tried the Fantino with two different dishes: a wild mushroom fettuccine, which was a pairing that he seemed to find puzzling and unsatisfying, and a mushroom-and-sausage pizza, which seemed to work well. “It opened up and let me into its lush dark fruit wonderland,” he wrote.

Mysteriously, on another occasion with the same pizza, Mr. Schappeit said, the wine withheld its pleasures.

“The wine is interesting but comes with a complicated personality,” he concluded.

I don’t know what to make of that. Mr. Barron later (a week later, in fact) tried that same bottle of Fantino with a clam, leek and fennel pasta and a tomato gratin. Predictably, the wine did not go particularly well with the pasta dish. But he liked it very much with the tomato gratin, also perhaps predictable, as a tomato roasted in the oven is a different, friendlier-to-barbera proposition than sun-dried tomatoes.

The pattern seemed to hold for most readers. The more straightforward the dish, the better it went with the barbera. The more complex, the more problematic. But even some of the easy matches didn’t work out that well. Todd of the Hudson Valley said that a 2014 Vietti Barbera d’Alba (yes, Vietti produces barberas from both Asti and Alba) was too harsh with a homemade pizza, but that it went beautifully with a creamy pasta dish.

What accounts for barberas’ seeming low percentage of success in these pairings? Aside from its mysterious failure with Todd’s pizza, the results suggest that with barbera we should tread lightly outside the tried and true. A wine with as much acidity as barbera needs either foods that can match its acidity (like pastas with tomato-based sauces, which are naturally acidic) or rich, meaty foods and cheeses, with which it dovetails.

Barberas will not go so well with vinegary foods, pungent, oily foods or shellfish. These may all be better served with crisp whites. For a wine that is actually versatile in practice, may I suggest rieslings, which I can say with conviction operate beautifully outside the realm of regional pairings.

Underlying this discussion is the real lesson: The very best way to learn about wine is to drink it and decide for yourself. You can read about it as much as you like, internalizing the thinking of others and memorizing facts, all of which may prove useful. But for matters of taste, nothing beats the wisdom of firsthand experience.


