


On Oct. 26, 1981, a beautiful fall Monday in New York, a small group of CBS Sports officials gathered in the executive dining room at the network building at West 52nd Street and Sixth Avenue, the dark granite heap known as Black Rock. After a sumptuous lunch served on fine china, a vote was on the agenda. The winner of the poll would become the network’s top N.F.L. play-by-play voice and the partner of John Madden, the new primary color commentator for CBS’s football coverage.

The loser was, of all broadcasters, Vin Scully.

Yes, that Vin Scully, the legendary voice of the Los Angeles Dodgers and Major League Baseball broadcasts, now in his 67th and final year behind the microphone. The veneration Scully has received during his victory lap this season is well earned. As one of the game’s foremost raconteurs, the 88-year-old Scully is widely considered among the best in the business.

But there was a time when his trademark wordiness and deliberate pace cost him a prime gig and the chance to work with one of football’s biggest personalities.

CBS Sports had little prestige in the spring of 1981 when Terry O’Neil, then 31, became an executive producer. A fallen wunderkind, O’Neil had risen quickly through the ranks at ABC, at the time considered by many the leading broadcast sports network. He had been producer of the highest-rated show in sports television at the time, “Monday Night Football,” but had lasted only a few weeks. His mistake was to run afoul of the show’s star, Howard Cosell, who ran O’Neil off the show and eventually off ABC.

(A side note: Scully had been considered for the original play-by-play role on “Monday Night Football” but could not escape his baseball contract to take the job.)

O’Neil was hired by the president of CBS Sports, Van Gordon Sauter, a bearish man with a Henry VIII beard and an erudite mien (he is also a brother-in-law of Gov. Jerry Brown of California), and given the mandate to turn around the entire operation. That included remaking the announcing teams for the N.F.L., then, as now, the network’s most important sports property.

O’Neil made the operation more professional, but it was Sauter who saw the potential in a former coach and Everyman who had completed two undistinguished seasons as a CBS analyst: Madden.

“He’d only done a handful of games to that point,” O’Neil said, “and none of them were sent to New York audiences. I had never seen him live on the air.”

After hunting up tapes of Madden’s work on games and watching his Miller Lite commercials, O’Neil was convinced.

“He was obviously a great personality waiting to burst,” O’Neil said.

Once it was agreed upon at CBS that Madden would become the star, Sauter gave O’Neil new marching orders: “Find him a partner!’”

A seasoned hand was required to guide the nascent color analyst. CBS was fortunate to have two top choices, even having let two promising young announcers, Bob Costas and Al Michaels, slip to the competition. Pat Summerall was entrenched in the top slot, but there were two concerns.

First, Summerall, a former Giants kicker with a basso profundo voice, had taken to drinking in the broadcast booth with his partner, Tom Brookshier, and his work had suffered as a result.

Second, Sauter hugely preferred another CBS broadcaster, Scully.

In 1975, Scully reduced his workload with the Dodgers to assume a more frequent national presence on CBS, including prestigious assignments like the Masters and less distinguished ones, like “Celebrity Challenge of the Sexes.” He also called regional football games for the network.

Sauter thought it was time to elevate the elegant Scully to a more prominent role. The two men shared a powerful agent, Ed Hookstratten, and it was widely assumed in television circles that the fix was in.

“The rumors were that it was a done deal,” O’Neil said.

O’Neil, however, strongly preferred Summerall, thinking that his terse style would make a better combination with the energetic and verbose Madden than the similarly loquacious Scully.

“It was a question of the pacing, the timing,” O’Neil said. “In televised football, replays are a tremendous part of the production.” O’Neil said the better person to frame Madden would be Summerall. The decision carried extra weight because CBS would broadcast that season’s Super Bowl.

“Sauter and I went back and forth for a few weeks,” O’Neil said. “I hoped it would remain private, but, of course, it didn’t.” The sports media world was alive with the gossip that, as O’Neil put it, “the new kid from ABC was already in trouble with his boss.”

He added, “The only Hail Mary I had to achieve the correct outcome was to suggest that we listen to both teams together in actual game action.”

O’Neil suggested that CBS put off a final decision until after the eighth week of the N.F.L. season. Scully would work four games with Madden in September while Summerall was working the United States Open tennis tournament. Then, in October, when Scully jumped to CBS radio for the baseball postseason, Madden would work four games with Summerall.

“I knew it was no way to treat two guys on the way to the Broadcasting Hall of Fame,” O’Neil said. “We tried to camouflage it in the press — the new kid, being me, needs to see the personnel at work, that sort of thing. But it inevitably took on the feeling of a face-off for the role. I belatedly realized there was going to be a loser, and it would be awkward.”

It swiftly became apparent that O’Neil’s initial judgment had been correct. Summerall’s concision worked far better with the bombastic Madden than did Scully’s “pull up a chair” storytelling. “Once you saw the two combos on the air,” O’Neil said, “it was very easy to see.”

Only one man — Sauter — remained unconvinced. Speaking of the Madden-Scully pairing, O’Neil said that Sauter “could have brute-forced it on me if he wanted to.” Instead, O’Neil persuaded his boss to take a straw poll, including votes from a half-dozen other CBS Sports lieutenants. In late October, and just after that lunch in the CBS executive dining room, the executives voted one by one for Summerall.

Sauter went around the table, O’Neil said, saving him for last. O’Neil recalled the moment: “I began to agree with the rest of the guys — ‘Well, not to echo what’s already been said, but. …’ — that sort of thing. Before I got any further, Sauter slammed his fist down on the table, rattling the china. ‘I know what you think!’ he yelled.”

Outflanked, Sauter relented, and Summerall was given the top spot. O’Neil said, “The fact Sauter allowed himself to be outvoted tells you a lot about him.”

There was one tricky detail left. Someone had to tell Scully that he had lost a broadcasting contest. The job fell to O’Neil.

“In my naïveté, I thought I could sell it as a positive,” he said. “But I didn’t handle it well.”

Scully was across town, in a hotel, preparing to call Game 6 of the World Series between the Yankees and the Dodgers for CBS Radio, when the telephone rang in his room.

O’Neil said, “I offered to come over to talk to him, but he said, ‘Just tell me.’ ”

O’Neil tried some ham-handed spin, telling Scully that he had “good news.” Scully would be working the rest of the season with Hank Stram and would call two playoff games, including the N.F.C. championship game. He left out the fact that the Super Bowl would be called by the winner of the competition, Summerall, who went on to work with Madden for the next 20 seasons (they moved together to Fox in 1994).

“I should have just said that the decision has been made, in Pat’s favor,” O’Neil said.

Indeed, Scully did not see any “good news.”

“I understood his disappointment,” O’Neil said, but it went beyond that. Scully was spitting mad. His contract with CBS was nearing its completion, and he soon began to seek other broadcast homes. By the spring of 1982, he had left CBS for NBC, taking over as the primary voice of its baseball coverage. He turned down a hefty sum to stay at CBS, reportedly $10 million over seven years. According to O’Neil’s 1989 memoir, “The Game Behind the Game,” Scully told CBS management that the two huge factors in his decision to leave were his loss of the vote to Summerall and the “good news” phone call from O’Neil.

Scully finished the 1981 season with Stram, including a memorable call of the N.F.C. championship game, which pitted the Dallas Cowboys against the San Francisco 49ers. O’Neil produced the game from Candlestick Park and worried about tensions backstage, but Scully took the high road.

“He was always professional, as you would expect,” O’Neil said. “We did the game together without any problems.”

Indeed, the game became a classic when Joe Montana threw the winning touchdown pass in the Bay Area gloaming, with Dwight Clark hauling in what would later be called the Catch. Scully’s call of the moment, while not as iconic as his famous descriptions of Kirk Gibson’s World Series home run in 1988 (“She is gone!”) or Sandy Koufax’s perfect game in 1965 (“When he wrote his name in capital letters in the record books, that ‘K’ stands out even more than the ‘O-U-F-A-X’”), was superb, hitting hard on “Dwiiiiiight … Claaaaaark!” his voice rising an octave or two to tower above the roar of the delirious home fans.

It was his last N.F.L. game. Scully’s only comment for this article was to remember thinking as he boarded a plane out of San Francisco that “this was a hell of a game to quit doing football.”

The thought that Scully might be as synonymous with the pigskin as he is with the hardball is a tantalizing one. But it is hard to argue that CBS erred in selecting Summerall to work with Madden. O’Neil has no regrets, save for the clumsiness in how he told a broadcasting titan that he had been passed over. And he remains a fan of Scully’s work.

“I thought then, and still do now, that he’s a legend,” he said.


