


Edie Brickell and Steve Martin put that opening number into “Bright Star” just before their musical began performances on Broadway in March.

At first Carmen Cusack, the show’s star, couldn’t sing it without crying.

“I understand it,” Ms. Cusack said in a recent interview. “I had something similar happen to me.”

Her mother was 16 and her father 15 when they had her in a small town near Denver. Ms. Cusack spent the early years with her grandparents in Fountain, Fla., until she was returned to the primary care of her mother in Alabama, who promptly had three more daughters.

“I became a live-in nanny,” Ms. Cusack said. “We had to grow up very fast. There never was a day when there wasn’t shouting about the bills.”

Throughout her life, Ms. Cusack has hustled to earn a living — she couldn’t afford to finish her degree at the University of North Texas — whether as a singing waitress near a Fort Worth freeway; on a cruise ship crooning Burt Bacharach songs; or as a jazz chanteuse in an underground wine bar for $40 a night.

Sitting in her cramped dressing room at the Cort Theater the other day, Ms. Cusack didn’t seem bitter. Instead — wearing star-studded cowboy boots — she exuded a combination of the grit and grace that makes her seem so suited to the character she plays: Alice Murphy, a spunky backwoods teenager in the 1920s who evolves into a buttoned-up book editor in the 1940s.

It’s been a long road to Broadway, where Ms. Cusack has caught the attention of critics like Charles Isherwood of The New York Times, who pronounced her debut “simply gorgeous,” and Chris Jones of The Chicago Tribune, who said the role “looks likely to change her life.”

Up until now she has stepped into roles as a replacement, albeit for major parts like Christine in “Phantom of the Opera,” Fantine in “Les Misérables” and Nellie Forbush in “South Pacific.”

“Originating something is what every actor waits for,” she said. “Usually, those opportunities are offered to people who already have a name.”

Having been with “Bright Star” from its first reading in 2013, Ms. Cusack — who declined to give her age since she moves between 17 and 37 in the show — always assumed she would be replaced with a big name if the production ever made it to Broadway.

The musical also calls for someone who can be credible both as a once-lighthearted teenager whose baby is taken away and as a self-restrained professional woman who has buried the past.

The “Bright Star” creators felt Ms. Cusack was up to the task. “It seemed hard to step away from her,” said Walter Bobbie, the show’s director.

Over time Ms. Cusack’s performance has informed the book and score. “Carmen has gone through every transformation that the play has gone through,” Mr. Martin said. “Ultimately, scenes and songs were written knowing that she could handle them.”

One of those songs is the rousing 11 o’clock number, “At Long Last,” in which Alice rejoices in a long-awaited release.

“When I heard what she can do,” Ms. Brickell said, “I was inspired to sit at the piano and write songs that would allow her voice to soar.”

Growing up with gospel music, Ms. Cusack had the show’s soulful, bluegrass sound in her bones.

She also had a well of sadness to draw from, having felt emotionally unsupported by both parents.

When Ms. Cusack came home from school with a trophy for performing in “A Christmas Carol,” she recalled, her mother, Debra Parker, produced her own middle school clippings for “Sorry, Wrong Number.”

Even at the opening night of “Bright Star,” arguably the biggest moment in Ms. Cusack’s career, her mother’s support was indirect. “She said the people around her were saying nice things,” Ms. Cusack said. “It’s hard for some parents to give their children compliments.”

Ms. Parker, a school bus driver, acknowledged that she hasn’t been great about conveying her approval. “I think that’s just something that runs in my family,” she said by telephone. “I never heard any praise.”

“I never realized I was very cold as a mother — I thought I was an affectionate mother,” she added. “I do always push my girls to excel. I guess I never gave enough love and I never realized it, because I was working so hard myself.”

Rejected by her own father, a Seventh-day Adventist — who told her when she got pregnant as a teenager, “You’ve ruined your life” — Ms. Parker said much of “Bright Star” hit her hard. “I cried through the first half,” she said. “It reminded me of too many things.”

Of her daughter’s performance, she said: “I think she’s wonderful. I’m very proud of her.”

Ms. Cusack moved to London at age 20, after marrying a jazz pianist from Manchester, England. The marriage only lasted two years, but Ms. Cusack stayed for 14, working steadily. (She eventually married Paul Telfer, a Scottish film and television actor, with whom she now shares homes in New York and Los Angeles).

“Carmen would often sing for her money,” said Sarah Pelosi, a London friend who regularly met Ms. Cusack at the King’s Head pub for lager and live music. “We’d sort of sit and put the world to right and look at the future and build each other up with a good laugh.”

The two met while doing a concert performance of “Les Misérables” in Ireland, and Ms. Pelosi said it was immediately clear that Ms. Cusack was bound for bigger things. “This voice came out of her and I just thought, ‘Bloody hell,’” Ms. Pelosi said. “I knew once she got a job out there people would be like, ‘Where have you been?’”

Although Ms. Cusack had done national tours of big musicals, she was little known in New York — a “discovered yet undiscovered talent,” Mr. Martin said, “like finding someone full blown who’s ready to go, who is theatrically and musically experienced yet had never been on Broadway.”

She auditioned for “Bright Star” by VHS tape. Mr. Bobbie called Bartlett Sher, who had directed her in the national tour of “South Pacific.”

“He said she’s the real thing,” Mr. Bobbie recalled.

In an interview, Mr. Sher described Ms. Cusack as a “fearless” performer, who can embody a complicated character and carry a show.

“She can be that severe, closed down, damaged person who opens up to something,” he said, “and she can play youthful and open as well.”

Asked if they knew how much their musical personally resonates for their lead actress, the creators said they had no idea. But they said Ms. Cusack brings a sentient clarity and depth to the material.

“You can certainly sense that she’s gone through a lot and can put her pain and her joy into this part,” Ms. Brickell said. “You can feel it when somebody has that in them.”


