


What this country needs is a dictator.

Or that’s the sort of proposition that can emerge from fevered imaginations in interesting times. Take 1933, for example. It was the height of the Depression in the United States and Fascism was on the rise in Europe. The fevered imagination in this case belonged to Thomas F. Tweed, an adviser to the former British prime minister David Lloyd George who apparently had some time on his hands when he wrote his first novel, quickly adapted into the movie “Gabriel Over the White House.”

“After witnessing the film, one is bound to be curious as to how an Englishman came to write it,” the critic Mordaunt Hall said in The New York Times in April 1933. “It appears that the author, who has not written any other book, was taking what he describes as a leisurely holiday aboard a cargo vessel in the Mediterranean, and this vacation ‘provided the boredom’ responsible for attacking a solution of American political problems in a somewhat extravagant fashion. The author attributes the theme of the book to a statement made by Gordon Selfridge to the effect that what the United States needed was a benevolent dictator and to chance conversations with others aboard the freighter about the world crisis.”

The film starred Walter Huston (father of John and grandfather of Anjelica). In his review, Mr. Hall called it “a curious, somewhat fantastic and often melodramatic story, but nevertheless one which at this time is very interesting.”

The story concerns “a fictitious President of the United States named Judson Hammond, who, while convalescing from injuries suffered in an automobile accident, is presumed to be inspired by a vision, declared by his secretary to be that of the Archangel Gabriel, to change his governmental tactics and proclaim himself a dictator of the land. Thus, Hammond, who in the first sequences is portrayed as a careless partisan politician, becomes an earnest and conscientious President, who tackles the problems of unemployment, crime and the foreign debts something after the fashion of a Lincoln.”

Pre-accident, Mr. Huston’s President Hammond is no dictator, but he is no leader of the free world, either. Mr. Hall wrote that in one scene, “he rather scoffs at the quill pen with which Lincoln is supposed to have signed the Emancipation Proclamation and he delights in driving his own car at 100 miles an hour.”

It is while he is driving recklessly, separated from his security detail, that he crashes and becomes a very different leader.

“He calls attention to the power of the president, talks of putting the country under martial law, asks the most powerful of all murderous racketeers to come to the White House, deals lustily with prohibition and establishes government liquor depots.”

No establishment pol here.

Shortly before the film’s release, The Times reported that “Metro-Goldwyn Mayer is gravely concerned over ‘Gabriel Over the White House,’ one of the company’s important Spring pictures, which dramatizes some of the country’s current problems. A number of film leaders here felt that because of economic and political conditions it was unwise to show a film which might be regarded by the nation at large as subversive and by foreign nations as invidious.”

Some changes were made before its release. Mr. Hall wrote that in its original version, the film apparently “depicted Hammond as insulting and very bombastic at Cabinet meetings; that the newspaper correspondents after an interview with Hammond ridiculed the President in the press room; that the relations between Hammond and the girl were anything but platonic.”

Writing in The Times decades later, in 1992, Vincent Canby noted that the film was “appalling for the casual way in which it glorifies Presidential death squads, the possibly permanent dismissal of Congress and the suspension of all Constitutionally guaranteed civil liberties.” But it “was no fringe movie,” he wrote. “It was a mass-market entertainment, produced by William Randolph Hearst’s Cosmopolitan Pictures and released by M-G-M. It was even a hit. As much as any film in the retrospective, ‘Gabriel Over the White House’ reflects the degree of American bewilderment at the time it was made.”


