


It is one of the incongruities of life in New York that some of the most appealing music ever written, a Beethoven trio, for example, or a Mozart sonata, is played in one of the most unappealing public spaces ever built — Pennsylvania Station.

The timeless music is meant to make the life of the modern traveler more pleasant, a word not typically associated with Penn Station. It is even considered a crime deterrent.

But the three people who decide what travelers in Manhattan will hear are actually about 1,500 miles away and have never set foot in the train station, the busiest in the country.

Working from a windowless office in Austin, Tex., the three women do their best to channel their inner commuter — harried, frazzled and stressed out — and choose the right overture, concerto or pop-song arrangement to soothe another hair-pulling train ride.

Amy Frishkey, one of the programmers, understands the otherness of picking the music that people hear between the train-boarding announcements. There is the place itself: “It’s like a basement,” she said, a description she has gleaned from her readings about the much-disliked terminus.

Unlike her two colleagues, Ms. Frishkey has strolled through Grand Central Terminal, whose monumental hall seems a far more appropriate setting for classical tunes.

But music does not play from speakers in the vaulted sky that floats over the main concourse at Grand Central, as it does from the blotchy ceiling at Penn Station. And Penn Station has definite shortcomings beyond the dispiriting, shabby look. It is not a concert hall and, as Ms. Frishkey suggested, it is not the soaring architectural gem that the original Penn Station was in its heyday, a place the novelist Thomas Wolfe once described as “vast enough to hold the sound of time.”

The puny-sounding speakers at Penn Station play a stream of classical pieces along with “easy instrumentals” that sound like dentist-office arrangements, mostly contemporary piano and guitar solos — and, one afternoon last month as the evening rush was approaching, a Sinatra hit that seemed to have been arranged for French horn. The result is a Beethoven quartet one minute, something vaguely New Age the next.

The volume varies, as do the tempos — louder and bouncier during the morning and evening, less so at other times. There are interruptions — “Now boarding, east gate, Track 9” cuts off the zippiest allegro, right at the climax — and there is the buzz of people on cellphones, calling to warn whoever is expecting them that their train is late or, more irritating, canceled.

“It’s almost as if you’re trying to D.J. the world’s largest wedding reception,” Danny Turner, Ms. Frishkey’s boss, said. But it is a reception without a bride or groom, and the 650,000 people who pass through Penn Station every day do not dance to the music.

Amtrak, which operates Penn Station, was not looking for a party when it decided to pipe in music in the 1990s. Amtrak wanted “to subtly help promote a peaceful and calm environment,” Craig S. Schulz, an Amtrak spokesman, said. So it enlisted Muzak, which was bought by Mood Media, a programming giant, in 2011.

Amtrak wanted classical music, Mr. Schulz said, with “an emphasis on light, airy selections, as opposed to thundering horns and drums.” He added, “The intent was to create a serene environment that could calm the nerves of the harried traveler.”

But, in a city in which the 1990s began with 2,200 murders in just one year, Amtrak had another objective: using music to deter crime.

“Yes, that was definitely a factor,” Mr. Schulz said. He said the decision to play classical music in Penn Station “was based on research” that suggested, among other things, that classical music “had in the past been effective in displacing gang activity from certain locations.”

Norman Middleton, who worked as a concert producer at the Library of Congress until his retirement, has described this theory of policing as “Halt, or I’ll play Vivaldi,” a term he said he got from a newspaper headline. In a panel discussion several years ago, he said the police in West Palm Beach, Fla., had installed speakers on the roof of a bar and played classical music — “I think it was Beethoven’s string quartets,” Mr. Middleton said. Drug dealers who frequented the neighborhood went elsewhere.

Ms. Frishkey said she had read all about Penn Station — the original Penn Station, a temple to railroading and high-minded civic purpose. “Through it one entered the city like a god,” the architectural historian Vincent J. Scully Jr. declared after its demolition in the 1960s, adding about its replacement, “One scuttles in now like a rat.”

So Penn Station is a place where workaday commuters and long-distance passengers seek the shortest sally to the boarding gate, some running, some preoccupied with how to drag too much luggage across the floor and then down the escalators, some simply happy their train is leaving close to on time.

“The music functions to create spaciousness, light, not feeling like you’re in a cattle call,” Ms. Frishkey said. “It speaks to the power of overhead music to work within a space, working as a corrective to this basement feeling.”

The music designers, as Mood Media calls them, vary the playlist. “We spread it out so you’re not hearing all symphonic pieces and then a piano piece and then some chamber pieces,” Janica Chang, one of Ms. Frishkey’s colleagues in Austin, said.

But they favor fairly fast tempos. “Most are around allegro, kind of bright, lively,” she said. Nothing faster, nothing slower. “You don’t want largo and lethargic,” she added, “and you don’t get prestissimo because that will make people feel more rushed than they already feel.”

In Penn Station, there is always the chance. It is a place where the critics are tough. Hannah Greenberg, who works in a Manhattan art gallery and was on the way home to Montclair, N.J., gave the music a thumbs-down review.

“It’s just loud enough to be annoying,” she said, “and it doesn’t even sound like classical music.”

She listened for a moment. “It doesn’t really fit the environment,” she said, “but I don’t think any music fits Penn Station.”


