


Bret Easton Ellis looked uneasy. He was sitting in the Schoenfeld Theater, waiting to see the Broadway musical based on his controversial novel “American Psycho” for the first time. He shifted in his seat and looked around at the crowd, then leaned back and sighed.

“This is just another surreal aspect of my life,” he said. “It feels like the weirdest dream. I don’t know,” he continued wearily, his voice trailing off.

Mr. Ellis, who had recently flown in from Los Angeles, seemed to be having doubts about the whole endeavor. Before heading to the performance, he had a panicked conversation with his boyfriend. “I said, ‘God, what the hell are they going to do with this?’”

It’s a fair question. How do you turn a wildly transgressive, experimental novel about a slick Wall Street investment banker-turned serial killer into a mainstream Broadway musical?

Mr. Ellis found out soon enough. The theater lights went down, and the ominous, drone-like music playing in the background got louder, building up to a piercing scream as the stage filled with smoke. Benjamin Walker, who plays the novel’s unhinged narrator, Patrick Bateman, a young banker whose hobbies include murdering and dismembering young women, rose up out of an opening in the stage floor. Buff and wearing nothing but tighty whities, Mr. Walker preened and strutted and described his elaborate grooming rituals, drawing bursts of laughter.

Mr. Ellis chuckled quietly a couple of times, rubbing his knuckles over his lips, as Bateman and his sidekicks sang a raucous opening number that telegraphed the story’s central themes about the corrosive effects of unchecked narcissism, greed and materialism.

His apprehension seemed to evaporate fully after the first musical number. He laughed loudly during a dinner party scene, when Bateman reaches into his blazer and pulls out a sharp butcher knife to aggressively cut his birthday cake. Later, Mr. Ellis cracked up when Bateman, parading around a gym locker room with his friends, praised Donald Trump’s book “The Art of the Deal.”

Pretty soon, Mr. Ellis was reveling in the punch lines, most of them lifted straight out of the book, and silently congratulating himself, thinking, “That’s mine, that’s mine,” he said later.

By intermission, Mr. Ellis’s mood had shifted from deep ambivalence to giddy enthusiasm about the production, which opens on Thursday. The show features music by Duncan Sheik and a punchy book by Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa that captures the novel’s over-the-top-satire and its slick, stylish sendup of late-’80s Wall Street hedonism.

“It’s still relevant, and it’s dark,” Mr. Ellis said. “It’s not for the tourist.” He paused, looked around the theater and seemed to reconsider his assessment. “But maybe it is for the tourist.”

He gushed about Mr. Walker, who brings an edgy, coiled energy and an unpredictable quality to the charming psychopath Patrick Bateman.

“It’s not how I pictured the character, but Christian Bale wasn’t how I pictured the character, either,” he said, referring to the 2000 feature film adaptation starring Mr. Bale.

During the second act, the violence and chaos escalates as Bateman goes on a killing spree, acting out after an oppressively boring vacation in the Hamptons.

After the final scene, the crowd rose for a standing ovation, and a press agent arrived to escort Mr. Ellis backstage to meet the cast. Mr. Ellis, who was wearing jeans, sneakers, a black shirt and blazer and thick black glasses, had gone unnoticed in the theater, and the actors didn’t seem to recognize him until he was introduced.

One of the actors jokingly asked Mr. Ellis if he was familiar with the material.

“This must be so weird for you,” another actor said to him.

“Thanks for letting us do this,” Mr. Walker said, with an air of formality.

The group was ushered into a cramped hallway, where they paused briefly to snap a photo with the actor Bradley Cooper, who had come backstage to congratulate the cast.

After the show, Mr. Ellis sat down at a nearby restaurant and struggled for a couple of minutes to collect his thoughts about the novel’s legacy and its unlikely reincarnation as musical theater.

“My first impression is that it’s strange that something I wrote 30 years ago is a musical on Broadway,” he finally said. “To witness its tortured history, from this thing that was a quasi-victim of censorship to a mainstream Broadway musical, makes me feel very, very old.”

Mr. Ellis, who has a round, boyish face at 52, said he was surprised by how well the story held up and seemed to reflect the current political and cultural climate.

“It’s such a prescient commentary on where we are now,” he said. “I thought there should have been more Trump jokes, at least for this run.”

He said he first came up with the idea for “American Psycho” in 1984, when he was just starting out as a writer, and before the publication of his successful debut novel, “Less Than Zero.’’ He wanted to create a character that symbolized the selfishness of the era.

“It’s such a big symbol: Wall Street, greed, serial killer,” he said. “At 23, it seemed pretty original. Pretty, like, amazing.”

Not everyone got the joke. His original publisher, Simon & Schuster, canceled his contract once it became clear how controversial the book would be. It was immediately picked up by Vintage and published three months later, in the spring of 1991. Critics savaged it as a misogynistic celebration of violence. Mr. Ellis got death threats.

“Everyone said my career was over,” he said. “I knew everybody was wrong. I knew the book would survive it somehow and live on as what I intended it to be.”

Not only did the novel survive, but its ultra-creepy narrator, Patrick Bateman, became a pop culture icon. Mr. Ellis went on to publish four other novels, including “Glamorama” and “Lunar Park,” but none have resonated as powerfully as “American Psycho.”

The musical may be the ultimate rebuke to Mr. Ellis’s early critics. As Bateman dances around in his underwear or in a dapper pinstriped suit, there’s little doubt that the story works best as a hallucinatory, pitch-black comedy.

Mr. Ellis doesn’t feel entirely vindicated by the reappraisal of the novel as a sharp satire. “Vindicated is too strong a word, because that would mean that I care too much,” he said. “I would say, I’m mildly surprised.”

He had little to do with the musical, beyond agreeing to it. Years ago, the producers sent him the script to gauge his thoughts. “I didn’t really read it,” he admitted. He didn’t see the show during its sold-out run in London.

Seeing the musical for the first time last Saturday, he felt relieved that the producers didn’t sanitize the story’s darkness and violence, although he could have done without the hints of Bateman’s transformation and redemption in the final scenes, he said.

“I’m not so into that kind of quote unquote redemption, though I understand the impulse for the artist to go there,” he said. “To me, that’s not so fun.”

After an hour at the restaurant, Mr. Ellis had to get back to his hotel room to finish a script for a web TV series he’s working on. He plans to see the musical again on opening night, and he’s no longer filled with dread at the prospect of seeing Bateman, the incarnation of pure evil, sing and dance with abandon.

“There’s not really anything that I can complain about,” he said of the show. “And I like to complain.”


