


An Ohio law that curtails early voting and prevents people from registering to vote and casting ballots on the same day illegally discriminates against black voters, a federal judge ruled on Tuesday, ordering a crucial swing state to change its rules before the fall elections.

Democrats had challenged the law, describing it as one in a long series that Republicans in several states had enacted to suppress voting by blacks and Hispanics, who are more likely than others to vote early and to vote Democratic. Republicans denied that charge, saying the law combated voter fraud. Judge Michael H. Watson, of Federal District Court in Cincinnati, wrote in his findings that voter fraud was very rare and that the law did nothing to prevent it.

It is unclear what effect the ruling will have on turnout. Republicans would not say immediately whether they would appeal, but they noted that even with the provision the judge struck down, Ohio had one of the longest early voting periods in the United States, starting four weeks before an election.

Early voting in Ohio grew out of the 2004 election, when people stood in line for hours to cast ballots, particularly in heavily minority and Democratic urban areas. Thousands went home without voting. George W. Bush carried the state by 2.1 percentage points. If he had lost it, John Kerry would have become president.

State law was then changed to allow any voter to get an absentee ballot without offering a reason, and to open early voting — by mail or by dropping off a ballot in person — 35 days before an election.

Ohio requires voters to register at least 30 days before an election, so the change created a window, known as Golden Week, when registration and voting were underway. With a single visit to a county elections office, a person could register, get an absentee ballot, fill it out and cast it.

In 2014, the Republican-controlled General Assembly and Gov. John Kasich, also a Republican, enacted a law eliminating Golden Week; early voting would start after registration had closed.

Judge Watson cited an expert witness called by Democrats who testified that black voters were far more likely than others to vote early and in person, and that voting during Golden Week in presidential elections was more than five times as prevalent in overwhelmingly black census blocks as in overwhelmingly white ones.

Curtailing early voting and eliminating Golden Week “will disproportionately burden African-Americans,” in violation of the Voting Rights Act, wrote Judge Watson, who was appointed by Mr. Bush and served in the 1990s as counsel to a Republican governor, George Voinovich. Another federal judge made a similar ruling in 2014, but the Supreme Court blocked it, and the case was later settled.

“The racial impact just sticks out like such a sore thumb,” said David A. Pepper, chairman of the Ohio Democratic Party, which had challenged the law. “I certainly don’t think that’s an accident.”

The judge upheld other restrictions imposed by the state that Democrats had also challenged, like limiting early voting to one location per county and reducing the number of voting machines counties are required to have.

Mr. Kasich’s office referred questions to Secretary of State Jon Husted, the elected official who oversees elections. Mr. Husted, a Republican, said he would consult with legislative leaders about how to proceed.

Noting that “for nearly 200 years, Ohioans voted for only one day,” Mr. Husted said, “If it was constitutional for lawmakers to expand the voting period to 35 days, it must also be constitutional for the same legislative body to amend the time frame to 28 days.”

In the 2012 presidential election, state officials said, about 80,000 people voted in person during Golden Week, or 1.4 percent of the total, and 14,000 of those ballots were cast by people who registered the same day. No one could say how many of them would have voted if the week were eliminated.


