


ROME — This much is known: American officials returned a letter to Italy on Wednesday that was written by Christopher Columbus in 1493 on his return from the New World. The letter had been stolen from a library in Florence and then ended up as a donation to the Library of Congress in 2004.

What remain a mystery — or at least the subject of a continuing investigation — are the crucial particulars to fill in the gaps of an intriguing, international case of whodunit.

For starters, when exactly was the letter stolen, and by whom? Who made and then substituted a credible replica in its place? And how did the letter make its way in 1990 to a rare-books collector in Switzerland, who then sold it at auction two years later in New York to an anonymous buyer for $330,000?

Italian and American law enforcement officials said on Wednesday that the answers to these questions were still being investigated, but that the return of the manuscript to its rightful owners should be greeted as a successful first step.

“This extraordinary letter by Christopher Columbus really completed — 500 years later — the same route,” Culture Minister Dario Franceschini told reporters in Rome. “It traveled there and it traveled back.”

Mr. Franceschini described the letter’s return to Italy as a symbolic event that “marks the friendship and the total collaboration that exists between our countries.”

The eight-page letter (four double-sided leaves), addressed to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain, is one of several surviving copies of Columbus’s first impressions of the New World, which he wrote on the return voyage of his first trip. It was originally printed in Spanish — the sole surviving copy is in the New York Public Library — but Columbus’s story became so popular upon his return that three editions were also printed in Italy, in Latin, and widely circulated.

The letter in the Library of Congress collection came from an edition printed in Rome by Stephan Plannck in 1493, of which there are about three-dozen known copies. An investigation that began in 2012 by Italy’s art theft squad and agents from the United States Department of Homeland Security found that the letter had been stolen from the Riccardiana Library in Florence. It had been included in a miscellaneous volume made up of 42 early printed books from the 1490s.

It is unclear when the theft took place, but Fulvio Silvano Stacchetti, the library director, said he believed the letter had been stolen and replaced with a copy more than 60 years ago, when the book was lent for nine months — in 1950-51 — to the national library in Rome. That was the only time the rarely consulted tome had left Florence in recent years, he said.

The volume that included the letter, along with other precious manuscripts and books, was stored in the library’s rare books room, “where they are kept with the utmost attention and safekeeping,” and access to these valuable tomes is closely vetted, Mr. Stacchetti said. But some investigators and experts said that the technique used to copy the letter — a photographic plate printed with modern ink, using different paper from the authentic copies — indicated that the forgery was more recent.

“The Columbus letter is relatively easy to forge, because it only has four leaves,” said Paul Needham, the Scheide librarian at Princeton University who was called in by Homeland Security to examine the original in Washington and the forgery in Florence. “So it’s a natural candidate for theft and forgery. And of course if you put something back in its place, 20 years can go by before people know that it’s a forgery,”

John Phillips, the American ambassador to Italy, said on Wednesday that the Florentine letter was not the only copy that had gone missing in Europe. “Several original copies of this letter exist,” he said, “and Homeland Security’s investigation revealed that a number of them had been stolen from libraries in Europe and replaced by high-quality forgeries.”

Officials said that the Florentine letter was bought by a rare-books collector in Switzerland in 1990 and was sold to an anonymous buyer for $330,000 at Christie’s auction house in New York in 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus’s first voyage to the New World.

In 2004, the letter was bequeathed to the Library of Congress by “an estate,” American officials said, declining to name the donor. They said that both the benefactor and the library had acted in good faith with regards to the letter’s legitimate provenance.

Examinations of the forged copy carried out by scientific experts with the military police in Italy found that the pages were not the same size as the original and that the binding and numbering of the pages was different. The paper used for the fake letter was antique but dated to about a century after the Plannck copies.

Experts at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington carried out their own studies and found that chemical agents had been used “to delete the ink of the Riccardiana library stamp,” Mr. Phillips said.

Mr. Franceschini, the culture minister, said on Wednesday that the original letter would soon be returned to the Riccardiana library, “its legitimate home.”

This is “the story of a very sophisticated theft,” he added. “For many years, we didn’t discover that the libraries had copies of the original. It shows that our level of attention has to remain high.” Particularly at a time when collecting is taking off in emerging markets, he said, “the temptations start now.”


