


The social norms of the Victorian era prevented Sam Clemens’s youngest daughter, Jean, from typical women’s roles as wife and mother because of her epilepsy, so she turned her hobby, woodcarving, into a business.

Handwritten or typed plays by Mr. Clemens’s oldest daughter, Susy, show how seriously she took her writing, even as a teenager; they include stage directions, set designs and costume notes.

And Clara, the only one to live past the age of 30, studied voice in Berlin and Vienna, sang professionally in Europe and at Carnegie Hall and became the guardian of her father’s papers.

Visitors who tour the Hartford home of Mr. Clemens, better known as Mark Twain, have the chance to learn more about his daughters in the exhibition “In Their Father’s Image: Susy, Clara and Jean Clemens,” in the museum adjoining the house.

The exhibition gives visitors a view of the author as his daughters knew him: the loving, caring “Papa,” with a bit of a temper, who said that his time in Hartford with his daughters and wife, Olivia, were the happiest years of his life.

The exhibition opens with photos of the daughters, with a quote about each girl from their father: “Clara is a dear & lovable child, but troublesome. You will like her.”

In addition to family photos and portraits, the exhibition includes samples of the children’s books, meant to impart Christian values and scare the daughters into behaving. A book of illustrated poems that Twain read to his daughters includes one in which a girl who played with matches came to a tragic end.

Growing up as the daughters of a famous writer had its challenges, but one perk was hearing a bedtime story nightly. The girls required that the story begin with something about the cat in the ruff (or frilly collar), whose picture stood on the right corner of the mantel, that the tale progress to include other items displayed on the mantel and that it end with something about the painting of a woman whom they called Emmeline.

Half the exhibition is devoted to the girls’ childhoods. Visitors learn about the medical challenges that even their father’s wealth could not fully overcome. (Diphtheria claimed the couple’s only son, Langdon, when he was 19 months old.)

Children visiting the exhibition are welcome to try on costumes that replicate those that the three girls and their friends would have worn when performing one of Susy’s plays. A small stage rests near the dress-up clothes, with a backdrop of an enlarged photo of a scene from “A Love Chase,” which Susy wrote as a teenager.

A governess educated the girls at home, but Susy and Clara each spent their freshman year at Hartford Public High School. Detailed school record books on display reveal that Susy had several unexcused absences and received 11 demerits in a year. Clara had 13 in a single month.

Clara wanted to be a singer, and Jean’s health caused doctors to place restrictions on her; only Susy attended college.

While at Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania, she formed a close friendship with a classmate, Louise Brownell. Susy dropped out partway through her second semester, but she continued to write notes to Louise that some scholars have interpreted as love letters. They began, “Dearest Louise” and were signed, “Your Own Olivia.”

The references in the letters to physical affection have led to speculation that the relationship was sexual, but the language is typical of the way Victorian women wrote, Tracy Brindle, chief curator of the home and museum, said.

“I think you have to be careful when you look at 19th-century situations through a 21st-century lens because it can be misconstrued,” she said.

At age 24, Susy died from spinal meningitis while her parents and Clara were touring Europe. Twain said later that she had been his muse when he wrote “Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc.”

Historians learned a great deal about Jean through her diary, Ms. Brindle said.

Because epilepsy was misunderstood, Jean was prohibited from dating for fear that romantic relationships might prompt an attack. To give herself purpose, Ms. Brindle said, she began woodcarving. Visitors will see a blanket chest and glove box she made, along with her tools and her ledger, which holds the tallies of her income and expenses and shows she made a donation to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

Jean’s epilepsy led to her death at 29, just eight months after she had assumed secretarial duties for her father. Four months later, her father died.

Clara became the guardian of his papers and of the family’s belongings. She also suppressed his more controversial writings, such as unpublished work on religion and sexuality.

Clara performed in concert to raise money for what would become the Mark Twain House & Museum, and the concert’s tickets and programs are still on display. The exhibition includes a floor-plan of the Hartford house, with notes written by Clara identifying the rooms and where her father placed his desk.

Clara married a pianist and composer and they had one daughter, Nina Gabrilowitsch, born after her grandfather’s death. Nina never married or had children, struggled with depression and addiction and died of an overdose in 1966.

After Clara’s sisters died, their father idolized their memories, Ms. Brindle said. But Clara and her father often clashed because their personalities were so similar, she said.

Shortly before her death, at age 88 in 1962, Clara reconsidered and agreed to allow the publication of her father’s works opposing “American imperialism.”

“She had good intentions when she didn’t want the darker work to get out,” Ms. Brindle said.

She added: “There’s a real strength in Clara. She survived her two sisters’ passing away, both parents’ passing away and being the only surviving daughter of such a famous man. She had a tremendous burden upon her to protect his legacy.”


