


For the second time, George W. Bush has written a warm letter in support of a conservative group that bills itself as promoting the “natural family” based on heterosexual marriage but that is classified as a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center.

The group, the World Congress of Families, based in Rockford, Ill., is holding a conference in Tbilisi, Georgia, where it had planned to honor Mr. Bush. But he declined to attend, a spokesman said.

In a letter dated May 2016, the former president says: “I commend your efforts to recognize the importance of families in building nations. Your work improves many lives and makes the world better.”

Mr. Bush used almost the exact same words in a letter to the group when members gathered in Mexico City in 2004 — while he was president.

Freddy Ford, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said in an email that the recent letter was sent “because the group requested it when we declined President Bush’s attendance.”

“Our knowledge of the group is limited to their work to encourage adoption.”

In 2004, Mr. Bush supported a constitutional amendment to define marriage as between a man and a woman and made it an issue in his re-election campaign. In her 2004 memoir, however, Mr. Bush’s wife, Laura Bush, said she had urged him to drop the issue out of respect for their gay friends.

The Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks hate groups, added the World Congress of Families to its list in 2014, calling it “one of the key driving forces behind the U.S. religious right’s global export of homophobia and sexism.” But the liberal-leaning center has been criticized for including groups that fall within the conservative mainstream, like the Family Research Council, based on their stances on gay issues.

The World Congress of Families has strongly disputed the hate-group designation and the implication that it supports violence against the L.G.B.T. community.

“Nothing could be further from the truth, as W.C.F. strongly opposes violence and would never advocate violence or hatred toward any group of people, regardless of differences,” the group wrote in 2014.

Larry Jacobs, the group’s managing director, said in a statement that it seeks to fight “the sexual revolution and the harm that it has brought millions of victims worldwide.”

This year, the group planned to honor Mr. Bush for “his pro-life work.” A Bush spokesman told BuzzFeed News that he hadn’t known about the award.


