


Annemarie Mogil held out.

She had lived almost three years at Prospect Park Residence, a nine-story tower overlooking Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn. When she first arrived, more than 120 residents were living in comfortable prewar apartments, many with views of the park below. People filled the dining room, where they sat at tables with elegantly folded napkins and plates of prime rib or spinach-stuffed shells, and ran into one another at the rooftop garden.

But then, several months after Ms. Mogil moved in, the owner of the residence, an assisted-living home for seniors, said it was closing. Most residents packed up and left. Ms. Mogil, now 93, refused to follow them. These days, she is one of just five who are still there.

“I have a lovely neighbor; I have a cat I won’t be able to bring with me to some other places,” Ms. Mogil said on Thursday morning, as she sat opposite Prospect Park with Alice Singer, her close friend and neighbor. “I have a real psychological problem about moving.”

After a two-year fight between the small group of residents and the developer who owns the building, a $3.35 million settlement was reached this week, paying each of the holdouts — whose ages range from 91 to 101 — more than $500,000 but forcing them to leave their apartments by the end of the summer.

“It’s definitely a win for our clients,” Fred Millett, a lawyer who represents the five residents and several former residents, said of the settlement, which “gives them time and money to make the transition.”

Frank Carone, a lawyer representing the owner, the developer Haysha Deitsch, said the settlement would allow his client to move forward, including with other litigation involving the property. “I am satisfied with the settlement with the remaining residents,” Mr. Carone said.

Lawyers for the residents said that they have not reached a resolution with the New York State Health Department, which was also named in the lawsuit, filed in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn in 2014. The lawsuit claims that the department did not follow state and federal rules in how it handled the home and its closing.

A spokesman for the department declined to comment on Thursday because of the continuing litigation.

For the residents and their families, the settlement has been met with a measure of resignation.

“The last thing I think about is money,” Ms. Mogil said. “I think about the distress at the thought of being so-called evicted from a place I have been residing since November 2013. I’m very comfortable.”

Ms. Singer, 91, came to the residence six years ago after she was hospitalized and her family realized that she could no longer live alone in her Suffolk County home. Her daughter, Joyce Singer, said her mother settled in well: Her room was awash in sunlight, and the building was lively, with plenty of engaging activities. Brooklyn Botanic Garden and the Brooklyn Museum were a short stroll away.

“This was kind of like a happy village,” Joyce Singer said of the home. “It was a functioning, wonderful place, and it was like someone threw a bomb in the village.”

In 2014, Mr. Deitsch announced that the home would be closing, blaming mounting operational costs and financial losses. But residents believed that developers drawn to the building’s coveted location — in the Park Slope neighborhood, with the particularly attractive address of 1 Prospect Park West — had plans for the space. It later emerged that Mr. Deitsch had made a deal to sell the building to an investment firm.

Soon after the announcement, residents started leaving, and in the following months, the building’s population dwindled. “The halls became quiet, rather than full of life,” Joyce Singer said.

But for her mother, who has mild dementia, the building remained home. “These are the walls she’s used to,” the younger Ms. Singer said. “She feels secure. In the middle of the night, she knows how to go from the bed to her bathroom.”

More important, she added, “What mattered to her was she had one really good friend.”

Ms. Singer and Ms. Mogil have apartments near each other’s on the eighth floor. They spend much of their days together, often starting by sharing sections of the newspaper.

Ms. Mogil said she was “facing the inevitable.” She would have to move, but it would not be easy.

Ms. Singer’s daughter noted some of the challenges: She had to find a place that was a reasonable distance from her home in Brooklyn, and her mother had to feel comfortable and safe there. Moving her into a nursing home was out of the question. So was separating the two best friends.

“Where Alice goes,” Ms. Mogil said as she sat next to her friend, “I will go as well.”


