


Most people know you from “The Office,” but your big current project is an app for lists, which seems a little bit like something Ryan Howard would invent. On first glance, it’s the kind of thing people shouldn’t need an app to do. Are you “disrupting” list ­making? I think it’s too simple an idea for Ryan Howard. It’s not trying to prove how brilliant and deep it is. The idea is that we’re surrounded by lists even more than we realize, because our internal monologues are in list form.

So you’re democratizing lists. Now I do sound like Ryan Howard. I would have said, “I want us to democratize writing.” When people hear “writing,” they think of a bad grade they got in spelling in third grade. People are probably composing more words than at any time in history through text messages. People are writing all the time, and yet they think they can’t write, because they’re so intimidated by the structure. When you provide a structure in the form of a list, there is, in a utopian way, a real chance to democratize the power of writing, by taking away what people are wrongly intimidated by.

In a way, a list is about what’s not on it. Do you think it relies on a reader to provide a certain amount of context? It has to mean something to other people, right? Well, we’re getting into really fundamental questions of art and literature. If a work alienates a reader, should that be counted against it? I respect people that love “Ulysses,” for example, but I’m on the other side of the argument. “Ulysses” would be better if it seduced me. But I probably have the minority point of view.

A definite theme in your work is a sort of meta-ness. Your father was a ghostwriter, which is a meta profession itself. Did that influence your own desire not just to become a writer, but to become famous? Ooh, yeah. I remember seeing “Iacocca,” which I knew he co-wrote, and yet only Lee Iacocca’s photo was on the cover. I thought, Why isn’t my dad on the cover? I wonder if there was some subconscious desire to be that guy on the cover, and to sort of be a famous writer and avenge my father’s anonymity.

Between your father’s work and your own, you know what the act of writing looks like. Do you think that TV and movies get it right? It drives me crazy sometimes when people play writers. It feels as though a very disproportionate number of main characters are writers, because that’s what the writer knows. Fair enough. But nothing bothers me more in a movie than an actor playing a writer, and you just know he’s not a writer. Writers recognize other writers. Ethan Hawke is too hot to be a writer.

He has published several books, hasn’t he? No, I’m not saying he didn’t write them. I’m saying I’ll never look at Ethan Hawke and think, That guy looks like a writer. A full-time professional novelist in perfect shape, perfect everything? You could tell me he secretly wrote Shakespeare. I just don’t buy it on-screen.

I read that you said that when you wake up in the middle of the night with an idea, a part of the thought is “I want to write it and test it out, and then see if other people love it the way that I do in that moment.” My father gave me advice when I started stand-up. “How about you say only what you like and keep only what they like?” Don’t say anything you don’t love, don’t share anything you don’t love, don’t make anything you don’t love, but if you love it, try to make it popular. My goal is not to make popular things. My goal is to make the things I love as popular as I can make them.

What’s the most unpopular thing that you’re a fan of? Well, I loved “Mr. Show.”

You have a famously complicated relationship with Mindy Kaling — but I think that’s the only romantic relationship I have ever heard you mention. Is that a deliberate strategy, to keep your other relationships private? Wow. I love that. I’m honored that anyone would speculate on a conspiracy theory involving me.


