


BALTIMORE — While the sky continued to fall around the Yankees on Wednesday afternoon, with Alex Rodriguez headed to the disabled list, leaving a dilapidated offense without one of its seemingly sturdiest pillars, Brian McCann sat calmly at his locker.

So as fans clamored for Nick Swisher or Aaron Judge or Rob Refsnyder — or anyone — to be recalled from the minors and inserted into the lineup, and as the Yankees sank further in the American League East, McCann displayed a been-around-the-block demeanor.

If there was angst swirling around the Yankees over their floundering start to the season, it had not enveloped at least one corner of the visitors’ clubhouse.

“I know this,” McCann said. “Baseball is such a long season. You’re going to have courses through the season where you play bad baseball. It just so happens that ours is April, and it’s magnified. We still have a long time to get this turned around, and that’s got to be our mind-set in here. We’ve got five months to continue to climb up the standings, and that’s just the reality to it.”

The Yankees took at least one step in the proper direction later Wednesday, getting a turn-back-the-clock performance from C. C. Sabathia and three R.B.I. from McCann to break open a tight game and beat the Baltimore Orioles, 7-0. The victory ended a six-game losing streak that had, at times, seemed more like 60.

“We felt like we clinched a playoff berth,” left fielder Brett Gardner said.

Nobody was more responsible for ending the skid than Sabathia, whose previous trip here had ended with his walking into Manager Joe Girardi’s office last October and leaving the team to check into an alcohol rehabilitation clinic. Sabathia, who had done little so far this season to engender much confidence that he could be more than a passable fifth starter, threw seven shutout innings — the first time he had done that since April 7, 2013.

“It’s a big contrast from me standing in this locker room the last time,” Sabathia said. “To be able to go out and get us a win felt great.”

Sabathia, who allowed six hits and two walks and struck out six, used his cut fastball and his fading changeup to work both sides of the plate. He also mixed in his slider and his two-seam fastball. His pinpoint control left the Orioles so off balance that when he worked up in the zone with his marginal fastball, he was able to sneak it by, as he did in striking out Joey Rickard and Manny Machado.

Sabathia induced three inning-ending double plays and escaped a first-and-third, one-out fix in the fifth by striking out Rickard with a letter-high 87-mile-per-hour fastball before retiring Machado on a liner to center field.

“When he has all his pitches, he has two going one way and two going the other way, which I think is important,” Girardi said. “And they’re all different speeds.”

When Sabathia struck out Caleb Joseph to end the seventh inning, he strode slowly off the mound as Yankees fans behind the third-base dugout rose to applaud. He descended the dugout steps into a swarm of teammates offering high-fives.

Sabathia was not the Yankees’ only encouraging performer. Jacoby Ellsbury reached base five times, one of them on a single that began the three-run rally in the sixth that broke a scoreless tie. McCann contributed with a run-scoring single in that inning and a two-run double in the eighth, when the Yankees put the game out of reach.

Carlos Beltran started the four-run rally in that inning with a ringing double.

It was a bounty of riches of a kind rarely enjoyed this season by the Yankees, who had been held to two runs or fewer in 13 of their first 24 games. The only real cause for concern at the end of the night was the condition of Gardner, who took a bases-loaded fastball from the Orioles’ Dylan Bundy on his right elbow in the eighth. It was a painful way to drive in a run.

Gardner left the game in the ninth. Although X-rays were negative, it seemed unlikely that he would play Thursday when the Yankees finish their road trip.

On Wednesday, Beltran replaced Rodriguez as the designated hitter, a role that Girardi said would also fall to Teixeira and McCann.

The decision to replace Rodriguez on the roster with reliever James Pazos raised eyebrows, but Girardi said it was in deference to the Yankees’ schedule. On Tuesday, they began a stretch in which they play 20 games in 20 days, and Girardi emphasized that they might not carry 13 pitchers through that entire stretch.

Also to be determined is the extent of Rodriguez’s injury. Although a magnetic resonance imaging exam Wednesday morning revealed a strained right hamstring, Rodriguez had not yet been examined by the team doctor, so little was known except that he will spend at least 15 days on the disabled list.

Rodriguez, 40, said it was important to let a hamstring injury heal because rushing back could lead to a more serious setback. He missed 13 games with a hamstring injury in 1996, when he was 20.

“I felt pretty good coming in, but the machine doesn’t lie,” Rodriguez said. “You’ve got to be smart; there’s a lot of baseball to be played this year.”


