


This fall, the Jewish Museum will present what it’s billing as the first United States exhibition devoted to the work of Pierre Chareau, a French Modernist who for decades fell out of the mainstream history of art and architecture.

The show, “Pierre Chareau: Modern Architecture and Design,” is scheduled for Nov. 4 through March 26, 2017, and is the third exhibition in the museum’s design trifecta, which began in March with “Isaac Mizrahi: An Unruly History” and continues on May 6 with the opening of “Roberto Burle Marx: Brazilian Modernist.”

Chareau (1883-1950) was a prolific designer and art collector in France, and best known for his Maison de Verre (“Glass House”), a landmark building in Paris created in 1928 in collaboration with the Dutch architect Bernard Bijvoet and the metalworker Louis Dalbet.

He also owned works by artists like Picasso, Mondrian and Modigliani — but sold them when he fled Nazi persecution and moved to New York, where he worked in exile in the 1940s. In 1950, Chareau proposed a solo show of his work at the Museum of Modern Art and was turned down. He died that same year.

Chareau’s work, with the exception of the Maison de Verre, has remained in obscurity since his death, said Esther da Costa Meyer, a professor of modern architectural history at Princeton and the curator of this Jewish Museum exhibition.

Through Chareau’s furniture, light fixtures and interiors, Dr. da Costa Meyer said, she hopes to “present him for the first time to American audiences.” The show will also include examples of the artworks he collected, as well as designs for the Maison de Verre.

The exhibition design by Diller Scofidio + Renfro — the architecture firm behind the High Line and Lincoln Center renovation — will in some ways aim to evoke the Maison de Verre. “We want to make the house come alive,” Dr. da Costa Meyer said.

And, given the show’s venue, “Pierre Chareau: Modern Architecture and Design” will also include Dr. da Costa Meyer’s recent scholarship about Chareau’s Jewish identity, which she said “has never been explored before.”


