


When the Mets hired Sandy Alderson as their general manager in 2010, the team was in the dumps: on the field, a series of disappointing seasons; off the field, severe financial constraints caused in part by the owners’ investments with Bernie Madoff. Six years later, the Mets are flying high, thanks largely to Mr. Alderson, 68. A former Marine lieutenant and Vietnam veteran with a Harvard Law degree, he brought stability and confidence to the front office, and in 2015 the team made a surprise trip to the World Series. This year the Mets have had a solid start, with a talented pitching staff and one of the best records in the National League. Mr. Alderson, who lives in a penthouse on the Upper East Side of Manhattan with his wife, Linda, and their 11-year-old golden retriever, Buddy, is Zen about it. “My job,” he said, “is like watching the tide come in and out — observing, ruminating, trying to figure out where the team is and where we should make changes.”

NEWS CLIPS I wouldn’t say I’m addicted to my iPhone, but the first thing I do when I wake up is grab my phone and check the news clips about the Mets. I need to be aware of the odd story out there about the team or me. Buddy gets up at 5 a.m., so Linda or I feed him, and the other one sleeps until he’s ready for a walk. Everything is timed around when Buddy needs to go out.

STEPPING OUT Buddy needs his morning walk, but I do, too. I try to get in 10,000 steps a day. They say what you can measure, you can improve. I have a Fitbit, but just the basic model — nothing fancy. We walk to Central Park, around the Reservoir, if it’s nice, or down to Carl Schurz Park or the East River Promenade. It’s the great thing about where we live. That, and the fact that I can get to Citi Field by car in 20, 25 minutes.

DINER DASH There are two diners nearby that we like to go to, the Mansion and Gracie’s. If I’m feeling like pancakes, we go to the Mansion. If it’s corned beef hash, we go to Gracie’s. I’d say there are Mets fans on staff at both places. Either way, sometimes I get recognized, but it’s not all that often. Buddy gets recognized more often. He’s kind of a celebrity, because a few years back I talked about him on Twitter.

QUEENS OR NEW JERSEY If the Mets are playing at home, I try to be in the office by noon. If there’s no game, or they’re away and I’m not traveling with them, then we get in the car and head to New Jersey to see my daughter and her family. Of course, northern New Jersey is Yankee territory. But they’re making converts, one friend at a time.

GAME-DAY WALKABOUT I try not to think about the specific game. It’s in the hands of Terry Collins, our manager. Before the game, sometimes I’ll talk to the media, usually after we’ve come back from a road trip. I’m big on leadership by walking around — being seen, without being intrusive. I don’t go into the locker room; that’s the players’ space.

VERY SUPERSTITIOUS I like to start watching from the executive box. Sometimes Linda or my kids and their children will join. Once the game starts, I don’t have any influence over what happens. I’m just like the average fan. But sometimes there are a lot of people in the box, and my blood pressure goes up. So I’ll go from the box back to my office over right center field. I can still see the game, but I’m a bit superstitious. Everyone in baseball is, to some extent.

LOW-KEY EVENING After the game I’ll usually talk with Terry a bit, just to go over a few basic things. If everything goes right, I’ll be back at home by 6. Sometimes we’ll watch TV. Right now I’m binge-watching “Better Call Saul.” Or else we’ll get dinner with my son and his wife. They live in the West Village. We’ll go to the Waverly Inn and see real celebrities. We saw Danny DeVito once! But usually we’ll stay on the Upper East Side. We’re like a lot of New Yorkers. There might be great restaurants in other parts of the city, but we’re just not interested in hopping in a car to go someplace. In a three-block radius, we probably have 20, 30 restaurants. Why go anywhere else?


