


Four days after the elaborate release of “Lemonade,” an intensely personal album about infidelity, self-worth and forgiveness, Beyoncé debuted many of her new songs live on Wednesday at Marlins Park in Miami. The concert was the opening night of her 41-date “Formation” world tour, which runs until August.

Beyoncé drew largely from her most recent albums for the two-hour set, mixing the hurt and anger of songs from “Lemonade” — “Sorry,” “Hold Up,” “Don’t Hurt Yourself” — with more euphoric numbers from her 2013 self-titled release. Deeper throwback numbers included “Baby Boy,” “Naughty`` Girl” and, from Destiny’s Child, bits of “Survivor” and “Bootylicious.”

The show also featured a partial singalong to “Purple Rain” by Prince, who died last week at 57, and wove in musical cues from the catalog of Beyoncé’s husband, Jay Z, whose role in “Lemonade” has been a source of speculation and gossip since its release. (The album was initially available exclusively on Tidal, the streaming service he owns.)

“I want to dedicate this song to my beautiful husband,” Beyoncé said before closing the show with “Halo,” a ballad from 2008. “I love you so much.” (Jay Z, while present at the show, did not appear onstage.) She added, “Prince, thank you for your beautiful music.”

“Lemonade,” Beyoncé’s sixth solo album, was released without much warning on Saturday night after the premiere of an hourlong HBO special based on the music, building on the tactics used in her last surprise release, in December 2013. In a review, Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote, “Marital strife smolders, explodes and uneasily subsides” on the album, which “probes betrayal, jealousy, revenge and rage before dutifully willing itself toward reconciliation at the end.”

At the show, Beyoncé called the hopeful “All Night” her favorite song from “Lemonade,” urging fans to echo its opening lines: “Found the truth beneath the lies/And true love never has to hide.”

Although the concert mostly avoided the explicitly political content of her Black Panthers-inspired Super Bowl appearance this year, the tour merchandise included T-shirts that read “BOYCOTT BEYONCÉ,” an allusion to the backlash she received from a Miami police union after the release of the single “Formation” in February. (“Anyone who perceives my message as anti-police is completely mistaken,” Beyoncé told Elle in a rare interview. “I am against police brutality and injustice. Those are two separate things.”)

DJ Khaled, the local Miami producer and Snapchat personality, opened the show with an array of special guests including Rick Ross, Lil Wayne, 2 Chainz, Future and Trick Daddy.

A full review will follow.


