


WASHINGTON — The White House on Thursday said that it expected intelligence officials to provide a classified briefing to Donald J. Trump after the Republican Party formally nominates him for president at its convention in July, a tradition for major party nominees dating back to 1952.

Asked whether President Obama was concerned about Mr. Trump’s receiving classified information in light of the presumptive Republican nominee’s reputation for making unfiltered comments, Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said the president would leave it to intelligence professionals to decide what to share with him.

“Those are assessments that will have to be made by the intelligence community, and the president has full confidence in the ability of our professionals in the intelligence community to make those assessments,” Mr. Earnest said.

Mr. Earnest referred reporters to comments last week by the director of national intelligence, James R. Clapper Jr., who said that the Obama administration intended to continue the practice of briefing the nominees from both major parties this electoral cycle.

“We have already established a plan for briefing both candidates when they are named, and certainly after November when the president-elect is known, and it gets more intensive,” Mr. Clapper said. “We’ve already got a team set up to do that, and a designated lead, who is not a political appointee.”

Mr. Clapper added that he and other Obama officials would not be involved other than ensuring “that everybody gets the same information and that we do comply with the needs to protect sources and methods and comply with security rules.”

Mr. Trump said in an interview with The Washington Post this week that he was eager to start receiving regular classified intelligence briefings.

But that overstates the information Mr. Trump will receive. After the party conventions and before the election, the major-party nominees for president and vice president receive only a one-time intelligence briefing about the state of the world.

Michael J. Morell, a former deputy C.I.A. director, who regularly briefed Mr. Obama before retiring in 2013, said the postconvention nominee briefing would last several hours. The idea is to “get them to understand that they have now stepped into a bigger world” in which foreign allies, adversaries, and neutral parties are paying close attention to whatever they say, and that their words may have broad consequences, he said.

Michael E. Leiter, a former director of the National Counterterrorism Center, provided the terrorism portion of the briefing that Mr. Obama received after he became the Democratic nominee in 2008. Mr. Leiter said the post-convention briefings lay out a significant amount of important and sensitive information.

“You are not trying to give them a tactical update on the issues of the day, but to lay out the full panoply of issues that they are going to face; the good, the bad, and the ugly of what the world looks like and what implications there may be going forward,” he said.

Both former officials said that the postconvention briefing for nominees would contain top secret information, but not a discussion of the sources and methods used to gather it, or any description of covert operations. After the election, the president-elect receives regular briefings with more sensitive information.

Still, while Mr. Earnest suggested that responsibility for what to tell Mr. Trump would reside with the intelligence community, Mr. Morell said that there was no formal rule permitting intelligence officials to share classified information with presidential nominees who lack security clearances. Each cycle, he said, the current president signs off on the briefings.

The handling of classified information is already part of the campaign because of the investigation into Mr. Trump’s likely Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, over her use of a private email server to conduct State Department business while secretary of state. Mr. Trump has called her use of the server “criminal” and said she should not be permitted to run for president because of it.

Aki J. Peritz, a former C.I.A. intelligence analyst, wrote a column in March raising concerns about the prospect of giving Mr. Trump classified data.

“Trump shoots from the hip and speaks in a stream of consciousness,” Mr. Peretz said. “If you give him a particularly juicy piece of intelligence, what is to stop him from talking about it that afternoon?”

Just this week, on the morning of the Indiana primary, Mr. Trump told Fox News viewers that it had been “reported” that Ted Cruz’s father, Rafael Cruz, was with Lee Harvey Oswald shortly before Oswald shot President John F. Kennedy. His source for that baseless claim turned out to be an article in The National Enquirer, a supermarket tabloid.


