


PARIS — François Pinault, the French luxury goods magnate and the owner of Christie’s auction house, announced plans on Wednesday to create a private museum in Paris to display his vast collection of contemporary art.

Mr. Pinault, who turns 80 this summer, said at a news conference at City Hall in Paris that the museum would be housed in a former commodities exchange building that dates to the 18th century near the newly built La Canopée in Les Halles. Tadao Ando, the Japanese architect, who redesigned the Palazzo Grassi in Venice into a museum that Mr. Pinault opened in 2006, will oversee the renovations, he said.

Mr. Pinault said it was his ambition “to contribute to the brilliance of Paris in an original and strong way.”

The announcement confirmed a report this month about the museum in Les Échos, a French daily owned by LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the luxury goods conglomerate led by Mr. Pinault’s longtime business rival, Bernard Arnault. Mr. Arnault and the Louis Vuitton Foundation opened a private museum for contemporary art in 2014 in a soaring structure on the edge of Paris designed by Frank Gehry.

He said the museum, which is still not named, would be completed by the end of 2018.

Mayor Anne Hidalgo of Paris said at the news conference that the city had negotiated an agreement to find a new location for the current occupants of the exchange, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry. In 1949, the city gave the building, which dates to 1767 and was originally a market for the storage and trade of wheat, to the group for the symbolic price of one franc.

With the announcement, it appears that Mr. Pinault will realize an ambition that was thwarted in 2005, when he abandoned plans to build a museum in a former Renault plant on the Île Seguin in the Seine. At the time, he complained about the bureaucratic hurdles, saying that “eternity is for art, not for projects designed to serve it.”

He ended up restoring two historic palazzos in Venice to display parts of his collection, which has more than 3,000 works.

The son of a farmer in western Brittany and a high school dropout, Mr. Pinault built his fortune from a wood importing business, sold it and invested in the luxury goods business that evolved into the holding company Kering, which now includes the Gucci Group, Saint Laurent and Balenciaga. He did not visit a museum until he was an adult, developing a taste for contemporary art and collecting over the last 40 years.

Since ceding control of the business in 2003 to his son, François-Henri Pinault, he has concentrated on expanding and editing his collection with a team of art advisers that includes Jean-Jacques Aillagon, a former culture minister and former chairman of the Pompidou Center. Many of Mr. Pinault’s works were acquired directly from artists such as Damien Hirst and Jeff Koons, and he has backed young, up-and-coming artists such as Danh Vo.

On Wednesday, Mr. Pinault’s son stood by him, smiling as he announced plans for the museum. The father said he hoped it would last for generations with his family’s support.

“We are really proud of what he has accomplished,” François-Henri Pinault said, “and we are absolutely enthusiastic about this Paris project.”

According to reports earlier in the French news media, Mr. Pinault had been exploring other historic sites in the city, near the Champs-Élysées and in the Marais district.


