


INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 28 about Germany’s struggle to integrate some of the million migrants who flooded the country last year — and to decide whom to deport — referred imprecisely to the handwritten grammar notes taped to the walls of a meeting room in Cologne where asylum interviews are conducted. They listed conjugations of German verbs, not declensions (that term is used in reference to nouns, adjectives and other parts of speech, but not verbs).

NEW YORK

An article last Sunday about how two Manhattan buildings would look if they were built according to current codes misidentified the law that resulted in the development of so-called dumbbell tenements throughout New York City. It was the Tenement Law of 1879, not the Tenement Law of 1901.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Friday about an appeals court’s rejection of an arbitration clause that prevented employees of Epic Systems, a Verona, Wis., health care software provider, from pursuing class actions misstated the location of the court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in some copies. It is in Chicago, not Madison, Wis.

WEEKEND ARTS

A report in the Inside Art column on Friday about an exhibition of work by the artist Simon Starling at Japan Society in Manhattan, using information from the society, referred incorrectly to the exhibition. It is the second solo exhibition there that features a non-Japanese artist, not the first. (Ansel Adams’s work was exhibited there in the 1980s.)

•

Because of an editing error, a list on Friday of noteworthy television premieres this summer misstated the starting date of Season 4 of “Survivor’s Remorse” on Starz. It is July 24, not June 24.

•

Because of an editing error, a picture caption on May 20 with a television review of “Julian Fellowes Presents Doctor Thorne,” on Amazon Prime, misidentified an actor. He is Harry Richardson; Frank Gresham is the name of the character he plays. The caption also misspelled the given name of an actress. As the review correctly noted, she is Stefanie Martini, not Stefani.

SCIENCE TIMES

A report in the Observatory column on Tuesday about Nile crocodiles in Florida misstated the distance that a tagged crocodile traveled between 2012 and 2014. It was 18 miles, not 29.

TRAVEL

Because of a production error, this weekend’s Travel section omits an article intended to accompany a cover article about Vladimir and Véra Nabokov’s cross-country journeys to the American West, during which the author researched “Lolita.” The omitted information, with suggested reading material and lodging for such a trip, can be found at nytimes.com/travel.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


