


TULSA, Okla. — A former volunteer sheriff’s deputy in Oklahoma who said he mistook his handgun for his stun gun when he fatally shot an unarmed suspect last year was sentenced on Tuesday to four years in prison.

Judge Bill Musseman gave the deputy, Robert C. Bates, 74, a wealthy insurance executive, the maximum penalty recommended by jurors who last month convicted him of second-degree manslaughter.

Mr. Bates fatally shot Eric C. Harris on April 2, 2015, while working with Tulsa County sheriff’s deputies during an illegal gun sales sting. Mr. Harris, who had run from deputies, was restrained and unarmed when he was shot.

The shooting, caught on video, led to several investigations. The inquiries revealed an internal memo questioning Mr. Bates’s qualifications and showed that Mr. Bates, a close friend of the sheriff’s, had donated thousands of dollars in cash, vehicles and equipment to the sheriff’s office.

Judge Musseman said the prison sentence was a “legitimate and moral consequence” of Mr. Bates’s actions. He said he took into account Mr. Bates’s failing health and dozens of letters written by members of the community asking for leniency.

Defense lawyers, who said they would appeal, argued that methamphetamine found in Mr. Harris’s system, along with his cardiac health, caused his death.

But prosecutors said that Mr. Bates, who is white, was guilty of culpable negligence. One deputy testified that Mr. Bates had apparently dozed off minutes before Mr. Harris, who was black, fled from deputies.

After the shooting, an outside consultant hired to review the Sheriff’s Department determined that it suffered from a “systemwide failure of leadership and supervision” and had been in a “perceptible decline” for more than a decade. The reserve deputy program was later suspended.

Weeks after Mr. Harris was killed, an internal sheriff’s office memo from 2009 was released by a lawyer for Mr. Harris’s family that alleged superiors knew Mr. Bates did not have enough training but pressured others to look the other way because of his relationship with the sheriff and the agency.

A grand jury also investigated the department and indicted the longtime sheriff, Stanley Glanz, in September, accusing him of failing to release the 2009 memo. He resigned on Nov. 1.


