


In January, I moved from Washington to our facility near Baltimore, where we assemble military launch systems. My office is on the northeast corner of the fifth floor, with views overlooking Martin State Airport. Today, it’s a joint civil-military facility, but formerly it was the plant airport of the Glenn L. Martin Company, one of the heritage companies that make up Lockheed Martin. The Maryland Air National Guard is a tenant at the airport, and we occasionally see other flyover operations, including the United States Navy’s Blue Angels.

I love roses. The ones on my desk are silk, but they infuse my office with warmth and joy. People think they are real. When they walk in and say they are beautiful, I say, “and they’ve looked like that for the last five years.”

I lead a diverse and geographically dispersed team, so a lot of our collaboration is done virtually with video teleconferencing. But when I have members of my senior leadership team here, we have discussions at the small table in my office.

One of my current projects involves a class of the Navy’s littoral combat ships that operates close to shore. Next to the credenza are some shells fired from one of these. The model of an orange Coast Guard helicopter reminds me of the customers we support.

In a previous vice president position I held at Lockheed, we were working to obtain a contract for an information technology project from the British Ministry of Justice. It took two years, but we won it. On one of my trips there, a ministry staff member gave me a miniature barrister’s wig as a memento of our working together. He had done quite a bit of research and educated me on its history.

My office is full of family photos. I have some older ones of my two daughters on my blotter, protected by glass. It makes me think back to their early years.

One of my former groups suggested we might use a 3-D printing machine in supporting National Science Foundation research in Antarctica and NASA’s international space station. The NASA staff might need to print a space wrench while on the space station, for example. I used to say we had the longest supply chain ever. When we first bought the printer, my staff gave me a 3-D robotic hand that one of them printed.

I have a small refrigerator in an alcove with bottled water and assorted soft drinks for guests. A set of mugs embossed with photos of my daughters sits on top. I have a big family and I love making items like this as holiday gifts for them.

We are a sponsor of the Children’s Inn at the National Institutes of Health, a residence for families with children in research studies. In 2014, I chaired one of their art contests and bought one of the children’s pictures that was auctioned that night. It’s unfinished, which I found heart-wrenching. I wondered if the child had a setback.

In 2008 I received a Comet Award for communications excellence at Lockheed Martin. It means a lot to me because my staff nominated me for placing importance on open communications and employee engagement.

I keep a book called “The Prayer of Jabez: Breaking Through to the Blessed Life,” by Bruce Wilkinson, in my office. I’m a person of faith; being a servant leader is part of my style. If you do the right thing, good things will happen in life and in business.


