


FRONT PAGE

An article on May 20 about the setback to Egypt delivered by the fatal crash of an EgyptAir Airbus A320 that was flying from Paris to Cairo omitted a reporting credit. Kareem Fahim and Nour Youssef contributed reporting from Cairo.

INTERNATIONAL

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on May 20 about the inauguration of Tsai Ing-wen as president of Taiwan referred imprecisely to the “92 Consensus,” which Chinese state media outlets have called on Ms. Tsai to endorse. Under the consensus, the Kuomintang and China’s ruling Communist Party currently recognize Taiwan and mainland China as part of “one China,” but each has its own understanding of what that means; it is not the case that the parties have yet to reach the consensus and that doing so would bring them to a common understanding.

•

An article on May 20 about the nomination of Binali Yildirim, a loyalist to the conservative president of Turkey, as the country’s new prime minister quoted incorrectly from comments by Mr. Yildirim about his opposition to the mixing of genders at Istanbul Technical University. He said, “I was taken aback by the sight of young people, girls and boys, sitting together on the lawn,” not “sitting on the together on the lawn.” (Mr. Yildirim was confirmed on May 22.)

•

An article on May 19 about an uproar in Iran prompted by a visit by Faezeh Hashemi, daughter of a prominent ayatollah, to a female leader of the persecuted Bahai religious minority misstated the number of Bahais worldwide. There are five million to seven million, not about 300,000.

•

An article on May 18 about a decision by Australia’s national science agency to dismiss John Church, a pre-eminent scientist in the field of rising global sea levels, as part of deep cuts at the agency misstated part of the name of the San Diego research center where Dean Roemmich is a professor. Mr. Roemmich, who said the dismissal was “absolutely inconceivable,” is with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (not “Institute”).

NATIONAL

An article on Tuesday about the victims of the Orlando nightclub massacre misidentified the country where the family of one victim, Jerald Arthur Wright, lives. It is Ecuador, not Colombia.

•

An article on Monday about the sexual assault case at Stanford University referred incorrectly to the punishment for Brock Turner, the assailant in the case. Under California law, Mr. Turner will likely be released — not paroled — after three months in county jail. (There are no parole procedures for county terms.)

•

An article on Tuesday about global reaction to an attack on a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., that killed 49 people misspelled the given name of a Chinese lawyer who expressed concern about her daughter, a student at the University of Minnesota who was at the Shanghai airport when explosives were detonated there on Sunday. The lawyer is Gao Junlan, not Gao Junlian.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Monday about a gathering at the Stonewall Inn in New York after the mass shooting in Florida misidentified a gay rights case that the Supreme Court decided a year ago. It was on the right to same-sex marriage — not the Defense of Marriage Act, which it struck down in 2013.

SPORTS

Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about Molly Huddle’s competing in the New York City Marathon in November referred incorrectly to the events she is hoping to compete in at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics. They are the 5,000 meters or the 10,000 meters — not “middle-distance events.” (Middle distance typically refers to the 800 and 1,500.) The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.

THE ARTS

The Books of The Times review on June 8, about “End of Watch” by Stephen King, the third novel in his “Mr. Mercedes” trilogy, misidentified the book in the series in which Holly attacks Brady Hartsfield and there is an attempted attack on a stadium. It is the first book, “Mr. Mercedes,” not the second, “Finders Keepers.”

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


