


Last fall, the furniture designers Christian Lopez Swafford and Lauren Larson of the brand Material Lust found themselves rethinking the role of textiles in living spaces. “They don’t have to be rugs on the floor,” Larson says. “They can be hung on a wall as tapestry or arranged on your bed.” She and Swafford recruited the Brooklyn-based artists To Dødsfall to collaborate on Derma, a series of all-black, handwoven works inspired by bodily irregularities. The centerpiece, suspended from the ceiling in Material Lust’s newly opened experimental salon, Annex, is a sculptural and richly textured blob (and “a nod to Louise Bourgeois,” Swafford says), made from scraps of leather, alpaca, wool and cotton, and stuffed with old punk T-shirts. It’s called “Tumor I,” and it really brings together the room.

Material Lust officially launched in 2014, though Swafford and Larson — both raised by artist mothers and Parsons School of Design graduates, and a couple — began the project long before then as a creative release relegated to nights and weekends. Larson describes a set of Him and Her coat racks as their “coming-out moment.” “Those were inspired by a Man Ray photograph,” she says, “but it led us to look into primitive motifs — like hieroglyphics and alchemical symbols.” Swafford says, “We’re concerned with where our work fits in the historical context of design,” and mentions their end-goal to make heirlooms. However, the basis of Material Lust is “Oppressionism,” or exploiting sexual or uncomfortable imagery.

These days, that provocative tension isn’t just in their design — at one point, Swafford says “Some people see a ram’s head, some people see breasts, some people see ovaries,” in reference to a sconce — but also in their relationship to the design world. Upset by how they think gallerists work — “almost like vampires, finding new talent, churning out objects, getting as much money as they can and, as soon as it stops selling, getting rid of the designers,” Swafford says — the duo opened Annex on the Lower East Side, to celebrate an insular group of makers supporting one another.

On display is the aforementioned Derma collection; a large-scale oil painting of a leather jacket sleeve by the tattoo artist Tamara Santibanez; selections from Swafford and Larson’s private label, Orphan Work; and, of course, Material Lust pieces, old and all-new. It contains Swafford and Larson’s first upholstered items, a lush, oxblood-colored sofa and an off-white, pleated club chair; the Her coat rack stands alongside the door; the ram’s head sconce illuminates a corner; an alchemy-inspired vanity and side table, and the Vanishing Twin chair (a cousin to the Pagan chair, which garners Instagram comments claiming the designers are devil worshippers — to their amusement) comprise another setup; their scifi-looking Crepuscule floor lamps are available in updated finishes; and a walnut Crawl chair with hands hints at what’s to come.

In February, after they dismantle the living room, Swafford and Larson plan to install a folksy bedroom full of hand-carved furniture and a different set of artistic partnerships. And, “eventually, we want to take over more spaces in the building, even if they aren’t next to each other,” Swafford says. “We could have two or three things going on at a time — more rooms and concepts of rooms that don’t exist,” an unorthodox yet fitting home for their extraordinary wares.


