


Ever since Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park opened on Roosevelt Island four years ago, City Hall has been arguing with the nonprofit group that built and runs the park over whether it is fully accessible to disabled people.

The little-known dispute has now reached an impasse, with the de Blasio administration declaring categorically that the park is not accessible and needs to be fixed.

President Roosevelt himself would have been unable to use a 12-by-60-foot sunken terrace at the southernmost end of the memorial. He was paralyzed from the waist down and depended on a wheelchair for mobility.

“There is a particularly tragic irony in a park commemorating the legacy of Franklin Delano Roosevelt — one of this country’s great historical figures with a disability, and a role model to so many — that is not completely accessible to those with disabilities,” said Natalie Grybauskas, a spokeswoman for Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat.

Though the park is open and operating, the city is withholding a permanent certificate of occupancy and hundreds of thousands of dollars in financing until the matter is resolved.

Board members of the Four Freedoms Park Conservancy said that the sunken terrace was a design device created to enhance the views from an open-air enclosure known as the Room, and that those views could be enjoyed by anyone in a wheelchair or motor scooter.

“From that vantage point, the individual has full access to the visual experience intended by architect Louis Kahn,” the conservancy said in a 2014 analysis.

The Room has granite walls on three sides. In place of a fourth wall is an uninterrupted vista of the East River. This barrier-free illusion is made possible by the sunken terrace beyond, called a “ha-ha” for the jolt of pleasant surprise it induces.

The ha-ha is like an invisible fence, ensuring that no one can fall or jump from the Room into the river. Though it can be reached by steps on either side of the Room, the sunken terrace was not intended by Mr. Kahn to be a destination itself, said James Stewart Polshek, a conservancy board member who studied under Mr. Kahn.

“You feel like you’re in a pit,” Mr. Polshek said.

Mr. Kahn, one of the most influential American architects of the 20th century, designed the park shortly before his death in 1974. That was long before the Americans With Disabilities Act took effect, prohibiting discrimination in any public accommodation on the basis of disability. But construction of the park did not begin until 2010, long after the act was enforced.

Both the conservancy and City Hall say their positions are supported by the law. It seems possible to interpret the welter of complex accessibility regulations under the federal act either way.

The remedy favored by the de Blasio administration would be to install ramps on either side of the Room.

Sally Minard, the president and chief executive of the conservancy, said the use of ramps had been thoroughly explored. But it would present its own drawbacks.

Railings would have to be installed along the ramps and behind benches that are now sheer slabs of Mount Airy granite, set off against monumental blocks of the same whitish-gray stone. This would compromise the Kahn design, which the conservancy tried to follow as faithfully as possible.

“The consequences of doing it — for everyone’s experience — seemed to outweigh the value,” Ms. Minard said. “The decision was not seen as a problem because we believed then, as we do now, that the park more than meets the requirements for accessibility for those with a disability, and that the memorial as a whole is A.D.A. compliant.”

She said that the conservancy was prepared to continue operating as it does now, under a temporary certificate of occupancy, while acknowledging that the missing financing from the city is “meaningful.” (City Hall puts the figure at $900,000, the conservancy at $600,000.)

It is unclear at the moment how or when the issue will be resolved. For the time being, the lowest level of the ha-ha is closed to everyone.

At least one advocacy group, the Roosevelt Island Disabled Association, supports the conservancy’s viewpoint. The conservancy has helped guide and finance the association’s own project on the island, the F.D.R. Hope Memorial, which features a sculpture of President Roosevelt in a wheelchair.

Jim Bates, the president of the association, who uses a wheelchair and motor scooter, said there is a better view from the Room above than there is from the ha-ha below because of a wide parapet wall at the end of the sunken terrace.

“The upper level is ideal,” Mr. Bates said. “You can see everything.”

The Kahn design had already been modified in subtle ways to improve accessibility, Ms. Minard said.

Loose gravel, a difficult surface for wheelchairs and motor scooters, was originally specified for two allées. Instead, the conservancy installed a polypropylene honeycomb grid of two-inch hexagonal voids filled by gravel clusters held together by resin. It also raised the level of the cement and gravel fill between the 4-by-4-inch granite pavers in the promenades on either side of the island to offer a smoother ride for those on wheels.

Ms. Minard said both modifications had been made in consultation with Victor Calise, the commissioner of the Mayor’s Office for People With Disabilities.

Accessibility has generally improved at the south end of the island because of the memorial, Mr. Bates said. It had been rutted parkland before — hostile terrain for a scooter. “I probably got stuck three or four times going into that area,” he said.


