


Patrick Wilkes-Krier was warming up on Thursday morning for his United States Open debut next to the defending champion, Jordan Spieth. Suddenly he stopped, leaned his club against his golf bag and, with a few loping strides, appeared at the side of his father, James Krier, who had been wordlessly watching him. Krier nuzzled his father’s neck and gave him a kiss. After a long embrace, he pulled away, retraced his steps and resumed hitting balls.

Wilkes-Krier, 32, turned professional in 2006 after a college career at Ball State. He won once as a pro, on the Hooters Tour in 2008. After several years toiling in the sport’s hinterlands, playing in what amounts to its Class AA and AAA circuits, he decided, with his father’s advice, to become a full-time coach at Kendall Academy in Ann Arbor, Mich., and a part-time competitor.

”I’d always dreamed of my dad watching me in a major,” said Wilkes-Krier, who shot 78-72 and missed the cut by four. “And it was devastating to me when I stopped playing full time because I thought that would never happen. I just wanted to make sure he knew I was enjoying it. I just wanted to make sure that he knew I was having a blast and that a big reason I was having such a good time is that he was here with me.”

That moment on the range, Wilkes-Krier’s father said, was the mother of all early Father’s Day presents.

Golf is a gift fathers and mothers can give their sons and daughters and get back more than they could have imagined. The process is its own reward, each round a half-day exercise in communicating and connecting. It is sport as an antidote to the 140-character world and 40-hour (or more) workweek.

Rory McIlroy, who inherited his love for the game from his father, Gerry, secured his first major title on Father’s Day at the 2011 United States Open at Congressional Country Club. His favorite memory from that day, he said, was walking up to the 18th green and spotting his father along the rope line beside the hole. When their eyes met, they communicated all that needed to be said about love and sacrifice and pride.

“At least I didn’t have to worry about a Father’s Day present that year,” McIlroy joked, adding, “Didn’t have to go and get a card or anything.”

Golf can strengthen the parent-child relationship, but sometimes it distorts it. Jason Day’s father taught him how to play the game but also to fear falling short of expectations. Day, the world No. 1, described his father, Alvyn, who died when he was 11, as “very abusive.” He said his father would hit him if he failed to reach the target score that was established before the round.

“It was brutal,” Day said, adding: “If he was alive still, he’d be the one thing that would be holding me back. He was one of those guys that would be out here on the range every day. He’d have a lot of input into what I was doing. Whether it was good advice or bad advice, it didn’t matter; I’d probably have to listen because he was very strict that way.”

Day, 28, insists that he will not raise his 3-year-old son, Dash, the same way. In their relationship, he joked, the son is the one setting the target for the father.

“He always says to me before each tournament, ‘On Sunday, make sure you win because I want to kiss the trophy,’ ” Day, a three-time winner in 2016, said, laughing.

His dynamic with his son is different from what he had with his father. “We discipline Dash when we need to,” Day said. “I understand that. But I want to be one of those dads who’s fun to hang out with. I’m more of a kid myself when I’m hanging around Dash.”

The Days’ me-and-my-best-friend vibe comes across loud and dear in a video commercial made by Day’s equipment sponsor, TaylorMade. The promotional spot, coordinated to air around Father’s Day and casting Dash in a starring role, shows video clips of him hitting golf balls and running onto the green to get swept into his father’s arms.

“When I first saw the commercial, especially at the end when he says, ‘I love you, Daddy,’ I just started crying,” Day said, adding, “I replay it over and over and I cry every time.”

Some kids have baby albums; Day’s son will have a video scrapbook of his childhood.

“It’s so neat,” Day said. “He’s going to have those memories to look back on. We’re going to have that commercial forever, and when he’s my age, he’ll be able to see when he was little he ran out on the greens when I won tournaments.”

A rich life is made of such memories. “That’s what it’s all about,” Day said.

For Phil Mickelson, the United States Open and fatherhood are inexorably entwined. In 1999, less than 24 hours after he recorded the first of his record six runner-up finishes in the tournament, his wife, Amy, delivered the couple’s first child, their daughter Amanda Brynn.

From a swaddling infant, his firstborn has grown into an independent young woman. Mickelson spoke with pride recently of a school-sponsored trip she recently took to a remote mountain village in India to teach impoverished children. “I learn from her,” Mickelson said. “I could go on and on about her.”

Three years ago, Mickelson left Merion, site of the 2013 United States Open, to fly across the country to attend Amanda’s eighth-grade graduation in San Diego, returning a few hours before his first-round tee time.

On Tuesday, his middle child, Sophia Isabel, graduated from eighth grade, and Mickelson was there. He flew home on Monday after a practice session at Oakmont and returned after the Tuesday night ceremony. He had a private jet at his disposal, which no doubt made the commute more manageable. But one got the feeling from listening to Mickelson that he would have hitchhiked if that were what it took to be there for his daughter (his third child, Evan Samuel, is two years younger than Sophia).

“I think any parent would, if they had a chance to be at their child’s eighth-grade graduation,” Mickelson said. “I think that’s a big milestone.” He added, “It’s just important for me to be there for that stuff.”

Mickelson, who turned 46 on Thursday, recognizes that traveling three time zones and back in 24 hours is not the ideal preparation for someone trying to complete a career Grand Slam with a victory here. But such is the juggling act that is fatherhood.

“Those are the differences that I’ll have, where a lot of the young guys in their 20s don’t really have to think about it yet,” said Mickelson, who missed the cut after the second round. “But it’s also brought me some of the greatest joy in my life.”

Wilkes-Krier tried between eight and 10 times, he said, to qualify for the United States Open. He skipped the local qualifier last year because it coincided with the birth of his first child. In his first attempt to qualify as a father, he finally succeeded. A coincidence? Wilkes-Krier thinks not.

His wife, Whitney, reminded him of a vow he made last year to their daughter, Azalea. “I picked her up and said, Next year on this day we’ll be at the U.S. Open,” Wilkes-Krier said. With his eyes glistening, he said, “It’s special.”


