


The first poster I can remember tacking to my wall as a boy was of the actress Kristy McNichol. I was 7, she was 18. In “Crush,” a collection of essays edited by Cathy Alter and Dave Singleton, in which authors reflect on their earliest infatuations with celebrities, I learned that the fiction writer Dave Housley shared my object of affection. “She resembles a very cute, very good Little League pitcher,” he writes of now looking back at McNichol on the cover of Dynamite in 1978. “There is no denying it: My first celebrity crush kind of looked like a boy.”

Perhaps only Stephen King would describe the actress Kim Novak as “heavy-eyed and feral” (sounds more like Cujo than a heartthrob). Jodi Picoult plotted running away from home at 6, and left a note: “I have gone to live with Donny Osmond. Don’t try to come after me.”

Osmond and David Cassidy (Singleton’s daydream of choice) seem the very definition of crushes; the cartoon character Speed Racer less so, but he set Jamie Brisick’s heart revving. Kermit Moyer fell for Tarzan, in part for the “animal keenness of his senses.” Well sure, when you put it like that.

Others, through some combination of luck, taste and sophistication, got things perfectly correct straight out of the gate: Paul Newman (Barbara Graham), Mikhail Baryshnikov (Kimberly Dawn Neumann), Deborah Harry (David Keplinger).

Quotable

“I remember when I was a little kid, after it snowed I would go around the yard and find the best clumps of ice, and save them in a little pile, icicles from the roof or deck or whatever. Memoir is a way for me to do that with experiences.” — Augusten Burroughs, in an interview with Vogue

Guarding Against Bloat

David Means has published short stories in every major literary journal, has won several prizes for the form and has four collections of stories to his name, starting with “A Quick Kiss of Redemption” in 1991. For a long time, it seemed that he would never publish a novel. But now he has. Jay McInerney reviews “Hystopia” this week.

The novel’s appearance casts a different light on a 2010 headline on The Paris Review’s blog: “Why David Means Is Not a Novelist.” What did he say when asked about it back then? “When I’m down — and even Alice Munro admits that at times she feels guilty for not writing a novel — I just start a defensive mantra: Blake never wrote novels. Whitman never wrote novels. Carver’s work is still around,” Means said. He left open the possibility of longer work, but with caveats. “Big and wide can mean expansive and comprehensive, but it can also mean bloat,” he told the magazine. “A move from stories to novels for me would be partly a matter of not giving in to the temptation to abuse the form.”


