


RE: ON SPORTS

In his debut column, Jay Caspian Kang explored how baseball’s treatment of black and Latino players has diminished its place in American culture.

Jay Caspian Kang makes good points regarding the lack of minority participation in baseball, both in college and professionally. However, there is another factor to be considered: The lure of huge money in the last 20 years and immediate entrance into both the N.B.A. and N.F.L. is something that is hard to resist for a youngster, no matter what ethnicity.

No matter how good a young baseball player is, he is going to spend at least three to five years in the minor leagues. There is no instant gratification in baseball. If they do make it to the major leagues, even the best of them won’t realize “big” money for a number of years because of the way the collective-bargaining agreement is structured. It is a path that demands a whole lot of patience and faith. For many people that is a quaint notion these days. Mike Fernandez, Richardson, Tex.

For the first time ever, Jay Caspian Kang writes, all Major League Baseball teams are required “to hire a full-time Spanish-language translator.” This, however, only hinders a solution to the alleged problem of M.L.B.’s subpar promotion of its Spanish-speaking stars. The reason Spanish-speaking players don’t get more media exposure is quite simple: They don’t speak or speak very limited English.

Perhaps the fault lies with athletes who choose not to learn to communicate with fans in their native tongue. Two examples come to mind, both Cuban émigrés who played for the Chicago White Sox. Minnie Minoso, a Sox star of the 1950s, spoke English poorly but did the best he could, serving as a team ambassador for many years after his playing career ended. The other, Alexei Ramirez, starting shortstop for about eight years prior to this season, never, to my knowledge, tried to learn the language and probably isn’t any better known now than he was before he joined the team. Another cause of the alleged underexposure may lie with the media, which seems less inclined to interview non-English speakers who rely on interpreters. Talk radio poses a special problem. More translators or interpreters won’t help. John F. Hogan, Chicago

I am constantly amazed by the tortured lengths some authors go to find latent racism. Now it seems that anyone objecting to things like bat flipping, which some consider taunting, is racist. Kang’s description of baseball’s having “a racially coded obsession with tradition” is as shameful as it is sophomoric.

I often wonder if uber-liberals and the perennial victims get a list of words each day that other extremists have decided now mean not what they’ve always meant. Why can’t one put off by showboating simply be put off by showboating? Why does it have to take on other meanings? Further, how would the author explain black and Hispanic former players who are also offended by these displays? Vincent Mooney, Poughkeepsie, N.Y.

RE: BECOMING EUROPEAN

James Angelos traveled to a small German village to monitor how it struggled to resettle a small group of refugees, as its country struggles with the challenge of transforming itself into a republic of shared ideals.

Where is the United States? Where is Canada? Where is Australia? Where is Russia? Why should all the burden fall on Western Europe in general and Germany in particular? Let there be no doubt, it is a burden, both economically and culturally. Yes, we all wish to do what is right and humane, but we ought to do this collectively and responsibly. Further, there is a considerable challenge with this particular group of immigrants/refugees, most notably misogyny and homophobia.

These people should be made aware that any attack on European lifestyle would not be tolerated — even at the risk of deportation to Syria/Afghanistan, regardless of any risk to their own lives. It is almost as if these people are trying to recreate the cultural environment that has led to their very own misfortunes in their countries of origin. This is something we cannot and should not accept!

It’s one thing to be humane in the editorial room of The New York Times. It’s a different story on the streets of Germany. Kiefer D. Arends, Mannheim, Germany

As a German living abroad, this article provides an impartial impression of the conundrum faced by my fellow citizens: Should we be glad to move out of the shadows of a horrible past by an unrestricted welcome of refugees, or should we be afraid of losing prosperity and “Western” values to an “Eastern” culture? I’m optimistic. Despite strong resistance from the political right, the majority of Germans will opt for helping those who need help. American support of Germany’s resurrection after World War II is not forgotten. P. Bartelmus, New York


