


MADRID — Roger Federer withdrew from the Madrid Open on Monday because of a back injury, continuing a year of misfortune in tennis in which many of the game’s brightest lights have flickered.

He said he injured his back in practice on Saturday, forcing him to cut that session short and to cancel scheduled practices over the next two days. He had been scheduled to play his first match on Wednesday evening; a possible meeting with Rafael Nadal loomed in the quarterfinals.

“I’m very disappointed, to say the least,” said Federer, who has won here twice since the event switched to clay in 2009. “I was hoping to play. I changed my schedule around and practiced well in Switzerland before coming here. This is not really what I wanted to do, come here and do a press conference about pulling out. It’s been a tough year.”

In the first week of this season, Federer reached the final at Brisbane despite struggling with flulike symptoms. He then reached the semifinals of the Australian Open, losing to the eventual champion Novak Djokovic, but partly tore the meniscus in his left knee in a household accident shortly after the tournament.

After having surgery on his knee, Federer withdrew from three subsequent tournaments, in Rotterdam, Dubai and Indian Wells, Calif., but added the Miami Open to his schedule. He traveled to that tournament but withdrew before his first match with a stomach ailment. In April, he played his first matches in three months in Monte Carlo, where he reached the quarterfinals.

Federer, who has overcome similar back problems before, said he hoped to play next week at the Italian Open in Rome. Having avoided serious injuries for most of his career, he expressed perspective on the sudden deluge of setbacks that have dampened his season.

“If you look at the pullouts this year, many I couldn’t even do something about it,” he said. “If it’s clear that you can’t play and you know it’s the best for your career and for the future of the season, it doesn’t feel like such a big letdown.”

He added: “I mean, I am frustrated. I’m a little sad, of course, not to be playing here. At the same time, I’m still upbeat that the back issue is going to go away.”

Federer is not the only tennis superstar who has been absent for much of the season. Serena Williams, who withdrew from Madrid on Friday because of flulike symptoms, has played in only three tournaments since September. Maria Sharapova competed this year only at the Australian Open, where she tested positive for meldonium, a newly banned substance. She accepted a provisional ban in March as she awaits a hearing.

While Sharapova’s return date is unknown, Federer has his sights set on the next Grand Slam event, the French Open, which begins May 22.

“The goal has always been that I’m at 100 percent when the French comes around, hopefully,” he said. “Hopefully. If not, then, latest, Wimbledon. That’s always been the case ever since I stepped into the operation room, to be honest.”

Though short on matches, Federer said that he was satisfied with how he had been able to train and that he did not discount his prospects at Roland Garros, even though he has won the title there only once.

“Time will tell if I’ll be fine at the French,” he said. “I do believe I have chances there.”

Referring to Nadal, he went on: “The problem in the past has been more Rafa than the clay itself. If you take Rafa out of the equation, I would’ve had an amazing clay-court career. I still, with him, I’ve had a great clay-court career. It’s still the surface where I did grow up, still a surface I feel comfortable on. I’ve spent maybe most time of my life on that surface.”

While confident on clay, Federer said the lack of external pressure could also help his cause.

“I probably can enter the French Open or clay-court season with maybe a little bit less expectations because you guys expect less from me,” he said. “I’m not the overwhelming favorite in those events, and sometimes that can be helpful, too. I still put pressure on myself wanting to go far and deep and play well. Same thing this year. Maybe something can happen at the French? If not, still a huge summer ahead.”


