


One could be forgiven for experiencing some whiplash from the spate of intense auctions this week. One moment, the art world was bemoaning Sotheby’s poor Impressionist and modern sale on Monday evening as confirmation of a softening of demand. The next moment, the art world was celebrating Sotheby’s successful contemporary sale on Wednesday evening as evidence of the market’s resilience.

All in all, these disparate results suggest more about the categories than they do about the overall art climate. “Contemporary,” Todd Levin, an art adviser, said on Thursday, “is now the market barometer.”

Christie’s Impressionist and modern sale on Thursday evening confirmed this perspective, with a noticeably subdued sale of works by Monet, Modigliani and other late-19th and early-20th-century masters that raised $141.5 million, including fees, from 51 lots, 86 percent of which sold. This was just above the low estimate for the sale, $134 million.

The result was in striking contrast to Sotheby’s contemporary sale the night before, when a selling rate of 95 percent and a total of $242.2 million confounded doomsayers.

Dealers say the auction boom of the 1980s has left the inventory of so-called Imps and Mods in short supply. “It’s getting harder to find great material from pre-1945,” Abigail Asher, an art adviser, said. “There’s a constant supply of fresh works in the contemporary market, and that creates energy. In Impressionist and modern, there are so few great fresh things.”

With collectors reluctant to test the market with trophies, and auction houses increasingly cautious with guarantees, there were no obvious mega-lots at Christie’s on Thursday. Proceeds from the sale — which included only one guarantee — were down 30 percent from the $202.6 million achieved at the equivalent sale last year.

But the sale did have its moments. Here are a few of them.

FADING IMPRESSIONS With an estimate of $25 million to $35 million, Claude Monet’s signed and dated 1919 canvas “Le Bassin aux Nymphéas” was the most highly valued lot in the sale, though the original canvas had been divided down the middle sometime before 1944, perhaps by a dealer, to create two separate paintings. (The right side of the painting was for sale on Thursday; the left portion is in the Tel Aviv Museum of Art.)

Never offered at auction before, this work — 40 inches square — had not been included in any of Monet’s major museum shows. “There could be nothing, hopefully, easier to sell,” Laura Paulson, Christie’s deputy chairwoman, said before the auction. It sold for $27 million to Glenn A. Fuller of the London gallery Gladwell & Patterson after two Christie’s staff members struggled to connect with telephone bidders. “I robbed that lot,” Mr. Fuller said afterward. “It was an absolute steal.”

Monet’s smaller, once-vaunted Impressionist paintings from the 1870s have become far less fashionable. The atmospheric 1874 canvas “Au Petit-Gennevilliers,” featuring sailboats on the Seine, sold for $11.4 million, below the $12 million low estimate. The auction high for an 1870s Monet is $41.5 million, in 2008.

A MODEST MODIGLIANI Modigliani’s “Jeune Femme à la Rose (Margherita),” from 1916, was considerably more modest than the full-frontal study by the artist with which Christie’s set an auction high of $170.4 million last fall. “She’s a clothed, albeit still seductive, Modigliani,” Ms. Paulson said. “Not everyone wants to live with a nude.” She called the $12 million to $18 million range “a real come-and-get-me estimate.” But the piece barely made the low valuation, selling for $12.8 million with fees.

PICK OF THE PICASSOS Picasso, the only artist who has sold for more than $100 million three times at auction, remains the godfather of Imps and Mods. But in the absence of any serious guarantees, the auctions were short of prime works by the artist, perhaps the most famous of the 20th century. The best that Christie’s had to offer was “Homme Assis,” a five-foot 1969 canvas from Picasso’s “Musketeers” series, estimated at $8 million to $12 million. From the estate of the Philadelphia property magnate Kenneth Kaiserman and his wife, Susan, the painting sold for $8 million with fees to the Nahmad family of dealers.

KAHLO DISAPPOINTS Frida Kahlo’s typically enigmatic 1939 oil-on-metal painting “Dos Desnudos en el Bosque (La Tierra Misma),” showing two naked women in a Surrealist landscape, was one of the few museum-quality works in the sale. It was included in Tate Modern’s 2005 show devoted to the artist. Kahlo, whose work rarely comes to market, is usually offered at Latin American sales, but Christie’s hoped to expose the painting to a wider audience. Demand was muted and the painting sold on one bid at the low estimate: $8 million with fees, an auction high for the artist.

FINAL WORD Jay Vincze, Christie’s international director and head of the Impressionist and modern department, said: “There are a lot of buyers out there and they’re after good stuff, but it’s a very selective market going forward, and you need to be even more careful about curating your sales. You can’t pull the wool over people’s eyes.”


