


A detective called Tom Ligon last month with the news. There had been an arrest in his case, three years later.

Mr. Ligon, 75, was surprised. He had heard the police had a suspect in custody back in 2013, but nothing more, and he let it go. After all, the man who had tried to break into his home that day, Aug. 1, 2013, hadn’t even succeeded. In fleeing down the Manhattan street, the intruder had lost a shoe that was kept as evidence.

“A lady policeman went and put her hat on top of the shoe, because it was starting to rain,” Mr. Ligon recalled on Thursday.

The police were able to extract DNA from the shoe, and they matched it to a man arrested on May 19 after what they described as a crime spree.

Mr. Ligon thinks back on that day in 2013 with more nostalgia than fear or outrage. It has been a long three years — longer, actually, since his wife died in 2009, leaving him alone in the Waverly Place apartment in Greenwich Village that they had shared for decades.

Mr. Ligon is an actor whose past roles include a bit part as a nephew on an episode of “The Honeymooners” and a longtime part as Lucas Lorenzo Prentiss on the soap opera “The Young and the Restless.” But recent years have found him working less and eating and drinking more, and they have taken a toll.

Walks in the neighborhood have became difficult. He has to stop at stoops or storefront benches once or twice on every block to catch his breath. He used to laugh at guys who hit 300 pounds. His livelihood depended on his looks, and he wondered how someone could let that happen. Then last month he stepped on a scale and looked at the number: 292.

“I just let go of the reins a little too much,” he said.

When the detective called last month, it was a welcome distraction from the visits to the doctors, the breathless walks. The suspect was identified as Kenneth Wiley, 34, with addresses listed in Manhattan and Brooklyn. The police, working backward, said Mr. Wiley was linked to many more crimes than the one at Mr. Ligon’s home.

On May 4, a woman on a downtown subway train said she was approached by a man who asked her: “How do I get to the C train? I need to go to the hospital because of my stomach.” The woman saw that he was fondling himself, and told him to get away, the police said.

The police said the same man had approached different women on different trains the same way, on March 28, April 1 and, on April 29, twice, all in Manhattan. The suspect in the encounters was identified as Mr. Wiley, the police said. He was also linked to 16 burglaries, the most recent on May 18.

The first: Aug. 1, 2013, at the apartment on Waverly Place.

Mr. Ligon was napping that day when he heard a noise in the next room. Someone was climbing through his window.

He sprang from the bed, crossed the room in a flash, let out a piercing shriek he learned from a Kendo master and punched the intruder in the face.

Later, Mr. Ligon saw video of that moment. “He ran down the block, and you see me stick my head out,” he said, recalling what a street surveillance camera recorded. “‘I’m ready for my close-up, Mr. DeMille.’”

The detective on the phone said the police would like Mr. Ligon to consider testifying at trial, if necessary.

Sure, he replied.

Things are looking up now. Mr. Ligon landed a voice-over job that would have been impossible to imagine when he was on “The Honeymooners.” It was for a new podcast series called “Songonauts,” about a band that travels through time.

He is working on losing weight. That number on the scale scared him straight, he said. He stopped drinking. No carbs for a while. More walking, no matter how many times he has to stop. He thinks of the 100 pounds he wants to shed as two bulging suitcases he carries everywhere.

“I need my luggage to get lost,” he said.

He thinks back on that day at the window, he said, and it makes him feel good. About what he did and what he hopes to be able to do again.

“It makes me not afraid,” he said.


