


“Interventions”

(Northern Spy)

The music of Horse Lords can partly be explained as a result of musical information leveling itself out over the last 20 years, through scholarship and Internet power, so that nothing is much less accessible than anything else.

In a certain light, on “Interventions,” the Baltimore quartet’s invigorating third album, this is an instrumental dance band — guitar, bass, drums, alto saxophone — with a lining of post-punk energy. But it’s also borrowing sounds and techniques from Mauritanian guitar music, free jazz, classical minimalism and other places. On a track called “Intervention I,” there’s a passage of electronic beeps that sound like pure tones from audiology tests.

Horse Lords is also way into hocketing, where the individual notes of a continuous melody are played in quick sequence by different instruments. (Historically, it’s either a widespread or a specialized interest. You hear it in medieval music, in various sub-Saharan African traditions, in some of Wynton Marsalis’s ambitious jazz compositions and in Dirty Projectors records.) In general, musicians are individually playing only part of a rhythmic cycle or a melodic line. On “Interventions,” fast, repeated riffs become collaborative acts, over drones and strong skeletal grooves that stress the upbeat, and the whole thing is held together by concentration, timing and willpower.

It’s that tensile feeling of daring — can they pull this off? — that lifts “Interventions” above what it might look like on paper, a hypothetical combination of traditions or styles.

This music feels very live, shivering with energy. Its best tracks run from five to nine minutes — long enough to feel gradual developments — and are full of imprecisions. Sometimes tempos speed up or slow down slightly. Owen Gardner, the guitarist, has altered the frets on his guitar (and on Max Eilbacher’s bass) to accommodate the ancient just-intonation tuning system; the result is some warp and dissonance in his hammered, fast-picking patterns. Andrew Bernstein, the saxophonist, uses circular breathing to create continuous tones and patterns; in “Encounter II / Intervention II,” recorded in a deep-echo space with the microphone far away from the horn, he works harmonics, key-clicking and weird timbres into a sustained improvisation, which leads without pause into the guitar tone that begins “Time Slip.”

Underneath all this is a kind of dance guarantee: Mr. Eilbacher and the drummer Sam Haberman holding it down, playing, for lack of a better word, funk.


