


BERLIN — In his first comments since stirring a diplomatic dispute with Turkey, a German satirist said that Chancellor Angela Merkel “filleted and served me with tea” to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, who is trying to prosecute the comic over an obscene poem.

Jan Böhmermann, who has become Germany’s most notorious comic since his sketch lampooning the Turkish leader aired on March 31, joined a chorus of critics who have accused Ms. Merkel of curtailing free speech.

Ms. Merkel was the chief proponent of a European Union deal with Turkey that has helped stem the chaotic flow of migrants to Europe. Mr. Erdogan’s cooperation is still needed to enforce that deal.

In return, he has sought billions of dollars in aid and other concessions, including looser visa restrictions for Turkey’s citizens. The European Union proposed visa-free travel for Turks on Wednesday.

But Mr. Erdogan has also used his new leverage to pursue his critics in Europe, extending a crackdown at home that has already targeted more than 1,800 opponents for insulting him.

“It is not my job to make art that Angela Merkel, or whoever, always finds agreeable,” Mr. Böhmermann said in an interview with the German weekly Die Zeit, published on Wednesday. “On the contrary, my role is to ask questions, start debates and draw attention to problems.

“The chancellor is not allowed to waver when it comes to freedom and human rights,” he added. “But instead of this she filleted me and served me up with tea to a despot suffering a nervous breakdown.”

Ms. Merkel initially called the poem satirizing Mr. Ergodan “deliberately offensive,” something Mr. Böhmermann himself concedes.

The chancellor has since apologized, telling reporters that “in hindsight it was a mistake” to make the remarks and has repeatedly stressed the importance of freedom of expression and the press in Germany. But she allowed a lawsuit filed by Mr. Erdogan against the comedian to proceed under a 19th-century law that allows prosecution in Germany for insulting a foreign leader.

Mr. Böhmermann’s interpretation of the proceeding was slightly different. “Now, there will be a trial in the name of the people: Humor vs. the German government,” Mr. Böhmermann said in the interview, which was complete with emojis. “I’m eager to see who will get the last laugh.”

In the uproar that followed his poem, Mr. Böhmermann took an extended break, canceling his regular show, which is to air next week at its regularly scheduled time. After receiving threats from Turkish nationalists, he was forced to live under police protection. He canceled an appearance at an awards show and his social media pages went dark for six weeks.

But on Wednesday, Mr. Böhmermann was back. Several hours after the interview was published in Germany, he spoke to his fans live over social media from New York, where he was supposed to appear on “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore,” but said he had changed his mind because he wanted his first television appearance to be in Germany.

One fan asked about the hardest part of his hiatus. “The worst was having to keep my mouth shut!” he said, munching on melon slices.

Mr. Böhmermann’s fans have remained loyal throughout the affair, but the reactions on Wednesday from German media outlets that had rushed to his defense several weeks ago were decidedly mixed.

Tanit Koch, the editor in chief of the mass-circulation Bild daily, took the comedian to task for failing to accept Ms. Merkel’s willingness to recognize, and apologize for, her mistake.

“Jan Böhmermann can allow himself to be ironically irresponsible from the safety of the TV screen. Angela Merkel does not have that luxury,” Ms. Koch wrote, pointing out that the chancellor “has had to deal with the very real and unironic diplomatic disaster that Böhmermann’s poem created.”

“In doing so,” Ms. Koch added, “she made mistakes which she readily admitted to. That showed her class. However, Jan Böhmermann has shown no such stature.”

Stefan Kornelius, the foreign editor of Süddeutsche Zeitung who wrote a biography of Ms. Merkel, questioned whether Mr. Böhmermann had actually paid attention to her remarks, in which she said she was letting the judiciary rule on whether the comedian had gone too far, stressing that such decisions “are not a matter for the government.”

“Of course Merkel made a mistake,” Mr. Kornelius said. But he supported her decision to give the courts the final word on whether the poem crossed the boundaries of satire or should be protected as freedom of speech. “In the end, in Germany, it will be up to a court to decide that.”


