


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Rachel Donadio, The Times’s European Culture Correspondent, describes her recent interview with Svetlana Alexievich.

When the Belarussian writer Svetlana Alexievich was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature last October, I remember thinking to myself: Who is this person? How can I reach her — in Minsk! — on deadline? And why does the Swedish Academy, which awards the Nobel Prize, always insist on picking such obscure writers? Why not Philip Roth already?

Then I started reading Ms. Alexievich’s work. Not long into “Voices from Chernobyl,” her oral history of the 1986 nuclear disaster in Ukraine, I was so overcome with emotion that I had to take breaks. I stopped reading it before bed. The testimonies of radiation poisoning victims were so raw and yet so beautiful, so unsentimental, so pure. This, I realized, was a remarkable writer. Somehow I’d missed the book when it appeared in English in 2006, translated by Keith Gessen.

Few things give me more joy than helping writers and artists whose work I admire reach a wider audience. And so, early this month, I found myself sitting with Ms. Alexievich in a breakfast room high up in a hotel overlooking peaceful Gothenburg, Sweden, where the day before, in a lovely house on a tranquil lake, there had been an illuminating conference on her work organized by the University of Gothenburg.

I’ve been lucky enough to interview a few other Nobel laureates for The Times. In 2005 I met V.S. Naipaul at his home in Wiltshire, England — I was terrified before that one, as he had a reputation for being fearsome — and last year in Paris I spoke to Patrick Modiano, the 2014 winner, who was reluctant to elaborate on the biographical details of a life he had fictionalized in his work.

I was relieved that Ms. Alexievich, one of the most seasoned interlocutors on earth, was so easy to talk to. She was frank, and friendly. I was lucky that Kajsa Öberg Lindsten, who had translated three of Ms. Alexievich’s books into Swedish, and her husband, Johan Öberg, were able to translate during the interview. They were old, close friends of the author’s, and the atmosphere was relaxed and intimate, helping to ease the language barrier. (It was these Swedish translations, along with translations into French and German, that had caught the attention of the Swedish Academy.)

We discussed “Secondhand Time,” Ms. Alexievich’s 2013 oral history of post-Soviet Russia, which appears in an English translation this week. That book had also blown me away. Her conversations with people across the former Soviet Union had such pathos and complexity — the history of a country and an era is told through each precious life. Bela Shayevich, who translated the book into English, told me she had suffered from “secondhand trauma” in the process, and I’m not surprised.

At the conference the day before, I liked how Sara Danius, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, had described Ms. Alexievich’s work as “an anthropology of the human heart, with the field work carried out in the Soviet Union.” Ms. Danius added: “What she has achieved is an atlas of emotion, tracing the inner life of an entire epoch.”

Several decades ago, after her sister died young, of cancer, Ms. Alexievich had an existential crisis and gave away all her books to the journalism school at the University of Minsk, where she had studied, keeping only those by Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky and Chekhov. Like those authors, her work also has great moral urgency. It poses many questions, and doesn’t answer them. (Over the succeeding years she acquired more books, she said.)

In our conversation, Ms. Alexievich said she thought that Russia had missed many opportunities in the 1990s, and had never been able to embrace democracy. “We thought that we could show supermarkets on the television from the West, and people would understand what freedom is. But that didn’t work,” she said. “No one had an idea of what freedom was, not the Democrats, or the others.”

Today, she thinks that anything is possible in Russia, where images of the wars in Ukraine and Syria fill the airtime on state television. “I think that Russian television today is committing a crime,” she said. “There’s a kind of hysteria propagated by television. They keep the people in a mobilized mood. The question of why do we have such a bad life is not raised, because Russia is shown encircled by enemies.”

But she also made us laugh. She said that after she won the Nobel Prize, a journalist in Belarus interviewed some of her former teachers, who were fearful of the government and didn’t know what to say. They showed disdain for her and her work. Then, she said, the journalist went to a collective farm and talked to tractor drivers. “And they said, ‘Yes we know her and we have her books and she writes the truth. And now that she has the prize, please, tell her to buy us a new tractor!’”


