


Replacing a space filled with nostalgia is not an easy feat for a developer in New York. So it’s no surprise that there was a bit of an uproar when William S. Macklowe presented plans to replace Bowlmor Lanes in Greenwich Village, which was one of the city’s oldest bowling alleys and a popular party spot until it closed in 2014, with a new condominium building.

Longtime bowlers, revelers and area residents, aided by a neighborhood preservation group and local politicians, said Mr. Macklowe’s plan for a residential tower some 300 feet high would not fit in with the surrounding neighborhood, which is largely defined by low- to midrise historic structures.

In a recent interview, Mr. Macklowe said his tower at 21 East 12th Street is “as of right,” meaning it is legally allowed to be built as designed given the existing zoning designation, but he added that the project’s architect, Annabelle Selldorf, gave careful consideration to the building’s design.

“While I’m always appreciative of opposite points of view, I really believe we are building something that will contribute to the community,” said Mr. Macklowe, who asked the architect to design a building with stone and not glass. “But time will be the judge.”

He opted to make the building, which sits just outside the Greenwich Village Historic District, 22 stories high, but set back the tower on a wide base that will house retail space. The residences in the tower will begin on the third floor.

The apartments have been designed so that each will be a corner unit, which allows for more natural light, especially since the tower is set back from the street, said Ms. Selldorf, who recently was given a medal of honor by the New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects.

“I think recessing the residents back from the street equates to a more balanced footprint,” Ms. Selldorf said. “I understand the height is a concern to some people, including myself, but I designed the building to be discreet, simple and elegant, which fits the neighborhood.”

Andrew Berman, the executive director of the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, said he was disappointed with city officials for ignoring the organization’s plea to rezone the area and essentially prohibit such a tall structure.

There will be a total of 52 units in the sandstone-colored building, all with large casement windows that measure 8 feet by 5.6 feet. Units range from one-bedrooms, starting at $2.4 million, to four-bedrooms, priced from $8.25 million. There will be two penthouses and two townhomes, priced between $11.5 million to about $16 million. Each townhome will come with a private, 3,200-square-foot garden, according to Mr. Macklowe.

Ms. Selldorf said she liked that “residents and neighbors will be looking down on a green space” that will be built on the roof of the retail base.

Although Greenwich Village as a whole sees little new, ground-up construction, the northeastern pocket has seen some activity over the last several years as former parking garages have been turned into residences and new restaurants have popped up on the side streets.

“The location is A-plus-plus,” said Beth Fisher, a senior managing director of the Corcoran Sunshine Marketing Group, which is handling sales for the building. “It’ll attract people looking for new infrastructure and amenities that are not part of older properties.”

The building, which is also developed by Goldman Sachs, is steps away from Union Square and will also include a basement parking garage for residents. Other amenities include a residents’ lounge area that is attached to an outdoor terrace and a children’s playroom.

The more than 13,000 square feet of ground-floor retail space will help “clean up the streetscape,” Mr. Macklowe said.

Sales are expected to begin next month, with the building scheduled to be completed by late 2017 or early 2018.


