


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this article, Jessica Bennett, who writes for The Times’s Style Section, provides a behind-the-scenes look at her experience writing a profile about Paula Broadwell, David Petraeus and the afterlife of a scandal, and about questions over language.

It was another story, about another woman and another label, that prompted Paula Broadwell to email me a year ago. I was in Vancouver at the time, finishing up a profile of Monica Lewinsky, who gave a TedTalk about her struggle to overcome her own shame.

When Ms. Broadwell’s email appeared in my inbox, I knew I recognized her name but I couldn’t place it. I typed it into Google and immediately knew why she was emailing. “Ohhhhhhh,” I thought to myself. “That Paula Broadwell.”

Ms. Broadwell is the former lover, and biographer, of Gen. David Petraeus, once the director of the C.I.A. and the commander of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, who resigned in disgrace after it was revealed that he and Ms. Broadwell had had an affair. She is also a Harvard-trained counterterrorism expert, an accomplished athlete and an Army reservist. But most people don’t remember those things. Because, much like Ms. Lewinsky, Ms. Broadwell has been defined by the collection of seemingly scarlet letters that spell out “mistress.”

It’s a word for which there’s no male equivalent — something I hadn’t thought about until Ms. Broadwell pointed it out. When she got in touch, in March 2015, Ms. Broadwell’s name was back in the news: the result of Mr. Petraeus’s sentencing, in her hometown, on a misdemeanor charge of mishandling classified material. In article after article, Mr. Petraeus was called a “general,” a “former commander” and, as The Times put it, “the best-known military commander of his generation.” The same Times article referred to Ms. Broadwell as “the mistress.”

Ms. Broadwell complained to The Times’s then-public editor, Margaret Sullivan, who wrote a column about the word, and advised The Times to hasten its departure. But Ms. Broadwell’s plight had only begun. She told me she had reached out to Diane Sawyer, Katie Couric, Norah O’Donnell and other female journalists she thought might help her expunge the word from their broadcasts. Inspired by her experience, she was working to found a nonprofit organization focused on gender bias in the media.

As a student of language, I was sympathetic to her cause. As I am a feminist, the double standard apparent in the way she was characterized was clear: He was the revered general who made a grave mistake; she was a psycho homewrecker who, as many often reminded her, had “brought the general down.” Was her plight honorable or self-serving, or somewhere in between?

Ms. Broadwell and I began corresponding over several months. She forwarded me Google alerts, and updates on her nonprofit. We met in New York when she was in town for a West Point reunion. For more than a year, we traded emails and text messages and phone calls: Did she want to speak publicly, would her lawyers allow it, and when? Was she ready to tell her story, and what was the best way for her to do it? Did she trust me to tell it?

Ms. Broadwell’s story had all the elements of a good, newsy profile, but it also highlighted something larger. For many years, I had noticed the way biased language crept into the pages of the publications I wrote for. I noticed it in the physical descriptions of female leaders, the questions asked of female sources (“How do you balance it all?”), in qualifications (“female comic”), or the things a reporter would choose to highlight in the first paragraph of an obituary.

Sometimes it was the tiniest things: the use of a male pronoun to describe a hypothetical involving an entrepreneur or business executive, when we know that women, too, can fill these roles (but too often don’t). Or it is “mistress,” as well as the battery of other words that were used to describe Ms. Broadwell: “shameless,” “self-promoter,” “curvaceous,” a femme fatale “seemingly immune to the notion of modesty” who “got her claws” into the general. (He, by contrast, was “the consummate gentleman and family man,” the “honorable” general who had “let his guard down.”)

Language is a diagnostic, the linguist Robin Lakoff once told me — it reflects the beliefs of a particular moment in time. And yet. As Ms. Sullivan noted, we are long past the era of Anne Boleyns and Cleopatras. Sometimes it takes a story to give outdated language a necessary kick out the door.


