


An Iranian refugee who set fire to himself to protest Australia’s policies toward people who try to reach its shores by sea died on Friday.

The man, who was 23, was airlifted from the small island nation of Nauru to a hospital in Brisbane, Australia, where he “tragically died today from his injuries,” Australia’s Department of Immigration and Border Protection said in a statement.

The man’s name was not released, but Australian news reports have referred to him as Omid.

Australia-bound migrants who are intercepted at sea are detained in Nauru or Papua New Guinea, often for extended periods, under agreements Australia has with those countries. On Wednesday, officials from the United Nations refugee agency were visiting Nauru, where 450 men, women and children were being held, when the man set himself on fire there.

“This is how tired we are,” the man said before igniting the fire, according to witnesses quoted in news reports. “This action will prove how exhausted we are. I cannot take it anymore.”

His self-immolation, along with a court ruling on Tuesday in Papua New Guinea that declared the detention agreement unconstitutional and forced the closing of a detention center there, has renewed criticism of Australia’s policy toward boat migrants, whom the government refuses to allow to settle in Australia.

The policy appears likely to become a point of contention for Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull’s conservative coalition government in the next general election. Mr. Turnbull told lawmakers on April 20 that he intended to hold the election on July 2.

Mr. Turnbull defended the refugee policy on Thursday, saying that Australians “cannot be misty-eyed about this” and “have to be very clear and determined in our national purpose,” the Australian Associated Press reported.

But on Friday, a senator from the opposition Greens party, Sarah Hanson-Young, wrote on Twitter: “Omid, the refugee who set himself on fire has died. And yes Prime Minister I am misty-eyed as I can only imagine his loved ones are too.”

The Australian government and the largest opposition party, Labor, are in general agreement that migrants who try to reach Australia illegally by boat should not be allowed to settle in the country. Even those who are officially recognized as refugees are processed offshore and offered resettlement in other countries, not Australia.

Australian leaders say their tough stand has sharply decreased the number of attempted arrivals by boat, which in the past sometimes ended in shipwrecks and drownings.

But the death of Omid has prompted increased public calls in Australia for a more compassionate treatment of refugees. A candlelight vigil was held for the man in Brisbane on Thursday night, and protests are planned in Sydney and other cities over the weekend.

Critics say the policy of holding asylum seekers and refugees indefinitely on Pacific islands is inhumane.

“This is another senseless and tragic death as a direct result of Australia’s inhumane refugee policies,” said Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch. “Refugees who have fled persecution in their homelands don’t deserve a life in limbo in a detention center or effectively imprisoned on a tiny, remote island.”

Dr. Barri Phatarfod of the charity Doctors for Refugees said that a hospital on Nauru had trouble treating Omid, who was badly burned and suffered complications from a lack of oxygen, making the airlift to Brisbane necessary. “Hospital staff struggled with maintaining an adequate airway, and had difficulties accessing an intravenous line,” Dr. Phatarfod said in a statement. “These are quite difficult to do in a severe burns victim, and need a specialized team immediately.”

She added, “This tragic outcome once again demonstrates the complete impracticality of accommodating these highly vulnerable people so far from Australia.”

It was still unclear on Friday what would be done with the more than 800 men detained at the Manus Island center in Papua New Guinea, which the country’s prime minister, Peter O’Neill, said would be closed because of the court decision. Mr. O’Neill called on Australia to “make alternative arrangements” for the asylum seekers, but Australian officials have not said what they plan to do, other than insisting that the men will not be allowed into Australia.

Peter Dutton, the Australian immigration minister, told Sky News that one possibility was to send them all to Nauru. Another would be to address the court’s concerns by keeping the men in Papua New Guinea but no longer restricting them to Manus Island.

Last year, Nauru began allowing asylum seekers to come and go freely from the detention center there. But Nauru is just eight square miles, less than half the size of Manhattan, and advocates of refugee rights say that conditions there are difficult, with a lack of services for mental health care and other needs.

New Zealand has said it can take 150 refugees a year, but Australian officials have declined that offer, saying it will only encourage more people to try dangerous sea crossings. Mr. Turnbull repeated that position this week, saying that the chance of being resettled in New Zealand would be “used by the people smugglers as a marketing opportunity,” according to news reports.


