


“Radiolab,” the popular and influential documentary podcast from WNYC, began its first spinoff on Thursday with “More Perfect,” a series about untold stories of the Supreme Court.

Conceived by the “Radiolab” host Jad Abumrad, the new podcast had its debut with “Cruel and Unusual,” about the legal history of the death penalty, including Utah’s reinstatement of firing squads for executions in 2015. Additional episodes will be released weekly through July 14. You can listen to the first one below:

In an interview Mr. Abumrad said he had long been fascinated by the Supreme Court. “Radiolab” has had two similarly themed episodes in the past: one about the case Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl and another about the Authorization for Use of Military Force in “60 Words,” which won a Peabody Award.

Mr. Abumrad said that he was especially interested in the Supreme Court’s concentrated authority. “These nine justices are hugely powerful,” he said. “One of the sub-narratives is about how this group grew from partisan hacks to the priests of the Constitution.” But, he added, the podcast will not take an “inside baseball” approach.

Making the court seem accessible while not overly simple has been a major goal of the show in development. Elie Mystal, the legal editor of “More Perfect,” said: “We didn’t want to dumb it down. We want listeners to feel like they understand what’s going on.” Mr. Mystal, Mr. Abumrad said, is the production team’s guide in finding stories that are “interesting” to listeners now, or that will be in the near future.

Alex Overington, who produces the Peabody-winning podcast “Meet the Composer” for the WNYC affiliate Q2 Music, wrote a score for the show with the musician Gyan Riley. Mr. Abumrad has promoted “Meet the Composer” on “Radiolab” before and said he is a “huge fan” of Mr. Overington’s production style — which, like Mr. Abumrad’s, is kinetic and complex. “So much of this show is going to be hearing these men in that scratchy archival voice from the past,” Mr. Abumrad said. “I want that to feel like it’s dancing.”


