


The Hendrik, a new condominium under construction in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, aims to blend the space and character of the neighborhood’s coveted townhouses with the amenities of a new residential tower.

“The townhouse market is restrictive — they’re expensive and there are not a lot of them,” said Jeffrey Gershon, a principal of Hopestreet, the developer of the six-story building. For families who are outgrowing their current apartments and want to be in Boerum Hill, he added, the Hendrik is envisioned as “somewhere to live when they’re shut out of the townhouse market.”

As such, none of the building’s 33 units will be studios or one-bedrooms, and all apartments will have relatively large footprints. Sales began on May 31, with two-bedrooms starting at $1.625 million and ranging from about 1,200 square feet to 1,500 square feet. Three-bedrooms start at $2.5 million and range from about 1,600 square feet to more than 2,000 square feet. Four-bedrooms, starting at $2.9 million, range from about 1,850 square feet to more than 2,500 square feet. All will have 10-foot-high ceilings, and eight-foot-tall doors and windows.

With Barclays Center to the east, and a proliferation of new stores and restaurants, Boerum Hill is increasingly attractive to buyers, “but slightly underdeveloped on the residential side,” said Stephen G. Kliegerman, the president of Halstead Property Development Marketing, which is marketing the building. “It has opportunities for development, because there are underutilized parcels of land.”

Indeed, the Hendrik replaces a former one-story Walgreens, which the developers purchased for about $32 million, including buying out the drugstore’s lease, in December 2014. The new building, designed by the architecture firm Beyer Blinder Belle with a residential entrance at 509 Pacific Street, has frontage on Pacific Street, Atlantic Avenue, and a full block of Third Avenue. In addition to apartments, it will offer 26,000 square feet of retail space on the ground floor and below grade.

Just like its new condominium neighbor one block west at 465 Pacific Street, a 30-unit building that recently sold out, the Hendrik will have a mostly brick exterior, a decision inspired by nearby townhouses.

But, “the brick became more than just brick,” said Carlos J. Cardoso, a partner of Beyer Blinder Belle. “We were adamant about creating a well-built, well-crafted building.”

To ensure they acquired building materials with the appearance of age, Mr. Gershon and Mr. Cardoso traveled to Denmark to select bricks from Petersen, a company that has been making them since 1791. “It’s a handmade brick and the colors are astounding,” Mr. Cardoso said, adding that he and Mr. Gershon settled on gray with hints of green and black.

“It’s not going to feel like a new building,” he said. “It’s going to feel like it’s been there forever, and age really gracefully.”

Inside, units will have wide-plank oak floors, walnut cabinetry and white Calacatta marble in the kitchens and bathrooms, Miele appliances, integrated LED lighting, and wiring for smart home systems and motorized window shades.

But even more appealing for some buyers might be the family-friendly touches. “There are large walk-in closets when you enter, so you can drop the stroller,” Mr. Cardoso said. Many units will also have utility rooms with laundry machines. And 19 of the apartments will come with private outdoor spaces, most being terraces with gas, water and electrical connections.

Building amenities include bicycle storage on the ground floor, a shared rooftop terrace and a central courtyard with a viewing garden, along with a fitness center, a residents’ lounge, a dog-washing station and a children’s playroom on the cellar level.

Foundation work is underway, and Hopestreet expects to begin delivering units in late 2017.

“I know from living and owning in the area that the real demand is from families,” said Mr. Gershon, who lives in nearby Cobble Hill. For those who can afford it, he said, the developers hope to offer “the ability for families to really live, rather than being crammed into a glorified rental.”


