


At the close of the Second World War, the United States government embarked on an enormous artistic enterprise. It is estimated to have cost nearly $3 billion and, at its height, employed more than 2,000 people. I am talking about the topographic mapping program of the United States Geological Survey. It was an opus of Whitmanesque proportion, a heroic rendering of the American landscape; every last whorl and hachure and dotted line of actual topography — not to mention the name of every last desert wash, old mine or glorified goat track — was exhaustively cataloged. This 54,000-tile mosaic was not, of course, done in the cause of aesthetics, but it nevertheless represents as gorgeous and complete a depiction of the country as any ever made.

For the past number of years, I have been collecting the U.S.G.S.’s maps, treating them as eminently affordable pieces of American art. A favorite is the 1977 map of Eureka, Calif., which contrasts, in stunning dualism, the rugged bathymetry of the Pacific Ocean against the rolling hills of Humboldt County’s redwood forests. Some are more abstract. Take, for example, Item 41017 in the U.S.G.S. online store. For $12, you will be treated to an oversize, plastic-coated, shaded-relief map of the “Grand Canyon National Park and Vicinity,” a sprawling, muscular and gorgeous sweep of brown and russet that looks less like the bird’s-eye view of the canyon itself and more like the fractal, spidery spread of frost across a window pane. In a way, it calls to mind the work of Jackson Pollock, in particular his painting “Enchanted Forest.” Perhaps Pollock was a kind of topographer himself, charting some inner territory — until he gave up on the project of representation altogether.

Most of my maps lie rolled up in tubes, tucked away like books to be perused at some future date. On some gray afternoons, sequestered in my Brooklyn apartment, I will pull out, say, a map of Arches National Park, spread it over my kitchen table and trace imaginary pathways across airbrushed depictions of reddish sandstone with my finger. I take in the tiny names of features, a matter-of-fact procession of gravel pits and drill holes. Then my eye hooks upon more floridly named features, each unlocking the imagination: “Cactus Rat Mine,” “Bootlegger Canyon” or “The Poison Strip” (so named because of naturally occurring arsenic in the area that killed off sheep).

Sometimes I will pick up a map because of some other interest in an area. I bought a circa-1968 “orthophoto” map (an aerial photograph with topographic overlays) of Rozel Point, on the shores of Utah’s Great Salt Lake, simply because it would be, two years later, the site of Robert Smithson’s “Spiral Jetty,” the country’s most celebrated piece of land art. I like to imagine that Smithson — who was obsessed with geology — visited Rozel with the very same map in hand. (I checked; he probably didn’t.) Smithson said that he picked sites like Rozel because he wanted them to be “free of scenic meaning”; indeed, having been there, I can say that it is the sort of place that arguably looks better on an orthophoto map. In person, it just seems like rocky wastes and a dead lake. But the map, from above, captivates — a tempestuous burst of almost extraplanetary rust-colored desert strikingly offset by the pale blue lake. (Not all nearby maps are so exciting. One quadrant south is an entirely blue panel labeled, simply, “Great Salt Lake.”)

The connection between the beauty of the territory and the beauty of the map is typically more direct; my home quadrant in Brooklyn, for example, is hardly sublime. This is because topo maps measure change, which I suspect is the key to their visual appeal. In his 1965 book “Cartographic Relief Presentation,” the great Swiss authority Eduard Imhof suggests that the transition from light to dark was the pinnacle of both cartographic and artistic achievement. “It is simple to place in deepest shadow those steep slopes that are turned away from the light,” he writes. “It is simple, also, to leave, completely unshaded, the steep slopes that face the light. The critical part, however, is what lies between the two.” It is hardly surprising that Leonardo da Vinci, that master of the liminal techniques of sfumato and chiaroscuro, produced some early topographical maps.

The beauty intrinsic to these maps is the byproduct of an entirely different mode of production, the last gasp of an antiquated way of representing the world. Larry Moore, a longtime cartographer with the U.S.G.S., told me, in a phone call, that the printed maps I so treasure are no longer made (and exist mainly in the ever-shrinking warehouses of the U.S.G.S.). “Back in the old days, the map was the product, and every map was drawn by hand,” he said. “There was an assumption that every map would only be made once or twice in a century, so we went to extraordinary expense to make them not only correct but beautiful.” The Geological Survey has a new mapping program, called “U.S. Topo,” which, with its numerous layers of sophisticated data, is probably more precise — but less aesthetically pleasing.

“The older is a flat map or a globe map,” the geographer Arthur Robinson once observed, “the more likely it is to be called an art object.” There might be an echo of Kant here: Precisely because the historical topo maps are no longer necessary objects, they can be purely viewed as aesthetic objects. Any old iPhone will these days reliably tell you where you are, to within 10 feet or so, but only a well-made map can take you somewhere.


