


Since launching in 2014, the Springs in Los Angeles has become a destination for wellness enthusiasts seeking yoga classes, detoxifying body treatments (read: fire cupping) and green juices all integrated under one roof. Recently, the downtown studio transformed its on-site restaurant, moving away from strictly raw, vegan food toward a more plentiful array of plant-based, seasonal cuisine. The executive chef spearheading this change is Jasmine Shimoda, formerly of Jasmine’s at Happy Ending, Degustation and the John Dory in New York City. Having grown up in Santa Barbara, Shimoda was eager to get back to her Cali roots. “After cooking in a lot of crazy, tiny kitchens in New York, I wanted to return to this area and move more into health and wellness,” she says. “So this just felt organic right away.”

The restaurant is slated to open June 13, and will serve breakfast and lunch. While Shimoda is still tinkering with the menu, she says it will feature a variety of toasts on seed and nut breads (all gluten free); sandwiches, such as the pastrami-cured beet Reuben with a turmeric emulsion, celery and dill (“it’s a big experience, with lots of spices and textures,” she says); and buckwheat waffles with house-made raw Nutella, strawberries and smoked maple syrup. Shimoda, who grew up in a vegetarian and macrobiotic household, is also striving for a zero-waste kitchen. “I want to feature a bowl with all perfectly imperfect vegetables that purveyors can’t sell because they’re not pretty enough to go Whole Foods, but they’re still delicious and organic,” she says.

Since heading out West, Shimoda has quickly embraced L.A’s clean-living culture. “I was trying to get away from the crazy, toxic lifestyle of working in restaurants in New York,” she admits. A dedicated yogi, she now practices every day. “Before, I would smoke a cigarette and have a shot after work,” Shimoda says. These days, she hits Chris Reed’s 5:30 p.m. Power Flow class. “I just take off my apron and walk over,” she laughs. To fuel her own practice, Shimoda turns to foods that are stimulating and energizing but also grounding. Here, the chef shares with T her personal recipes for what to brew and eat, pre- and post-yoga.

I like to make a “coffee” that gives me energy but without any jitters. In this recipe, the reishi mushrooms lend that bitter-coffee profile while the Rehmannia root adds the very dark color to the “coffee.” The astragalus acts as a natural sweetener but is traditionally used in Chinese medicine as a chi builder.

1 medium-sized organic reishi mushroom OR 5-6 dried slices 2 pieces of Rehmannia root 3-4 slices of Astragalus 6 cups of filtered water

1. Place all the ingredients in a medium-sized, non-reactive pot and bring to a low boil. Then turn down the heat to a gentle simmer and continue to cook for 10 to 15 minutes depending on how strong you want your “coffee.”

2. Then, pour through a fine mesh strainer and into a mug. I like to drink this black to feel the full energizing effects but if I want a treat, I’ll add a glug of coconut creamer.

After yoga, I’m usually starving and craving something grounding, satisfying and easy to digest. I call this recipe Sweet Life, and I love the combination of sweet potato, smoky black beans, fluffy quinoa, leafy greens and creamy tahini.

1 sweet potato 1 can organic black beans Sea salt, to taste Ground cumin, to taste Cayenne, to taste Garlic powder, to taste Greens such as mustard greens, Swiss chard or kale (enough to fill a bowl) 1 spoonful steamed, cooked quinoa 1 to 2 tablespoons tahini sauce (either store-bought or homemade) A handful of curried cashews

1. Scrub your sweet potato well and place it on a cooking tray or pan. Roast it naked in an oven set at 375 degrees for 30 to 40 minutes, depending the size of the potato. While that’s roasting, warm up your beans and season to taste with salt, ground cumin, cayenne and garlic powder.

2. Next, boil four cups of water. Wash your greens in a colander. Pour the boiling water directly over your greens. This is a quick, easy and healthful way of cooking leafy greens.

3. Remove your sweet potato and place it in a bowl. Cut open the top and let the steam release a bit. Sprinkle with sea salt. Place your spiced beans and quinoa alongside the potato. Then place a heap of greens in the middle of your bowl. Top with tahini sauce and curried cashews. Sit down, enjoy a moment of gratitude, then dig in!


