


If you are Andrew Bolton, the curator in charge of the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, or the fashion designer Thom Browne, what do you wear on a leisurely Sunday? “Thom still gets dressed in his usual uniform,” Mr. Bolton, 49, said the other day, during the final preparations for an exhibition called “Manus x Machina: Fashion in an Age of Technology,” which opens on May 5, after a fund-raising gala on May 2. “I tend to be more casual. I just wear jeans and sneakers and a shirt or sweater. His usual uniform is literally a suit. So he’ll wear his gray suit and a tie and a tiepin.” What they do not wear are little stickers bearing the Met’s new logo. “It’s very polarizing,” Mr. Bolton said. Did that mean he had met anyone who liked it? “No,” he said. The couple, who have been together for five years, live on Central Park West with a miniature wire-haired dachshund named Hector who dominates their lives. “We’re obsessive,” Mr. Bolton said.

CREATURE COMFORTS On Sundays I wake up between 7 and 9. The very first thing I do is take Hector for a walk in the park. He barks at everything. He barks at his own shadow. He’s at that stage where it’s still adorable, but I’m sure that’s going to change.

STEEP We have tea in our robes, watching the news. Then every Sunday we go and get doughnuts from Nougatine. We walk Hector to Lincoln Square and sit on a bench opposite the small pond with Henry Moore sculptures. And then we take Hector for a longer walk in the park.

THE LIGHT IN THE PARK Central Park is my favorite place in New York. I’m from Lancashire, in England, and as a foreigner to New York, the park was always so iconic to me. And I just love the light. In Manhattan you rarely get such a broad expanse of sky.

WORDS TO LIVE BY If we have lunch before the gym, there’s no champagne. If we have lunch after the gym, there is champagne.

RELAY TEAM We used to go to the gym together pre-Hector. Our life is pre-Hector and post-Hector. Pre-Hector we went together; post-Hector one of us stays behind and looks after Hector. We’re a relay team now.

PAMPERED PUP He’s very pampered. I don’t think he’s ever been left on his own since we got him a year ago. Luckily, Thom has his own design company, so he takes Hector to work with him every day. He’s very much become the Thom Browne dog. He designed a bag called the Hector Bag that looks just like Hector, both in leather and in beaver. He’s become Thom’s muse.

RECLINE I’m a great afternoon napper. Thom refuses to do that. I love napping in the afternoon, so I tend to come back, either read a book or work, and then have a nap.

PAGE TURNER At the moment I’m reading “A Little Life.” It’s one of those books you can’t put down, but at the same time you’re nervous, because you’re worried about what’s going to happen next. It’s a real roller coaster of emotions.

BUBBLY Things morph into each other, and before we know it, it’s 6 o’clock and drinks time. We have drinks on the terrace at 6. Champagne, always. Sundays are one of those precious days that we tend to just be on our own.

DINNER FOR THREE After we got Hector, we tended to go places that allow dogs to sit outside. We tend to just walk over to Lincoln and have dinner. Or if we have a dog sitter for Hector, we’ll go to Waverly. Or we order dumplings from Shun Lee and then chicken or meatballs from Morandi.

LOW-LOW After dinner we tend to watch a movie. We’re very high-low; actually, very low-low. We watch anything. I love watching movies and I have no snobbism about movies whatsoever. I’m dying to watch “The Boss,” with Melissa McCarthy.

FADE OUT, WAKE UP Often I nod off watching a movie. I very rarely get to the end of it. Then straight to bed about midnight. That tends to be our witching hour. I fall asleep very easily, but then I tend to be a terrible insomniac. Hector is up with me as well. We’re both insomniacs, Hector and I.


