


On the night of June 6, Michelle Marks, who was 23 years old and lived in the Albany Houses in Crown Heights, was leaving her job at Fornino, a pizzeria a few miles away in Brooklyn Bridge Park, when she was shot in the head and killed. The day before she died, Ms. Marks had filed a report with the police alleging that her former boyfriend, a man with a criminal record who was three decades her senior, had assaulted her at the Albany Houses, trying to grab her groceries. This was the third domestic incident report involving the couple within the course of a few weeks. On May 16, the police said, Ms. Marks had called 911 after she opened the door to her apartment to find the man, Lamont Wright, lurking in the hallway outside.

Shortly after the shooting, Mr. Wright was taken into police custody and charged with assaulting and stalking Ms. Marks on the day before the killing. Mr. Wright has not been charged in the shooting, but Capt. Sergio Centa, the commanding officer of the 84th Precinct, which includes Brooklyn Bridge Park, sent an email to community leaders in the wealthy neighborhood telling them about the case, one he said the police believed had resulted from a continuing domestic dispute. There was no reason to think, he continued, that what had happened “was related to any of the issues we have had in the park this year such as overcrowding and/or unruly crowds.” The vexing tone of reassurance reaffirmed the conventional notion that although random violence warrants our apprehension, the presumption that it was a violent former consort who killed a young woman should permit us to abandon our anxieties. The park remained safe for the walking of cockapoos and consumption of rosé.

Over the past several years, the issue of campus sexual assault has managed to sustain American attention in a way that few issues regarding the welfare of women, or the welfare of anything, have managed. This was made clear again last week in the outpouring of rage over the lenient sentencing of Brock Turner, a Stanford student convicted of sexual assault. There were calls for the judge, Aaron Persky of Santa Clara County Superior Court, to be removed from the bench, and an old friend of Mr. Turner’s who had written a letter to the courts in his support found that her band was suddenly the object of a boycott in Brooklyn.

The statistic that one in five women will be sexually assaulted is surpassed by the figure that one in four women will experience domestic violence in the course of her lifetime, according to data supplied by Safe Horizon, a victims services group. Yet there remains a distinct disparity in our collective interest. Sexual assault has come up during the presidential debates (and during the last Oscars ceremony); domestic violence did not. “There are these moments around incidents like Ray Rice,” Liz Roberts, the deputy chairwoman of Safe Horizon, said, referring to the former N.F.L. running back who was videotaped punching his fiancée, “and then there is a fading away.”

Part of the problem lies with rhetoric. Since feminists enlightened the world about the horrors of spousal abuse in the early 1970s and sought to combat it, we have culturally relied on the meme that domestic violence “can happen to anyone.” Commentators invoked the line most recently when Amber Heard, the estranged wife of Johnny Depp, accused him of hitting her. But the sentiment has a long history, popularized beginning in the 1980s and ’90s with a spate of genre movies that fictionalized true stories of women imperiled by their husbands. The women were factory workers, secretaries, bankers’ wives and Washington wives.

The truth is that you are far more likely to become a victim of domestic violence if you live in Central Brooklyn than if you live on the Upper East Side or in Georgetown. According to city data, domestic homicides are 65 percent more likely to occur in neighborhoods with high rates of poverty. Since 2002, more than a third of all domestic homicides have occurred in just 15 police precincts that make up only 19 percent of the population. Among tenants of New York City’s Housing Authority, domestic violence incident reports rose from 809 in 2009 to more than twice that figure three years later.

Those who commandeer the cultural conversation online are more apt to know someone who has experienced a traumatic sexual encounter in a dorm room than someone who has been beaten or shot by a disgruntled former boyfriend who did not graduate from high school.

How might that change? The war against campus sexual assault has taken shape as a war against male entitlement; a dismissive legal and judicial apparatus; an insidious culture of binge drinking. What would a war against domestic violence look like? To some extent it would look like a war on poverty. A war against the bouts of social narcissism that afflict the upper classes. I posed the question to Lisa Smith, the former chief sex crimes prosecutor for the Brooklyn district attorney’s office. “I would like to see a national fatality review team of experienced domestic violence advocates,” she said, “whose job it is to look at these cases, talk to the families and all of the relevant parties and report back not to government entities but to us.” By which she meant ordinary people who might intervene before something terrible happened. “We’re not as good at identifying potential killers as we think.”


