


Minerality, one of wine’s most hotly contested words, is often assailed as imprecise and too general, even as it is widely used among wine professionals. I find it far more useful than bothersome.

Here in Wine School, we try to talk about wine clearly and meaningfully. The use of this term, which came up repeatedly in our recent discussion about Austrian riesling (partly because of my prompting), may seem to run counter to our bias against jargon. Yet it is practical in describing a wine’s salient characteristics without descending into the sort of hyper-specific terminology that often ends up reducing the essence of a wine to a grocery list.

We hope not to get too bogged down in the minutiae of tasting descriptions. In an effort to explore the varieties of wine-drinking experiences with an eye toward better understanding our own tastes, we aim to drink as many different sorts of wines as we can. We evaluate our reactions, both rational and emotional. This includes articulating not only how a wine smelled and tasted, but also how it made us feel and how it acted with food.

As we do each month, I recommend three examples of a particular wine, and you drink it in a relaxed setting, with a meal. If you are so inclined, I ask you to share your thoughts and insights about the wines by commenting at nytimes.com/food.

The three Austrian rieslings I suggested, all from the 2014 vintage, were Knoll Wachau Loibner Federspiel, Alzinger Wachau Dürnsteiner Federspiel and Bründlmayer Kamptal Terrassen.

Just to decipher a bit, the Knoll and the Alzinger rieslings come from the Wachau region, along the Danube River west of Vienna. The Bründlmayer comes from the Kamptal, a little to the northeast of the Wachau. Loibner and Dürnsteiner both refer to the geographical location of the vineyards — Loiben and Dürnstein are neighboring villages. Terrassen generally suggests that the grapes came from terraced vineyards. Federspiel, a term used only for wines from the Wachau region, indicates they are medium-bodied, not as light as steinfeder but not as rich as smaragd, also terms used only in the Wachau.

While I thought all of these wines were really good, they gave just a hint of how good Austrian rieslings can be. Tasting the best Austrian rieslings, which can combine a delicious richness with a coiled, tensile strength, would have required spending far more per bottle. Perhaps these bottles will inspire further experimentation.

Each of the wines was lively and refreshing. The Bründlmayer was brisk and zesty with flavors of lime and apple. It was a bigger wine than the others, which is a little counterintuitive as wines from the Wachau are generally weightier than Austrian rieslings from other regions. But it seemed a little more straightforward.

The Knoll also seemed full of verve and energy, with similar apple and lime flavors, but it was enhanced by a scent of warm rocks — minerality, that word again. The vivacious Alzinger stood out to me. It seemed more complex, with herbal, floral aromas and flavors, but it also had a savory, saline quality that I loved and a fine stoniness that threaded through from sip to swallow and beyond.

One objection to the use of the term comes from people who take it literally, as if minerality were referring to actual minerals tasted in the wine. But clearly it’s metaphorical, used in the same way that people refer to tasting the flavors of cherry or blackberry. Another objection is that wine tasters ought to strive for more specific flavors and aromas. I’ll get back to that idea.

Most readers embraced these rieslings, and most found minerality to be a useful description. Several made an effort to discern what set apart the specific mineral qualities of these rieslings from mineral characteristics in other wines. Dan Barron of New York dug especially deeply, I thought.

“Imagine a soft, fresh sort of minerality,” he wrote of the Bründlmayer, though he had the 2013 vintage, not the ’14. “Not steely at all. More fine-grained, powdery, in between chalky and seltzery, and veering into a curious yeasty quality.”

“Powdery” captured what I had in mind, particularly with the Alzinger. This quality contrasted, for example, with the wet-river-rocks sort of minerality that I often find in Mosel rieslings, the oceanic seashell quality of Chablis, the earthy, granitic character of cru Beaujolais.

Would this level of detail be useful to others? Sean McCarthy of Wainscott, N.Y., for one, seemed to accept the notion of minerality without needing to explore it further. “Does minerality have meaning for me: Is the Pope Catholic?” he wrote. “It’s like licking a rock, and some of us like that.”

JKM of Washington, D.C., deserves special notice for finding time for Wine School and getting married this month (mazel tov!). The couple celebrated with a 2012 Loibner Burgstall Riesling Federspiel from the excellent Wachau producer F.X. Pichler, a wine he called “downright kinetic.” They also found time to meditate on minerality.

“For me, minerality exists as both flavor and texture, sometimes contributing a cool sleekness, or a saline/umami impression, or even a palpable tanginess/sharpness,” he wrote. “It’s hard to describe, but it’s undeniable that certain wines offer additional flavors and sensations beyond fruit, acidity and tannins.”

Other readers also seemed to find the term useful. “Many wine-tasting terms confuse me or make me skeptical, but not minerality,” Ferguson wrote. “The mix of herb and citrus tastes and the crisp texture of these wines are what I expect when I hear ‘minerality.’ It also reminds one of the influence soil has on wine.”

Critics want more specific words: slate, for example, crushed igneous rocks, eggshells or petrichor, which refers to the pleasant aroma that comes with the first rain after a prolonged dry spell. No doubt, one can always be more specific in describing a wine. I’ve found certain wines, especially those from volcanic soils, to have a bloody, iron character. And I’ve often felt textural distinctions: pebbly, stony, papery and, yes, powdery.

While all very specific terms indicate a wide vocabulary of sensory terms on the part of the taster, it’s not clear how much these terms communicate to the reader or the listener. The most specific terms serve best as mnemonic devices, jogging our memories to recall wines we have had in the past. More general terms, in my opinion, convey a better understanding of the character of a particular wine to a wider audience.

Rather than speaking of wet slate, sedimentary stones or river rocks, it’s better to say simply the wine reminds me of animal, vegetable or, you know, that other word.


