


Rob Drummond, who stunned audiences at the 2012 Edinburgh Festival Fringe with “Bullet Catch,” a solo show in which he performed the magic trick of the title, will return to the festival this summer with the more personal “In Fidelity,” a scientific exploration of the concept of love (and an onstage dating game).

Mr. Drummond’s show is one of the 3,269 productions in the 2016 fringe program, which was announced in Edinburgh on Wednesday morning. Almost 300 venues across the Scottish capital, including, for the first time, the National Museum of Scotland, will take part in the huge annual celebration that features theater, dance, comedy, circus acts and just about any type of performance imaginable. It will run Aug. 5 through Aug. 29.

The Traverse Theater program, which will present “In Fidelity” and always features some of the most popular fringe productions, will also include “The Red Shed,” a new solo show by the comedian Mark Thomas and a new Daniel Kitson piece. Mr. Kitson, the English comedian and storyteller whose clever “Polyphony” was a difficult ticket to score last summer, will perform his latest work, “Mouse – The Persistence of an Unlikely Thought.”

“Glasgow Girls” is among the other productions likely to be popular. The show, based on a true story about a group of Scottish high school girls, one of whom is deported to Kosovo with her family after seeking asylum, was conceived and directed by Cora Bissett, whose “Roadkill” was well-received (if difficult to watch) in 2010. David Greig, an Edinburgh regular and the recently appointed artistic director of the Royal Lyceum Theater there, wrote the book.

In this year of events marking the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death, the festival will feature plenty of plays and reinterpretations of plays by Shakespeare, including “Hamlet in Bed,” starring Michael Laurence and Annette O’Toole, which ran Off Broadway in New York last year. (There’s even a production called “Shakespeare Syndrome,” that imagines several of his characters all being treated by the same shrink.)

There is plenty more happening in Edinburgh in August, including musical performances by Colin Hay, the former lead singer of Men at Work, and Camille O’Sullivan, with a new show that features the music of Radiohead, Nick Cave and David Bowie. The fringe festival will run alongside the Edinburgh International Festival, which announced its ambitious 2016 program in April.


