


In “Custody,” which had its premiere Sunday at the Tribeca Film Festival, the children of a young Colombian-American mother (Catalina Sandino Moreno) are put into protective custody after one child arrives at school with cuts and bruises. Viola Davis plays the judge who hears the case in family court. But the film, written and directed by James Lapine (the stage veteran whose credits include “Sunday in the Park With George”), doesn’t leave the drama in the courtroom. It also explores the home lives of both the mother and the judge, telling their stories from complex perspectives.

In an interview during the festival, Ms. Davis and Ms. Moreno discussed the movie, the kinds of roles they enjoy playing and the kinds they prefer to avoid. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.

Viola, what was it that interested you in the judge, Martha?

VIOLA DAVIS: I like any movie that explores social services. But I like the fact that Martha was being humanized. In the past, I’ve played a lot of authoritative characters. You’ve seen that character: the black bus driver with an attitude, the black lawyer with a nice suit who’s screaming at someone or cussing some man out, the judge (I’ve played a lot of judges) who’s up there banging the gavel and saying, “Order in the court, order in the court” and the scene is over right after that. Who is she? When she goes home, is she married? Does she make love to her husband? Does she hate being there? By the time you’ve asked all those questions, of course, she’s gone. So I thought it was interesting to explore that character’s personal life in this movie. But the thing that frightens me about what I just said is that I don’t think most people notice when those details are missing in movies, especially when it’s women of color. I think that people are happy with us just being a device to move along the story to the Caucasian lead. That’s not what happens here.

Catalina, what was interesting to you about playing Sara?

CATALINA SANDINO MORENO: It was beautifully written. I’ve been a fan of James Lapine and seen his musicals. I’ve been a big fan of Viola’s too. Also, I became a mother seven years ago, so when I read it, I thought, what would I do if my kid was taken away from me?

The courtroom scenes are impassioned but have a down-to-earth authenticity to them. How did you achieve that?

MORENO: One of the things was that we shot in a real courtroom here in New York. The space helped it to feel very real. But when you have great actors doing a scene with you, it’s easy.

What kind of role do you most like to play? What are you seeking out?

DAVIS: You just want something that’s good. And you’re not always seeking it out. Sometimes it comes to you, depending on what’s out there. It’s not like I have 20 scripts in front of me and I think, O.K., do you want to work with Baz Luhrmann or Steven Spielberg? But I have had great opportunities. Right now, I’m working with Denzel Washington doing “Fences” [the film adaptation of August Wilson’s play] in Pittsburgh. It’s fantastic. What I love about “Fences,” and what I love about “Custody,” is that it makes a larger statement. But it doesn’t sacrifice the humanity of the characters.

You’ve been outspoken about opportunities, or the lack thereof, for women of color in entertainment. Do you see things getting better for you and how do you see the issue shifting over all?

DAVIS: Things are definitely getting better for me. I started out making $120 a week as an understudy at the Public Theater, and was happy that I had that job. I loved it. But the whole diversity issue, something becomes a hashtag, so all of a sudden it becomes important. It’s always been important. When have people of color and different nationalities, when have we ever not been here? You’re just catching up to it now. It’s different because people of color in front of the camera and behind it are fighting for it now. They are not afraid of their voices and they are not satisfied with being superfluous. But my hope for the future is that Hollywood doesn’t just greenlight all the films dealing with diversity, even if they’re bad, because now it’s popular.

MORENO: I agree with Viola. I think it’s part of our responsibility as actors not to just stay with stereotypes. I don’t want to be just a drug dealer in a movie because I’m Latin. Or the chola character because I’m Latin. If it’s a movie that I like and the character is like that, I will do my best to change those crazy stereotypes. So when I get roles like this one in “Custody,” it’s so refreshing because these are real people. I look at some scripts and say, oh no, now I’m going to have to fight to change this and this. And hopefully they’ll hear me, because if not, I cannot do this. It’s in my DNA. I cannot be the person who keeps doing the roles that I hate. I think it’s all our responsibilities as Latin actors to say no. If we all say no to stereotypical roles, then I think they will do something. But there’s always people for that role.

DAVIS: Yes, because we are in a business of deprivation. And they bank on that deprivation to get an actor to do things that are absolutely humiliating, and a lot that they can’t come back from. A lot of people doing stereotypical roles are actually really good actors.

Viola, that’s a fun “How to Get Away With Murder” hoodie you’re wearing. What have you enjoyed about working on that show?

DAVIS: I’m doing the show because of the role. I’m working with fabulous actors. I love [the executive producer] Pete Nowalk, I love Shonda Rhimes, but I’m doing it for the role. It’s a role I haven’t seen any black actress play, of my shade, of my age. And in that way, I understood the value and the potency of it being pioneering. It’s been liberating for me to show that women of color can be multifaceted and don’t have to be a Size 0 to be sexual. And that you can’t always put a finger on us. And when you sit down to ABC on Thursday nights, you have to agree to come into my world. I’m not going to shrink myself to come into yours.

You also have “Suicide Squad” coming up this summer. What was it like to work on a big-budget comic book film?

DAVIS: Fun! That movie is just about fun, although I must say you comic-book fans scare me just a little bit, but I appreciate you, because it makes me feel like a rock star. I had forgotten what it feels like to have fun with what I do. A lot of times, I’m just complaining about how tired I am and I forget about the fact that when I first started, it was about pretend! “Suicide Squad” made me feel how I felt when I was a kid and first fell in love with acting.


