


OAKMONT, Pa. — Because golf is an outdoor sport played on a field of competition that changes from place to place and day to day, its rules are inherently more complex than those of other sports. There are so many factors to weigh, and the golf rule book considers thousands of them, addressing things like what to do if a ball comes to rest on a live snake or a dead snake.

The rule is not the same for both situations.

The motivation behind such meticulous rule-making is to ensure that every competition is equitable and just.

But Sunday, as afternoon was turning into evening and the 116th United States Open was hitting its stride, the country’s national golf championship temporarily lost its sense of evenhandedness. The game’s necessary devotion to the exactness of its rules failed to include a dollop of common sense.

Officials for the United States Golf Association, which conducts the Open and helps establish the rules of golf, may have been following their regulations to the letter in an attempt to be fair to every competitor, but few who watched Sunday’s proceedings will feel that way. For more than two hours, the fourth round of the tournament was held hostage because a definitive ruling had not been made. Or one apparently had been made but could be reversed when the competition was over.

The sport with perhaps the most complex rules still did not have enough of them to adjudicate a situation in real time.

What other sport could play on without the competitors — or the referees — knowing the actual score?

Ultimately, Dustin Johnson survived a rule travail he should never have been subjected to and was crowned the Open champion. After the final round, he was assessed a one-stroke penalty for something he might or might not have done, even though he had initially been absolved of that infraction by an official. Johnson persevered, building a big enough lead that the penalty was not consequential. He won his first major championship by three strokes with a four-round score of four-under-par 276.

But the final round may be forever remembered for what happened to Johnson along the way to his championship.

The incident that began all the uncertainty occurred on the fifth green when Johnson, who lost a chance to win the 2010 P.G.A. Championship because of a disputed infraction on the final hole, was lining up a putt. As he began to place his putter behind the ball, the ball moved slightly.

Johnson backed away and summoned a rules official, something he was criticized for not having done in the 2010 P.G.A. Johnson acknowledged that the ball had moved, but in the conversation that followed, he was asked if he had grounded his club behind the ball. When he answered that he had not, he was allowed to continue without a penalty, evidently because the official believed that Johnson had not caused the ball to move, which is a major determining factor.

The leader of the tournament at that juncture, Shane Lowry, had called a penalty stroke on himself Saturday in a similar situation. But in Lowry’s case, he had grounded his club behind the ball, which is perhaps the most central factor in determining that the actions of the golfer caused the ball to move.

But there are other ways to make that determination. On video, by zooming in on the ball and watching it in slow motion, it’s possible to conclude that just the presence of Johnson’s putter near the ball caused it to move.

That option suddenly became the biggest controversy of the day when a U.S.G.A. managing director, Jeff Hall, appeared on the 12th tee and spoke with Johnson about the fifth-green situation. Hall later said that Johnson was convinced he did nothing to cause the ball to move.

It was clear to Hall that the situation was not going to be resolved at that moment, although he also made it clear to Johnson that a penalty stroke was a possible outcome.

Informing Johnson that he was being assessed a stroke penalty as he stood on the 12th tee would have been difficult but perhaps fair. Letting the possibility of a penalty hang over his head as he played seven more holes in the crucible that is the final round of a major championship was unwarranted. It is not an uncommon way to proceed in championship golf, but after what we saw unfold Sunday, it ought to be.

For the next seven holes, Johnson did not know how many strokes ahead of the field he needed to be to claim victory. The rest of the field did not know whether they needed to surpass Johnson or tie him to win. How many on-course decisions — by Johnson and others — might have been affected by the notion that the leaderboard scores were just an approximation?

A scoreboard is not supposed to be just an estimation of who is leading and by how much. A final score is not meant to be a guess at the end result. One thing that draws people to follow sports is that outcomes are not hypothetical.

But for a while on Sunday, that is what happened, or almost what happened.

Again, tournament officials might have followed every step of the applicable rule as it was written.

If that’s the case, that rule should be changed. Yes, golf is different, and so are its rules. But it should not allow the kind of ambiguity we saw cast a pall over the country’s national championship on a day that is meant to be a celebration of the game.

In the end, Johnson soldiered on.

“I tried to focus on what I was doing and not focus on the penalty stroke,” he said.

Though tested by nervy putts, deep bunkers and narrow fairways, he shot even par after he was told he might be penalized after his final stroke and built a cushy lead.

As Johnson walked down the 18th fairway, the ovation was thunderous. In the social media age, seemingly everyone in the grandstand knew the trial he was going through, and they cheered his resoluteness.

On Twitter, his colleagues expressed their support and fiercely castigated the U.S.G.A. When Johnson sank a 3-foot birdie putt on No. 18, what could have been a dreadful ordeal had instead ended in victory.

And golf, which for two hours had stumbled badly, escaped a badly blackened eye.


