


FRONT PAGE

A map on April 21 with the continuation of an article about what Western military officials say is a significantly increased presence of Russian submarines along the coastlines of Scandinavia and Scotland, the Mediterranean Sea and the North Atlantic, meant to contest American and NATO undersea dominance, omitted two countries in NATO. Croatia and Luxembourg are also members.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 20 about Rodrigo Duterte, the front-runner in the Philippine presidential election, misstated, in some editions, the political status of another candidate, Grace Poe. She is a senator, not a former senator. (Mr. Duterte won the election on May 9.)

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Tuesday about a start-up that is developing self-driving tractor-trailer trucks described incorrectly 15 employees of the start-up, called Otto, who came from Google. Eight of them are engineers, not all 15.

•

A subheading in some editions on Thursday with an article about a bid for Monsanto by Bayer of Germany referred incorrectly to $67 billion related to the bid. That amount is the combined annual revenue of the two companies, not their combined value.

•

An article on Thursday about a decision by Viacom’s board to stop paying a salary to its chairman emeritus, Sumner M. Redstone, misstated the credentials of the person who evaluated Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity. He is a geriatric psychiatrist, not a psychologist.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on the Square Foot page on Wednesday about a revival of Inglewood, Calif., underpinned by a new stadium and a new National Football League team, referred incorrectly to the founding of the Kroenke Group, a development firm involved in that revival. It was founded in the 1980s — not in 2013, which was the year that the firm bought a parcel of land next to Hollywood Park and the Forum in Inglewood.

SPORTS

The Sports of The Times column last Friday, about accusations of a Russian doping scheme at the 2014 Sochi Olympics, referred incorrectly to a bronze medal the bobsledder Steven Holcomb won in Sochi. It was the first Olympic medal for the United States in the two-man event in 62 years — not the first Olympic medal for the United States in bobsled in 62 years. (The United States has won several medals in the four-man event and the two-woman event in recent Olympics.)

•

An article on Saturday about the golfer Colt Knost, who tied the course record in the second round of the Players Championship, misstated his age in some copies. He is 30, not 31. And because of an editing error, the article omitted, in some copies, part of the name of the Callaway golf club that has a sponsorship deal with Knost. It is Great Big Bertha, not Great Bertha.

THE ARTS

An article on Thursday about theaters’ efforts to attract new subscribers and members by offering tickets for the coming national tour of the musical “Hamilton” misstated the number of stages in North America to which Key Brand Entertainment brings shows through its Broadway Across America subsidiary. It is 40, not 30. The article also omitted a word from a comment by Jeff Chelesvig, president and chief executive of Des Moines Performing Arts. He said the organization had more than doubled the number of “new season tickets” purchased compared to a year ago, not the number of “season tickets” purchased.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Monday about the author Katherine Dunn misstated the year of her marriage to Paul Pomerantz and misstated the surname of her brother, who survives her. The marriage was in 2013, not 2012, and her brother is Eugene Hall, not Dunn.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


