


When Juan Carlos Pérez told his friends he was going to study to be a teacher, they dismissed his intentions: “They told me: ‘What’s the point? You’re not going to be able to teach.’”

He was an undocumented immigrant who crossed the border from Mexico and arrived in New York at age 11, with his younger brother and his mother.

They were right — initially.

But on Wednesday, a rule passed by the New York State Board of Regents in February will go into effect, allowing certain undocumented immigrants who came to the United States as children to apply for professional teaching certificates and for licenses in 57 professions. Soon, nurses, social workers, architects and engineers who came from places as disparate as Dubai, South Korea and Ecuador will enter the city’s work force, newly licensed. Medical students now have a way to fulfill their ambitions.

“It’s just a relief,” Mr. Pérez, 30, said last week in his classroom at the International High School at Union Square, where students hail from 49 countries. “I feel like I’m always on borrowed time because I don’t know what’s going to happen next.”

The state’s rule change comes after a 2015 decision that allowed the licensing of an undocumented New York lawyer, Cesar Vargas. An appellate panel of the State Supreme Court ruled last June that Mr. Vargas should be allowed to practice law because he was authorized to work under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program.

The program allows immigrants under 31 who were brought here by their parents to live and work legally in the United States and be temporarily protected from deportation.

Janet Calvo, a law professor at the City University of New York who provided the legal analysis for the Vargas case, sent a memo persuading the Regents that because of Vargas and similar case law, there should be no bar to noncitizens applying for other licenses.

Undocumented students are already eligible to attend state and city universities.

“New York has invested educational resources in these students, and it made no sense not to get the return on the investment,” said Natalie Gomez-Velez, the director of the law school’s Center on Latino/a Rights and Equality, also a party to the memo.

According to Ms. Gomez-Velez, California and Nebraska also allow immigrants in the deferred action program to get professional licenses.

It is unclear how many people in New York will be affected by the rule change because schools and the state do not keep track of who is undocumented.

Mr. Pérez came to the United States in 1997. His father had left six months earlier when his business was failing in rural Tlaxcala. The family settled in Corona, Queens. Mr. Pérez attended a bilingual middle school there, but did not speak much English. It was not until he got to high school, struggling with the language and coursework at International High School at LaGuardia Community College, that his teachers encouraged him.

He went on to graduate from Adelphi University with a bachelor’s degree in math and then, in 2008, with a master’s degree in education.

But after becoming the first in his family to graduate from college, Mr. Pérez could work only at restaurants because of his lack of legal status. He was a busboy at Buddha Bar in the meatpacking district.

After earning his master’s, he could only get a job passing out business cards for a car service company. He taught English as a Second Language for a Jackson Heights immigrant rights organization for three years. “I thought that was the closest I might come to the classroom,” Mr. Pérez said.

Then the Obama administration announced the deferred action program in June 2012, and the following April Mr. Pérez became a substitute teacher at the Union Square school, with a temporary license.

Even without the hope of a permanent license at the time, Mr. Pérez said, “I had already waited five years to be in the classroom. I wanted to teach.” Under the rules in force, he could have taught for a maximum of five years.

But at the beginning of 2015, he feared for his job. He had applied for the renewal of his work authorization and, weeks before his deadline, the government had not responded.

His Spanish-speaking students especially sensed Mr. Pérez’s distress.

“When I told them why,” Mr. Pérez said last week, tearing up when recalling their concern, “they said: ‘What can we do? Can we write letters to someone? We cannot lose you as a teacher, you understand us. You know what we’ve gone through.’”

Two weeks later, the renewal came through.

This year, he is advising one of the school’s top students, who is undocumented and seeking a way to afford college. His students have cheered him running the New York City Marathon and recently welcomed him as a chaperone at the school prom.

“He has a deep personal commitment to the work because he identifies so strongly with his students,” said Joe Luft, the executive director of the Internationals Network for Public Schools, which operates the 15 international high schools in New York City.

Immigration law had created a paradox. To fill the demand for teachers in the so-called STEM fields — science, technology engineering and math — the city has at times had to hire teachers from overseas, Mr. Luft said. But, he added, foreign-born candidates who were raised in New York often had to stay on the sidelines.

“I think it’s a long overdue and much-needed recognition of the fact that we have a pool of potential educators we’ve failed to tap into,” Mr. Luft said.

As soon as the school year ends, Mr. Pérez intends to submit his application for his professional license. He is already attending classes for his certification test. His reassurances to his students may soon carry more weight.

“I tell them, ‘I remember what it was like when I was in your place,’” Mr. Pérez said. “I know it seems really tough, and sometimes impossible, but it can be done.’”


