


ESPN and Verizon announced Tuesday the settlement of a lawsuit that accused Verizon of breaching its contract with the sports network when it created a new cable package for its Fios television service last year.

No details of the settlement were announced.

In a statement, Terry Denson, Verizon’s vice president of content strategy and acquisition, said: “ESPN is an important partner of ours. We look forward to working with them to provide great content to consumers for years to come.”

In the same statement, Sean Breen, senior vice president for affiliate sales for the Disney and ESPN media networks, said, “We look forward to further collaborating with them to deliver customers content across all of our platforms.”

ESPN filed suit in New York Supreme Court in April 2015 after Verizon moved some channels off Fios’s basic cable offering — including ESPN, Lifetime, TBS, USA Network and Comedy Central — and separated them into category-specific, $10-a-month programming tiers like sports, pop culture, entertainment and children that customers could choose from.

At the time, ESPN said in a statement that it was “at the forefront of embracing innovative ways to deliver high-quality content and value to consumers on multiple platforms but that must be done in compliance with our agreements.”

The lawsuit struck at the longstanding practice of bundling channels into broad, increasingly expensive cable packages that consumers have begun to rebel against by abandoning their pay-TV providers and choosing lower-priced Internet services like Netflix, Hulu and Sling TV.

ESPN is the most expensive cable network, so Fios’s Custom TV lineup was an attempt to create a “skinny bundle” that would keep customers from fleeing.

In defending itself against ESPN, Verizon said, “Consumers have spoken loud and clear that they want choice and the industry should be focused on giving consumers what they want.”

In February, with the lawsuit barely advancing in court, there appeared to be a thaw in the relations between ESPN and Verizon that suggested that a settlement was imminent. Verizon overhauled Custom TV, turning it into two plans that are essentially parallel basic cable packages. The first, Essentials, has no sports channels. The second, Sports & More, includes ESPN, ESPN2 and ESPNU.

ESPN said then that it was encouraged by the changes. But a Verizon spokesman said the changes were not made to accelerate a settlement but to adapt to consumers’ buying habits.


