


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times.

Michael S. Schmidt, a national security correspondent for The Times, just traveled for two weeks in Asia and the Middle East with the defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter. The trip was what Mr. Schmidt calls “Half a Magellan.”

“We went all the way to the other side of the world — in this case the Philippines — but instead of circumnavigating the earth, we turned around and made our way back,” he said.

On the trip, Mr. Schmidt passed through 14 time zones, visited five countries (India, the Philippines, the United Arab Emirates, Iraq and Saudi Arabia), wrote five articles, landed on one aircraft carrier and threw up once during a midair refueling of the defense secretary’s plane. In all, Mr. Schmidt flew 22,547 miles. (Had he flown around the Equator it would have been 24,901 miles.) As he got over the jet lag, he took some time to answer a few questions.

What is the secretary’s plane like?

Along with serving as his plane for foreign trips, it is a “doomsday” aircraft that is designed to be an airborne command center if there’s a national emergency, like a nuclear attack. It can refuel in air and fly for days without landing. The plane — which is called the “E-4B” — is a retrofitted 747 and was built decades ago during the height of the Cold War. The idea was if the country was devastated by an attack, the president, defense secretary or other administration officials could fly around in the E-4B and have all the capabilities of a command center on the ground — including the ability to launch nuclear weapons. According to the Air Force, at least one E-4B (there are more than one) is always on alert with a “global watch team” at an American air base somewhere in the world.

The inside of the plane is divided into sections. There’s an area just for the secretary, work rooms for his staff, a conference room, an operations center, bunk beds for the crew and a cabin for the press. The press cabin is similar to business class on a commercial flight. The seats are big and there’s decent legroom. But the plane is very old. You can hear it creak when we take off or turn, and the upholstery and décor look like something out of the 1970s.

The best part is the food, which is made in a tiny kitchen at the front of the plane. There are baskets of snacks in the press cabin, a cart with sodas, and we get hot meals for breakfast, lunch and dinner, and other treats in between. I must have eaten 7,000 calories worth of food on the flight from Washington to India.

What is it like when the plane refuels in midair?

On long trips, we refuel several times in flight. Even though we’re traveling to war zones, the refuelings are in fact often the most tumultuous parts of the trips. The captain will get on the loudspeaker and say: Buckle up, we’re coming into a refueling. The fasten-seat-belt sign goes on and a specially designed tanker that has come to meet up with us from wherever is the nearest American air baseflies a few dozen yards over our plane and drops down a hose. The E-4B opens a hole in the front of the plane and connects with the hose.

The problem is that in order to keep the hose in the plane, the pilots — who are flying by hand, not autopilot — need to maneuver the plane up and down. This creates the feeling of turbulence for the entire time of the refueling, which — depending on how thirsty the plane is — can last an hour and a half. It’s not turbulence in the sense of hitting bumps. It’s much more like going up for a few seconds and then falling for a few seconds.

We had two refuelings on our flight back from Saudi Arabia, and I vomited during the first one. Luckily, I did it in the bathroom. On a trip I made with the defense secretary in February 2015, I was allowed to sit in the cockpit for a refueling and shot this video. The video does not do justice to actually how close the tanker was above us. It was very easy for me to imagine how if either pilot made the slightest mistake the results would be catastrophic. After I left the cockpit, I walked down a spiral staircase and threw up. But that didn’t deter me — I found the refueling so neat that I went and watched the next one. The second one I watched was at night. The hose kept on coming out and fuel sprayed all over the windshield of the plane. Luckily, it has windshield wipers.

How does traveling with the defense secretary work? Do you play cards with him on the plane and then pile into a van with him wherever you land?

On the plane, we usually see him for only a brief period of time. When he gets on, he’ll typically come back into our cabin, say “Hello” and thank us for coming. On many trips, he’ll do an on-the-record question-and-answer with us in the cabin. It’s a small cabin, but he uses a microphone because the plane is so loud. This secretary does not often make news, so the question-and-answer sessions do not always lead to stories. The rest of the time, he’s usually with his staff or sleeping.

When we land, the press and his staff come out of one exit, and we head into cars and vans that are lined up in a motorcade next to the plane. The motorcade usually has at least a dozen vehicles in it. Then the secretary comes out of the plane’s main entrance, down the long staircase and is usually met by the American ambassador to the country we are in and senior officials from that country’s government. He then gets into a fancy car or S.U.V. at the front of the motorcade, and we speed off with police cars blaring their lights and sirens.

What was your favorite part of the trip?

It definitely was the visit we made to the aircraft carrier, the U.S.S. John C. Stennis, just off the coast of the Philippines in the South China Sea. Mr. Carter wanted to take his Filipino counterpart to see the carrier as part of the administration’s efforts to reassure our allies that we will support them against the Chinese. To get to the carrier, we took a special plane that is designed to land on it. The plane is small and is similar in size to one that a major American airline would use to fly passengers from a major city to a smaller domestic hub; it has propellers and looks sort of like a miniature cargo plane. It has very few windows, and we had to sit in these large seats that faced backward. The seats had many different straps and buckles to lock us in, and we wore helmets and eye gear.

We flew for about 30 minutes, and then about 10 seconds before we landed the crew shouted, “Here we come!” We hit the deck of the carrier, and you could hear the plane’s tailhook engaging the wire to slow us down. The plane went from a few hundred miles per hour to zero. The amount of force was unlike anything I had felt before. It lasted only a few seconds, but it felt as if it would never end.

As soon as the plane stopped, a door at the back popped open and we were told to get out — and there we were, in the middle of the deck in the middle of the South China Sea. Right next to us were fighter jets. You could literally touch them. We went inside for a few minutes, where we were given special colored vests and life preservers, and then came out back onto the deck and watched jets take off and land about 30 feet in front of us.

What was Iraq like?

It was my first time in Iraq since I spent all of 2011 in our Baghdad bureau. This time, my stay there lasted less than eight hours, and I don’t think I saw a single Iraqi. The secretary’s security officials determined that it was too dangerous to spend the night in Iraq so we got up early in the morning and flew from Abu Dhabi into Baghdad. We landed at the airport in Baghdad, and were whisked onto helicopters, where we put on body armor and helmets, and were flown into the Green Zone. We landed in the Green Zone on a cement helipad and were quickly ushered into up-armored S.U.V.’s and taken to a small American military base.

While Mr. Carter and his staff met with American military commanders and senior Iraqi officials, we ate at the military’s dining facility and received a briefing on the progress of the war. We then took helicopters back to the airport, where Mr. Carter announced at an event with American troops that President Obama was sending an additional 217 troops into Iraq to join the roughly 5,000 already there. We then got back on a plane and returned to Abu Dhabi. I could have been on a movie set in California and not known the difference.

Did you get any time off to do any exploring in any of the countries?

Not much. But there were unexpected encounters and discoveries. At the hotel we stayed at in Saudi Arabia, there were separate gyms for men and women. In the men’s gym there was a squash court. I play and ended up matching up with a local Saudi businessman. We were going to play first to three and I won the first game. We stopped to get water, and as I headed back into the court for the second game he turned to me and said, “Are you going to be here in a little while?” I said, “Yeah.” He said, “O.K., I’ll be back shortly.”

I was puzzled about where he was going, and after pausing for a few seconds I said, “Where are you headed?” He said, “To pray.”

He came back 20 minutes later and he went on to win the next three games.


