


KARMEI YOSEF, Israel — When David Woo and Margalit Shinar decided to buy a house after 28 years of a peripatetic life together, Israel was the only option for the couple, but it was not an obvious choice.

They had spent most of their life together in London, Washington and New York, where Mr. Woo is a managing partner and heads the research desk at Bank of America.

Mr. Woo, now 48, is Taiwanese by birth, but left home when he was 15, to study in the United States. He met Ms. Shinar, 20 years his senior, when he was in college at Tufts University in Massachusetts, and she was studying for her master’s degree.

Twenty eight years later, the time had come to settle down. Ms. Shinar, an American by birth who was raised in Israel, is 68 and wanted to return to the land where her family still lives.

The only question was where.

They knew they wanted a house, something pastoral, with a large garden and not too many neighbors.

The communities along Israel’s coastline, where the agricultural lands have become suburban enclaves, were not quite right. They were either too expensive, or had crowded lots that did not leave enough room for privacy.

A real estate agent specializing in country properties took them to Moshav Karmei Yosef, an agricultural community in the Judean foothills that is mentioned in the Bible and is still home to many farms, as well as two wineries.

The first plot they looked at was the former home of Ida Nudel, a former Soviet refusenik who had been gifted the land by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. Ms. Nudel had planted an extensive garden full of plants and trees mentioned in the Bible, and it radiated peacefulness and calm.

“When I saw this place, I said, that’s it, it’s done,” Mr. Woo said. “You’re buying for the plot and this lot is particularly lovely. It has gentle terrain and we fell in love with the garden. It’s like magic.”

The half-acre garden behind the house slopes down toward a private, locked gate that leads to a public forest next door, the house’s very own secret garden.

“They call this area Little Tuscany,” Ms. Shinar said. “We even have a monastery nearby and olive trees and wineries.”

There were also no “looming houses” nearby, said Ms. Shinar, who wanted to be “far from the madding crowds.”

“People told me I wouldn’t last here, that I would die from being so far from urban life. But what seduced us is the proximity to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.”

Karmei Yosef is halfway between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, about a 30-minute drive to either city.

There was a simple house already on the property, but Ms. Shinar had never considered living in someone else’s home.

“The idea that I would buy someone else’s house never crossed my mind,” said Ms. Shinar, an architect by training whose former husband and daughter are also architects. “And I’m fussy. I want this and not that, and especially in Israel, which has very young architecture, the chances of finding something I’d really like and afford, well, there was practically no chance.”

They began working with an architect, but when Ms. Shinar’s architect daughter, Kedem Shinar, helped solve a particular troubling issue with the black iron staircase leading to the second floor, Ms. Shinar knew she had found the right professional.

Mr. Woo felt the same way.

“We wanted something modern; we didn’t want to build another Tuscan villa in Israel,” said Mr. Woo, referring to the style of some of the nearby houses. “We wanted something original, so almost by definition you go down the path of modern, but modern with a soul, that would be homey, with the context of Israel. And we wanted a garden and to draw inspiration from the East.”

Kedem Shinar earned her architectural degree in Japan, where she lived for four years. More important, the two women and Mr. Woo share a similar aesthetic, she said.

“We see eye to eye on many things,” Kedem Shinar said of her mother and Mr. Woo.

Mr. Woo, a longtime New Yorker, loves lofts and wanted the airy, spacious feeling of a high-ceilinged loft in the country. He is a tall man, and did not want to feel cramped in any space. Finally, the couple are writing a novel together and wanted to be sure to have plenty of nooks that would encourage creativity.

What they created was the sum of all those parts. The square, spare house, 350 square meters on a half-acre plot, is large and airy, but not too big, which settled Ms. Shinar, who has lived most of her life in fairly small spaces.

The double-door entrance on the eastern side of the Bauhaus-inspired house leads into a spacious public space, divided into an airy living room and dining area furnished with Eames-inspired pieces, including a comfortable, twill-covered L-shaped couch, Turkish rugs and a long plank dining table. The focus, however, is on the interplay of walls and windows leading out to the garden, with double-height windows and sliding doors open to the garden and the forest of cypress and fir trees beyond.

“I was scared stiff of double-height windows,” Ms. Shinar said. “I was brought up in Israel, where you don’t open big windows to the sun.”

The house has a northern exposure, however, with sun coming from the east in the morning, but never any direct sunlight. The wraparound sliding doors offer complete exposure to the garden, creating one of the house’s many frames to the garden, Mr. Woo said.

The open kitchen is on the other side of the public space, taking up a spacious corner by the back door that opens onto the kitchen garden, planted with herbs for easy picking. With the burners set into the kitchen island and liberal use of wood and metal in the cupboard doors and surfaces, Ms. Shinar has the efficient, attractive work space that she lacks in their New York apartment, while Mr. Woo has the right kind of space for cooking Chinese food, which can create a lot of smoke.

An upper gallery houses the floor-to-ceiling library and office, with a wood-and-iron bridge that floats over the double-height living room. And while the palette of the house is mostly neutral, from the poured concrete floors and wooden elements to the iron doors and stair treads, there are many touches of color, from the area rugs, textiles and bright orange barstools set at the kitchen counter.

Ms. Shinar also preferred creating a modern interpretation of something local, whether it was her kitchen window designed with glass squares framed in metal, known as a Belgian window in Israel, or the iron staircase, in homage to the ironworks seen in many Israeli homes.

“If you’re in Jerusalem, you have to use Jerusalem stone,” she said, referring to the city’s law requiring facades of the creamy limestone, “but for me, stucco is Israel, and so are Belgian windows and cement floors, because that’s what Israelis use. You want to be able to live in it, and put things down on the counters and tables, without ruining some composition.”

On the west side of the house is the iron staircase that leads up to the master bedroom, also offering a full view of the garden and forest beyond. Downstairs is a guest room and on the side of the house is another apartment with a separate entrance that can be used for guests or family. Like all the other rooms, it faces the forest, said Kedem Shinar, pointing to the wraparound windows.

“We’re always oriented toward the garden,” she said.

For Kedem Shinar, it was important to include those elements of Eastern influence, although she is aware of how much she has to learn from the enigmatic culture.

“I’m careful when I mention being influenced by Japan,” she said. “It’s not about copy-and-paste or planting bamboos. I consciously tried to take some of the elements that I had deeply learned and understood.”

One of the elements she included is the concrete and wood deck that leads from the living room — a mix of materials that was cheaper and more practical, and also blended with the colors of the garden — and floats, Japanese style, over the garden. It is a concept found in traditional Japanese houses and shrines, creating a strong connection between inside and outside, she said.

Mr. Woo said, “If we wanted to build a house that was totally integrated with nature, we could have lowered the house to the level of the garden. I think the reason the Japanese create a little distance is to allow you to contemplate nature and enjoy it. It’s not totally being part of it, but it’s a reverential thing.”

The garden, which slopes down toward the forest and is divided into different zones, has areas where Mr. Woo and Ms. Shinar can sit on a bench and contemplate their surroundings, work on a tale or weed in the garden. There’s an English-style garden outside the front door, with tall, colorful flower beds of Mediterranean flora, a fruit and olive tree orchard and a grape arbor being developed toward the back, near the secret door leading to the forest.

The house is respectful of nature, but it’s not an environmental house, Ms. Shinar said; it’s a more of a philosophical approach.

Mr. Woo said he often wondered if, like them, Ms. Nudel, the Soviet refusenik, preferred the forest to the mountainous side of the community.

“I’m sure she did,” Ms. Shinar said. “The mountain offers drama, the forest offers peace.”


