


It was understandable if the Mets entered Thursday’s game with the Pittsburgh Pirates with as much self-esteem as a Charlie Brown-led team, after David Wright, their anchor for the last 13 years at third base, had neck surgery, with no timetable for a return.

As fate would have it, Bartolo Colon, the source of so much baseball joy, was scheduled to start.

Colon delivered on the mound and at the plate, boosting the Mets to a 6-4 win. Aside from throwing seven scoreless innings before allowing two runs in the eighth, Colon led off the third by ripping a stand-up double into the right-center field gap. After beating a throw to third base on a Curtis Granderson single to center field, Colon scampered home on a sacrifice fly by Yoenis Cespedes.

“Anytime you’re entertained, it helps, and he’s entertaining,” Manager Terry Collins said, adding, “He scored and came in and went out and pitched great.”

Colon said through an interpreter after the game that he does not enjoy running a lot, but was happy to provide a boost.

“I didn’t see it personally, but I was watching just now on TV,” Colon said. “It looks like they enjoyed themselves.”

The run delighted and awakened the Mets’ offense. Neil Walker followed with a two-run homer and Michael Conforto contributed a solo home run, prolonging the inning and enabling the heavy-footed Colon to regroup in the dugout.

“Thank God for Walker and Conforto’s home runs,” Colon said. “That gave me a little bit of chance to catch my breath, and I was able to come back even stronger after that.”

After missing the last three games with back pain, Walker drove in three runs. But it was Colon who provided the key spark on Thursday.

“I don’t think he ever ceases to amaze us,” Walker said.

Granderson led off the bottom of the first inning with a home run, the 17th time he has done so with the Mets, setting a club record.

Despite Colon’s efforts to enliven the Mets, there were times of concern. Addison Reed gave up two runs in the ninth before Jeurys Familia stopped the Pirates’ attempted comeback with his 22nd save.

Wilmer Flores started at third base, but left in the third inning after getting hit by a pitch on the outside of his left hand. In a rare piece of good news concerning the health of the Mets’ players, X-rays were negative. Flores said he hoped to be able to play Friday, but he was unsure of his status after the game.

There were more encouraging signs that Conforto may be fully healthy after injuring his wrist. He returned to the starting lineup for the first time since Saturday and prevented an extra-base hit by Jung Ho Kang in the first inning with a diving catch in left field. He added a single in the fifth inning for his first multihit game since May 20.

“I saw much better bat speed today than I’ve seen,” Collins said. “Hopefully, it’s a sign of good things to come.”


