


DENVER — A couple of innings after D. J. LeMahieu lay prone after taking a fastball to the helmet, he stepped into the batter’s box for what should have been a very gingerly at-bat against Aroldis Chapman and the major leagues’ fastest fastball.

Instead, LeMahieu dismissed the beaning as a once-in-a-career moment, dug in and drove Chapman’s two-strike fastball deep into the right-center-field gap, racing around the bases with a run-scoring triple.

LeMahieu’s eighth-inning hit put the finishing touches on the Colorado Rockies’ 6-3 victory over the Yankees on Wednesday on a hot, arid afternoon.

It also represented the type of up-off-the-mat resilience that the Yankees are going to need to show soon if they are going to be a factor in the playoff race.

The Yankees have followed a five-game winning streak with four consecutive losses, sinking back into last place in the American League East.

“You win five games in a row, you lose one, then try to put three or four more in a row,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “We haven’t been able to do that, and that’s why we’re where we’re at.”

He added: “This is an important month. We can’t keep having months where we’re not making up ground, ’cause if you’re losing ground, it’s going to be tough to catch up. These are months where we have to play better than the teams that are in front of us.”

The Yankees tried to do so on Wednesday with a lineup that was without its biggest bats. Alex Rodriguez was relegated to the bench because there is no designated hitter in National League parks, Brian McCann was given the day off after catching Tuesday night’s game, and Carlos Beltran missed a second consecutive game after having his left knee drained and receiving a cortisone shot.

Chase Headley hit cleanup, and Didi Gregorius followed him in the order.

The Yankees, not surprisingly, did not manage an extra-base hit, but they did take a 2-1 lead in the fourth when Starlin Castro singled in Jacoby Ellsbury and scored when catcher Tony Wolters threw away Aaron Hicks’s dribbler in front of the plate.

The lead evaporated in the fifth when LeMahieu, who had earlier doubled and scored, singled up the middle to score Charlie Blackmon. LeMahieu came home on Nolan Arenado’s home run to left. The Rockies added another run against Ivan Nova, the Yankees’ starter, when Trevor Story doubled and scored on Mark Reynolds’s two-out single to give the Rockies a 5-2 lead.

The game then nearly took a nasty turn in the sixth, when reliever Anthony Swarzak’s fastball caught LeMahieu in the helmet. LeMahieu lay face down for a moment before slowly rising to his feet and heading to first base.

“I don’t know where it hit me,” LeMahieu said. “I was pretty lucky it wasn’t worse. I was just more shocked than anything. I figured all right, everything’s good.”

Somewhat predictably, Rockies reliever Miguel Castro buzzed the first Yankees hitter in the top of the seventh, Austin Romine, with a pair of 99-mile-per-hour fastballs. The second one sailed to the backstop and drew a warning to both teams from Gabe Morales, the home plate umpire.

“I thought it was warranted,” Girardi said. “Only he knows, but it looked awful suspicious to me. If you’re trying to send a message, I get that, but it can’t be around someone’s head.”

Said LeMahieu: “I don’t think there was any message sent there other than a couple of balls got away from him. But it looks bad after that inning.”

When Dellin Betances threw a curveball at Rockies first baseman Mark Reynolds’s head in the next inning, Morales did not eject him.

“Whenever it goes by somebody’s head when we saw somebody get hit in the head, it always kind of freaks you out, like, Oh, what’s going on here?” Arenado said. “But it was off-speed, and it got away from him. It happens.”

Girardi said he would not have reacted mildly if Betances had been ejected.

“If the ump says something, I’m going to go ballistic,” Girardi said.

“Me, too,” Betances said when told of his manager’s comment.

It remains to be seen whether the Yankees can carry that type of fire to Minnesota, where they begin a four-game series on Thursday with the Twins, the team with the worst record in the American League. But little else seemed capable of stirring the Yankees, a team urgently in need of it.

INSIDE PITCH

MARK TEIXEIRA said he expected to go on a rehabilitation assignment next Tuesday and Wednesday with a targeted return from the disabled list of June 24 at home against the Twins. Teixeira said he was pleased with how the torn cartilage in his left knee had responded to shots and rest. But if the discomfort returns, he could have season-ending surgery.


