


“Collective Sigh”

(Don Giovanni)

For this, you don’t need perfect pitch or a lyric sheet: Pinkwash makes music in the key of catharsis. “Collective Sigh” is the Philadelphia duo’s first full-length record. It has 10 tracks but feels like one long double action of anguish and stomp. It suggests post-post-hardcore, or maybe punk-prog, with the punk first.

The band’s sound carries its own information, and to explain its biography and its name risks eclipsing the work. But it has been supplied to the news media, so here you go: Joey Doubek, the singer-guitarist, and Ashley Arnwine, the drummer, played in the band Ingrid when they both lived in Washington. During that time, Mr. Doubek’s mother became ill with breast cancer, and he became her primary caretaker. She died in 2009. Both musicians eventually moved to Philadelphia and started Pinkwash. The name alludes to the practice of corporations that promote their products with the iconography of pink ribbons in sympathy with breast-cancer patients; it also refers to the co-opting of L.G.B.T. interests for public-relations purposes by politicians or corporations.

In Pinkwash, Mr. Doubek writes repeating guitar riffs splintered into shifting or alternating meters; he has hundreds of them, all strong. (Placid, Gary Numan-like synthesizer tones float over the songs here and there, offsetting the churn.) Ms. Arnwine plays rugged drum patterns against those riffs, adding little accents to the groove, smashing her cymbals nearly all the way through.

A lot of what she does — the details, the elegant ferocity — traces back to John Bonham of Led Zeppelin; the unrelenting fever of a Pinkwash song, and the yelping tone of Mr. Doubek’s vocals, recalls the 1990s band At the Drive-In. The record is wearying, as so many guitar-drum duo bands are wearying. But the band has grown surer and more stately since its previous work, the 2014 EP “You Cure Your Soil” and the enraged 2015 single “Cancer Money.”

These songs are carefully composed, culminating in the record’s magnum opus, “Walk Forward With Your Eyes Closed.” The lyrics suggest pain, illness, exhaustion, the struggles of the body and the question of who takes care of the caretaker: “You’re metastatic/you’re spreading in plain sight,” or “empty appetite/to make it through.” One song, “Sigh,” has almost two and a half minutes of a single repeated low note, with the only vocals that don’t come from Mr. Doubek: It could be the voice of a nurse, repeating “Inhale. Exhale.”


