


WASHINGTON — In a biting critique of the presumptive Republican nominee, President Obama said Friday that Donald J. Trump should be subjected to serious scrutiny and not be allowed to treat the presidential campaign like “a reality show.”

“We are in serious times, and this is a really serious job,” Mr. Obama said after being asked about Mr. Trump at a White House news conference. “This is not entertainment. This is not a reality show. This is a contest for the presidency of the United States.”

The president suggested that Mr. Trump’s statements and proposals would wither under “exacting standards and genuine scrutiny,” saying that particular attention must be paid to campaign promises made by Mr. Trump — or any other candidate — on issues like the budget, the economy and foreign policy.

“You know, if they take a position on international issues that could threaten war or has the potential of upending our critical relationships with other countries or would potentially break the financial system, that needs to be reported on,” Mr. Obama said.

“What I’m concerned about is the degree to which reporting and information starts emphasizing the spectacle and the circus,” he added, “because that’s not something we can afford.”

Taking questions from reporters at the White House for the first time since Mr. Trump became the presumptive nominee on Tuesday, the president chided the news media over its coverage of the campaign, saying it had not yet focused on serious issues.

“One thing that I’m going to really be looking for over the next six months is that the American people are effectively informed about where candidates stand on the issues, what they believe, making sure that their numbers add up, making sure that their policies have been vetted and that candidates are held to what they’ve said in the past,” Mr. Obama said.

The comments, though restrained in tone, were a preview of what aides say will be a vigorous presence by Mr. Obama in the general election. Mr. Trump and Mr. Obama have a tense history that includes Mr. Trump’s leading role in the “birther” movement, which falsely suggested that the president was not born in the United States.

Mr. Obama has so far held back from entering the fray on the Democratic side, in part because of the continuing contest between Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders. Asked whether it was time for Mr. Sanders to concede, the president once again demurred.

He said both Democratic candidates agreed on issues like raising the minimum wage, investing in infrastructure, improving the immigration system, using the military prudently and providing health care to all Americans.

“Let’s let the process play itself out,” he said.

But Mr. Obama seems increasingly impatient to weigh in on the Republican side, amid a contest in which millions of voters have rejected more than a dozen traditional candidates in favor of a hotel mogul and former reality TV star.

The president’s comments came during what had been billed as a statement on the economy and financial corruption. But after making his remarks on those topics, the president took questions from reporters, knowing that he would undoubtedly be asked about Mr. Trump.

He said Republican voters must now confront the choice they have made.

“Their standard-bearer at the moment is Donald Trump,” Mr. Obama said. “Republican voters are going to have to make a decision about whether this is the guy who speaks for them and represents their values.”

In particular, he added, “Republican women, voters, are going to have to decide, ‘Is that the guy I feel comfortable with representing me and what I care about?’ ”

He also suggested that reporters covering the campaign — including some sitting in the room — had not done enough to expose the weaknesses in Mr. Trump’s policies.

“He has a long record that needs to be examined,” the president said, adding that “the American people, they’ve got good judgment, they’ve got good instincts, as long as they get good information.”

Echoing Mr. Obama, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., speaking on Friday to the CBS affiliate in Pittsburgh, expressed worry that Mr. Trump might ultimately persuade voters that he was fit to be president.

“He has beaten the odds; he’s surprised everybody,” Mr. Biden said. “I think we all make a mistake when we don’t take him seriously.”

The vice president said that Mr. Trump could hire some “really significant” advisers and propose policies that “would make people think, ‘Well, maybe this guy can actually be president.’ ”

Mr. Obama, like many of his predecessors, has often criticized the news media for focusing on frivolous subjects that produce good images instead of the more weighty subjects that are central to governing.

As if on cue, a television reporter in the briefing room asked the president about a Twitter post by Mr. Trump in which he professed his love of Hispanics and was pictured eating a taco bowl. Mr. Obama seemed amused, if not surprised, by the question.

“I have no thoughts on Mr. Trump’s tweets,” the president said bluntly. “As a general rule, I don’t pay attention to Mr. Trump’s tweets.”


