


Curt West, 41, is a knife sharpener at William Henry in McMinnville, Ore.

Q. What kinds of knives does William Henry make?

A. We make high-end folding pocketknives. Collectors like to buy them. People who want to make a personal statement consider these knives an accessory, like a high-end watch. It’s like wearing designer jeans, or the difference between wearing a Casio and a Rolex.

How did you find this job?

My aunt has worked here for 12 years. She’s responsible for the final assembly of the knives, and she was always talking up the company. I was working in auto body repair and painting, which I learned working on old cars with my dad. I applied here and was hired almost seven years ago.

Were your skills transferable?

They were. I used grinders and sanders in the auto body business, and I acquired an eye for detail and textures, which helps with the work I do now.

Did you begin sharpening knives right away?

No, I started under Rafael Barajas, a knife-handle shaper here, learning how to sand some of the easier handles like titanium. Then I moved up to handles with a black-lip pearl inlay. Pearl is softer than titanium and will sand down more quickly and make the handle uneven if you’re not careful. After about a year, Matt Conable, the company founder, asked me if I’d like to sharpen, and I jumped at the chance.

What is your work area like?

We each have our own workstation. I start with a variable speed belt grinder with 200-grit sandpaper and move to a finer, 845-grit paper. Then I use a polishing wheel that gives the blade a mirror finish and hones the final edge to razor sharpness. I get satisfaction seeing the finished knives. They’re art, and I like being able to say I’m an artisan.

Have you ever cut yourself?

Once or twice, but not enough to need stitches. I was mad at myself because it was my fault. I sharpen about 200 knives a day, and I don’t wear gloves because I need to feel the sharpness of the blade’s edge. I do wear a thick leather apron to protect my body, especially when I’m polishing the edge. The blade could catch in the wheel and kick back at you. Obviously, you have to pay attention in this job.


