


A state ethics panel asked a court on Monday to compel the Campaign for One New York, a political nonprofit connected to Mayor Bill de Blasio, to hand over documents related to its lobbying and fund-raising activities after the group’s lawyer declared last week that he would not comply with the panel’s subpoena.

The panel, the Joint Commission on Public Ethics, known as Jcope, filed papers in State Supreme Court in Albany seeking to have a judge enforce the subpoena, arguing that the nonprofit had no basis for refusing to provide the documents, according to two people familiar with the matter.

The Campaign for One New York now has several days to respond, according to the people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the papers were filed under seal. The group’s lawyer, Laurence D. Laufer, said in a letter on Friday that the group would no longer cooperate with the panel’s investigation into the nonprofit’s lobbying activities, saying the inquiry had become “blatantly political.”

At issue before the judge is whether the panel’s most recent subpoena was lawful, or whether the panel sought documents in a manner that was overly broad or burdensome, or that sought information that would be considered privileged and therefore not subject to disclosure.

The investigation by the panel is focused on whether the Campaign for One New York, which Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, created after his election in 2013 to carry forward his agenda, had acted as a lobbyist without filing the required paperwork declaring itself one. It had done so in 2014, when the group was advocating Mr. de Blasio’s universal prekindergarten initiative, which required state approval, but did not register again as a lobbyist in 2015.

The group has maintained that its activities that year — and in 2016, when the group was winding down its operations — did not include lobbying and that it was not required to file.

Mr. Laufer, in the 12-page letter, argued that the investigation had gone beyond its original focus on lobbying to include fund-raising activities that were not within Jcope’s jurisdiction to investigate.

In the letter, Mr. Laufer suggested that the panel’s investigation had been of a piece with an inquiry by the State Board of Elections into Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising on behalf of Democrats in State Senate contests in 2014; both independent agencies have had ties to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, he argued, and may have been influenced by the governor, a Democrat, who has been in an open feud with Mr. de Blasio for months.


