


EDMONTON, Alberta — Convoys of cars and trucks made their way gingerly through the wildfire-ravaged community of Fort McMurray, Alberta, on Friday, headed south to safety past the charred ruins of neighborhoods and businesses, after being stranded for days north of town on the area’s main highway.

Bracketed by Royal Canadian Mounted Police cruisers and preceded by a military helicopter watching for flare-ups near their route, the first convoy got rolling shortly after dawn and others followed at intervals.

In the next few days, officials hope to clear 15,000 vehicles from the area, which had been cut off repeatedly when flames blocked Highway 63, the only road link to the rest of Canada.

Food and fuel stops for the convoys were set up along the highway, and the traffic was “free flowing and going well,” Rachel Notley, the premier of Alberta, said at a news conference in Edmonton.

Mounties blocked intersections along the convoy’s route to prevent evacuees from turning off to check on their homes and property. “The city of Fort McMurray is not safe to return to, and this will be true for a significant period of time,” Ms. Notley said. “So the town site is going to be secured and protected by the R.C.M.P.”

Brig. Gen. Wayne D. Eyre said that military helicopter crews used techniques developed in the war in Afghanistan to search for potential fire threats to the conveys.

When Fort McMurray was swiftly overtaken by a wildfire on Tuesday and the city was ordered evacuated, most of its 90,000 residents escaped south on Highway 63, and the road rapidly became choked with traffic and was blocked at times by the fire. About 25,000 people headed north instead, to take refuge in the large work camps used to house transient workers at oil sands projects. Some camps that had been mothballed after the recent slump in oil prices were reopened as shelters.

The camps, too, were cut off when the flames closed the highway, and they soon ran low on food and supplies. Officials tried to resupply the camps using a military transport plane, but on Thursday evening, Ms. Notley said that effort was no longer sustainable.

Many evacuees have been airlifted from the camps, using an airstrip owned by Shell Canada, on chartered and oil-company-owned aircraft, including at least one executive jet.

But other evacuees tried to drive south again, only to be stopped at a police blockade outside Fort McMurray because smoke and fire had again severed Highway 63. The long line of stopped vehicles led to frustration and sometimes confrontations.

Overnight on Thursday, tankers with gasoline and diesel fuel were escorted north to Fort McMurray to top off the tanks of the isolated evacuees, many of whom had run out of fuel.

The vehicles are being divided into convoys of about 50, with police cars at the front and back to keep them together and moving. Television images showed that many of the vehicles were pickup trucks fitted with “buggy whips” — pennants on long, flexible sticks that are meant to ensure that the trucks are not overlooked and crushed by the immense dump trucks used in oil sands open-pit mines.

The police released the convoys to travel on their own once they were a safe distance south of Fort McMurray. Ms. Notley urged the evacuees to continue on to Edmonton, the provincial capital and nearest large city, or to Calgary farther south.

“What we’re trying to do is encourage them to go to the two major centers, because that’s where we have the greatest number of services, both in terms of health, income support, mental health support, as well as the capacity to absorb the students into the school system,” she said.

New shelters were expected to open in both cities on Friday.

Ms. Notley said the fire continued to grow Thursday night and had burned about 250,000 acres as of Friday. Fire officials said the flames had reached the gates of the Long Lake oil sands project, which has been shut down, as well as the small town of Anzac, where some evacuees from Fort McMurray had initially fled.

While there was as yet no end in sight to the fire, a change in wind direction on Friday may ease the threat it poses to populated areas. Chad Morrison, of the provincial wildfire service, said the fire would probably stop moving south and start moving to the northeast of the city, where there is nothing but forest.

Firefighters are having success protecting the surviving buildings in Fort McMurray, as well as in Anzac, Mr. Morrison said, but the extreme intensity of the fire has made it impossible to tackle on any larger scale.

“Right now, we really do need some rain,” he said, adding that even with rain, “we’ll be here for weeks and weeks.” Even that may be optimistic, he acknowledged: “It’s not uncommon to have large landscape fires burn late into the year.”


