


RALEIGH, N.C. — The protracted battle over North Carolina’s voting rules moved to a federal appeals court on Tuesday, one day after a judge upheld the Republican-backed overhaul and increased the likelihood that the changes would be in effect for this year’s presidential election.

Opponents of the changes here, which include the introduction of a voter identification requirement and a shortening of the state’s early voting period, submitted formal notices of appeals.

That shifts the litigation to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. Lawyers said they would ask the Fourth Circuit, which sits in Richmond, Va., to expedite its consideration of the matter.

“We are evaluating the grounds for appeal,” said Michael A. Glick, a lawyer for critics who have described North Carolina’s changes as efforts to suppress the vote of Democratic-leaning constituencies like minorities and students. “We have identified grounds, which is why we issued the notice this morning.”

Plans for the appeals, which the law’s opponents had vowed to pursue after Monday night’s decision by Judge Thomas D. Schroeder of Federal District Court in Winston-Salem, did little to diminish the good mood of Republicans, who have argued that key modifications are safeguards against fraud in a state that is among the nation’s most contested in presidential elections. (Democrats say the kind of misconduct the law targets is virtually nonexistent.)

In a statement on Tuesday, the chairmen of the General Assembly’s Joint Legislative Elections Oversight Committee welcomed the ruling by Judge Schroeder, who was appointed by President George W. Bush, and made a pointed jab toward the federal government, which joined the litigation against the state.

“We are glad the court recognized the law provides all voters an equal opportunity to vote and stopped this politically motivated overreach from the Obama Justice Department,” said the chairmen, State Representative David R. Lewis and State Senator Bob Rucho.

A spokeswoman said Monday that the Justice Department was “disappointed in the ruling, reviewing the decision carefully and evaluating our options.”

The changes to North Carolina’s elections procedures, which the Republican-controlled legislature first approved in 2013, are sweeping. Beyond the identification requirement, which state officials relaxed substantially amid the litigation, lawmakers and Gov. Pat McCrory, a Republican, abolished same-day voter registration and ended preregistration, which had permitted some teenagers to sign up for the voting rolls before their 18th birthdays.

After two trials and the development of a record of at least 23,000 pages, Judge Schroeder concluded that North Carolina had “provided legitimate state interests for its voter ID requirement and electoral system.”

Unless a higher court intervenes, his ruling means the changes will be in effect when North Carolina votes this autumn.

Although critics of Judge Schroeder’s opinion offered few details on Tuesday about their planned arguments to the Fourth Circuit, they began an assault about how the judge applied his factual findings, which consumed more than 190 pages of the 485-page ruling.

“The judge seemed to really think that if it’s not impossible for someone to register to vote after this law, then it’s acceptable,” said Dale Ho, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union. “From our perspective, that’s not really the proper test.”

Still, the law’s critics could encounter a significant obstacle at the Fourth Circuit, because appellate judges generally accept the assessments of trial courts on matters of fact.

“Republicans and Democrats tend to view these facts through different lenses, and judges are no different — not because they want to help ‘their party,’ but because they are predisposed to see facts in different ways,” Richard L. Hasen, an elections law expert at the University of California, Irvine, wrote in an analysis of Monday’s ruling.

Even if Democratic appointees form the majority of the panel that hears the case, Professor Hasen wrote, “the judge made a number of factual findings adverse to the plaintiffs, which are supposed to get great deference by the appellate courts.”


