


The nine correction officers who are on trial in the July 2012 beating of an inmate at Rikers Island, New York City’s main jail complex, will not be telling their side of the story in court.

Lawyers for all nine defendants unexpectedly rested their case on Monday without calling a single witness or presenting any evidence in State Supreme Court in the Bronx. One after another, the defense lawyers informed Justice Steven Barrett and the jurors of their decision shortly after prosecutors concluded their case after weeks of testimony from more than a dozen witnesses, including the former inmate who was beaten, Jahmal Lightfoot.

In response, Justice Barrett told the jurors, “We’ve taken a long journey together and the journey is coming to an end, for better or worse.”

The case has drawn public scrutiny at a time when persistent violence at Rikers Island has received intensifying criticism and prompted calls by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, and others to shut it down.

Prosecutors argued that Mr. Lightfoot, 31, was unarmed and did nothing to provoke a beating by members of an elite correction squad in a small cell. They said the beating was ordered by Eliseo Perez Jr., an assistant chief for security, and Gerald Vaughn, a correction captain, after Mr. Perez decided that the prisoner thought he was tough. Three other officers have been accused of helping to cover up the beating.

Mr. Lightfoot sustained fractures of both his eye sockets and testified in court that he suffered for months afterward. He said his eyes would hurt and his vision would become blurry when he tried to read, and he would get headaches and spit up blood. He was released from state prison in 2014.

The nine officers have been charged with various crimes, including attempted gang assault.

Defense lawyers have scrutinized and, in some cases, neutralized the prosecution’s witnesses, which have included doctors, investigators and a DNA expert.

Even the prosecution’s last witness, Dr. Eric Cerrati, who examined Mr. Lightfoot after the episode, testified that while his injuries were consistent with being kicked by the guards, as Mr. Lightfoot claimed, they could have also been caused by officers punching him in the face after he brandished a weapon, as the defense has claimed.

The defense lawyers have said that Mr. Lightfoot was injured while being restrained by the officers after he was found with a weapon during a search and disregarded their orders to drop it.

They have also sought to undermine the former inmate’s credibility by emphasizing his criminal history and by suggesting that Mr. Lightfoot, who is unemployed, hopes to benefit financially with a pending lawsuit against the city. Mr. Lightfoot was jailed at Rikers in 2010 after snatching a woman’s pocketbook. He has acknowledged in court that he had been a part of the Bloods gang and had been arrested for possession of marijuana and crack cocaine, among other minor offenses.

On Monday, the defense lawyers initially informed Justice Barrett that they would be calling witnesses, including some of the officers. But after a short break to discuss the case among themselves, the lawyers seemed to reverse course and returned to say they were resting their case.

The lawyers declined to explain their decision afterward, citing an order not to discuss case that was imposed by Justice Barrett at the start of the trial.

Daniel C. Richman, a professor at Columbia Law School and a former federal prosecutor, said defendants and their lawyers frequently choose not to present a case as a strategic move, often because the defendants have criminal histories or because it could open doors to other areas the prosecution could question.

“There are always some risks defendants bear by putting on a case,” Mr. Richman said. “By not putting on a case, they can avoid those risks and make a clean argument about how the prosecution failed to meet its burden.”

Mr. Perez retired in 2013, and Mr. Vaughn in 2014. The seven other correction officers on trial — Tobias Parker, Jose Parra, Alfred Rivera, David Rodriguez, Jeffrey Richard, Harmon Frierson and Dwayne Maynard — were suspended in June 2013, but recently returned to work on modified duty with no contact with inmates.


