


WILLOW, N.Y. — The narrow study where Carla Bley does her composing, upstairs in her rustic-modern house here, was the picture of tidy efficiency one recent afternoon. Handwritten sheet music covered a writing stand and the rack of an upright piano. A blank legal pad sat on a desk. Bookshelves held scores in labeled folders: “Healing Power.” “Liver of Life.” “Ups and Downs.”

This orderly state was aberrant, according to Ms. Bley. “I cleaned up my music room yesterday for the first time in 30 years,” she said. “I mean, it took me a week. There were piles here, piles there, great messes, remnants of organization that never got finished. And that’s the way it has been, because I’m not interested in organizing. I want to write the next piece.”

A composer-arranger known for the temerity, formal ingenuity and impish humor of her music — the basis for her recognition as a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master last year — Ms. Bley has settled warily into her current state of eminence. She has written standards, like “Ida Lupino,” and had an influence that’s incalculable partly for being so pervasive and diffuse, like fluoride in the water supply.

She turns 80 on Wednesday, having survived many of her former collaborators, with no sign of creative fatigue.

The office cleanup may have seemed a sign of renewal, but it was motivated by tedium, Ms. Bley said, reclining on a couch while her partner of more than 25 years, the bassist Steve Swallow, brewed coffee. They were back from their yearly retreat in the British Virgin Islands, where Ms. Bley broke her left wrist toppling off a ladder while reaching for fruit in a guavaberry tree. The injury, which has required resetting and a titanium plate, prevented her from playing the piano for weeks.

Ms. Bley is a born contrarian, quick with an absurdist or self-deflating remark. Since the early 1960s she has been one of the few women of her stature in jazz, but she’s not the type to rally for the cause. “I wanted to be the only woman,” she said. “I was glad I stood out in some way.”

Her coolly ravishing new album, “Andando el Tiempo” (“In the Course of Time”), just out from ECM, features a handful of inventions for her longtime trio with Mr. Swallow and the saxophonist Andy Sheppard. Chamberlike and willowy, suffused with melancholy, it reflects her sly noncompliance with jazz and classical conventions, which has been a prevalent theme of her half-century career.

The wayward product of a strict religious upbringing in Oakland, Calif. — her father, Emil Borg, a church organist, taught her to play piano — Ms. Bley discovered jazz in adolescence and never recovered. Moving to New York as a teenager, she became a cigarette girl at Birdland. “I just wanted everything to be bad and wrong and different and just as forbidden as possible,” she said. One night in the club she met Paul Bley, who would become her first husband.

Mr. Bley, a pioneer of free improvisation on the piano, encouraged her to compose tunes for him. Her first attempt, “O Plus One,” appeared on one of his albums in the late ’50s. She found challenge and purpose in the work, though not much validation: “I was going to a psychiatrist at that point who suggested electroshock therapy to get rid of this feeling that I was a composer.”

She didn’t follow that advice, but considered working as a seamstress until the composer and theorist George Russell asked to record one of her tunes on an album. She soon had other pieces recorded by the vibraphonist Gary Burton and by the Jimmy Giuffre 3, a highly esteemed if resolutely noncommercial trio led by Mr. Giuffre, a clarinetist, with Mr. Swallow and Mr. Bley.

The aura of avant-garde jazz has clung to Ms. Bley over the years, somewhat to her bemusement. By her reckoning, she traveled in that orbit briefly, in the late ’60s, when she was running the Jazz Composer’s Orchestra with the trumpeter Michael Mantler, her second husband.

The standout album by that cohort was her early epic “Escalator Over the Hill,” a jazz-rock opera with text by the poet Paul Haines. Its long list of contributors included the trumpeter Don Cherry, the saxophonist Gato Barbieri and the bassist Jack Bruce, of Cream. Ms. Bley later joined Mr. Bruce’s band, which had Mick Taylor, formerly of the Rolling Stones, on guitar.

With the bassist Charlie Haden, Ms. Bley also helped lead the Liberation Music Orchestra, a large ensemble that pursued experimentalism in the spirit of protest. Her own albums, which began appearing in the early ’70s on Watt, the label she founded with Mr. Mantler, have ranged in scale: big band, sextet, tentet, trio. She made several duo albums with Mr. Swallow, who characterizes her compositions as “especially useful to improvisers,” as a matter of express design.

“It’s difficult to play the standard bebop repertoire without playing standard bebop,” he said. “But when you play Carla’s music, you’re more likely to search within yourself for a method to realize these pieces. And I think that has to do with what’s left out of them.”

“Andando el Tiempo” is a case in point. The title track, a three-part suite meant to evoke the cycle of addiction and recovery, begins with a tragic, tangolike section called “Sin Fin” (“Endless”). The piece is based on a seven-bar harmonic sequence that Ms. Bley plays as if expecting resolution at the eighth bar; befitting the section’s title, it’s a song that seems capable of spiraling onward forever. Instead, it leads into the second movement, “Potación de Guaya” (“Drink of Grief”), which somehow sounds even statelier and sadder.

Though the trio is now her primary outlet, Ms. Bley hasn’t forsaken large formats: This month she’ll travel to Hamburg, Germany, to present “La Leçon Française” (“The French Lesson”), her sweeping oratorio for big band and boys’ choir that she describes as the sequel to “Escalator Over the Hill.”

She has a forthcoming album with the Liberation Music Orchestra, which has soldiered on since Mr. Haden’s death in 2014. Due out on Impulse! on Oct. 14, this album, “Time Life,” contains two of his last performances with the band. It also features several compositions by Ms. Bley, notably the dignified yet unsettled title track, an elegy for Mr. Haden.

The piece joins a substantial catalog of crooked anthems in Ms. Bley’s repertory, but it also suggests some new approaches. “I’m trying to stretch my harmonic palette to a few notes that don’t belong,” she said. “In the piece I wrote for Charlie Haden, there’s one note that’s really wrong. That’s the wrongest note I ever wrote. And I made it right.”


