


SAN FRANCISCO — Police Chief Gregory P. Suhr on Friday announced that all officers on the San Francisco force would be required to complete anti-bias training as he released nine pages of racist text messages between three officers that further tarnished the image of a department under federal investigation.

“We have nothing to hide,” said Chief Suhr. “These are the actions of a few.”

But the city’s public defender and experts on criminal justice said the texts appeared to reveal a deep culture of bias in the 2,000-member force that contradicts the city’s image of tolerance and liberalism.

“These texts evidence a deep culture of racial hatred and animus against blacks, Latinos, gays and even South Asians,” Jeff Adachi, the public defender, said in an interview. “It can no longer be said to be an isolated problem.”

A number of police departments, including those in Miami and Los Angeles, have had problems with racist messages sent by their officers. Experts in criminal justice have debated how to address bias, both conscious and unconscious.

The text messages released Friday use crude and strongly disparaging language against blacks and other minorities and were discovered as part of an investigation into a rape charge against one of the officers.

They come a year after a scandal involving 14 officers who also exchanged racist messages. An attempt to fire some of the 14 was rejected by a Superior Court judge, who said the statute of limitation had expired. Most of those officers remain on the force. Of the three officers whose messages were released Friday, one has retired and two have resigned.

Some of the messages released Friday had been previously made public by the public defender’s office, which is reopening the files on 207 cases that were handled by the three officers who sent the messages.

Mr. Adachi said the messages were highly consequential.

“These are people who have the power to arrest and the power to kill somebody,” he said. “If you’re thinking, ‘This is a wild animal or this is a crazed black man who’s going to hurt me,’ that’s when you might pull the trigger. That’s where it becomes scary.”

Chief Suhr also announced measures on Friday that would re-evaluate the use of force by officers. Two men wielding knives, an African-American and a Latino, have been fatally shot by the police since December in what critics say was unnecessary use of force.

Among other things, the chief said the department would now require officers to document any time they point their weapons at someone. He also announced measures requiring officers to carry helmets, long batons and gloves in their vehicles “to create time and distance from a person with a weapon short of a firearm.”

Eugene O’Donnell, a former New York City police officer who is now a professor at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said that racist texts in San Francisco were a marker of more complex and multicultural times. Two of the three officers are Asian-Americans.

“The traditional black/white narrative is changing,” he said.

Mr. O’Donnell said that firing racist officers is the “easy part” but that changing the mentality of officers is much harder. He is skeptical that lectures on diversity and tolerance are effective.

“Lecturing officers is not going to work,” he said. “If you tell the cops, ‘Don’t tell us what you really think,’ that fuels a backlash.”

The text messages released Friday had names and dates redacted. But in what appears to be a measure of the seriousness of the problem within the police force, the texts were sent last year, just as the scandal of the 14 officers exchanging racist messages was raging.

One text message released on Friday featured the image of a badly burned turkey and the words “Is that a Ferguson turkey,” an apparent reference to the St. Louis suburb where Michael Brown, a black teenager, was killed by a white police officer.

The Los Angeles Times on Wednesday published emails mocking blacks, Latinos and Muslims that were sent by Tom Angel, now the chief of staff for the sheriff of Los Angeles County. The emails were sent when Mr. Angel was an officer in Burbank.

The texting scandal in San Francisco comes as the federal government is conducting an overall review of the Police Department after the fatal shooting in December of an African-American man, Mario Woods.

After video of the shooting was posted online, prompting an outcry, Mayor Edwin M. Lee requested the federal investigation, which is being carried out by the Justice Department.


