


ST. LOUIS

In the 1996-97 season, Ken Hitchcock’s first full season as an N.H.L. head coach, his Dallas Stars raced to a division title and the most points in franchise history. They claimed the second seed in the Western Conference, drawing the No. 7 Edmonton Oilers, who had lost all four of the teams’ regular-season matchups.

“And then everything changed,” Hitchcock said. “It overwhelmed me, overwhelmed our team.”

The Stars lost Game 7 at home, in overtime, despite having what Hitchcock called “a way higher level of talent.” That series introduced Hitchcock to the difference between the regular season and the playoffs, a difference he understands perhaps better than any other current coach.

Since Hitchcock joined St. Louis 13 games into the 2011-12 season, the Blues have the most regular-season victories in the league, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. But until Sunday’s victory at Dallas, they also had not won a second-round playoff game during that span.

The Blues have now won two, the latest a 6-1 demolition of Dallas on Tuesday night, their best performance of the postseason. Two more victories, and St. Louis will reach the conference finals for the first time in 15 years.

“We’ve had countless years of having early exits, and I think now we’ve really bought into what he preaches,” defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk said of Hitchcock. “As monotonous and as frustrating it might be at times when you want to play out of the structure, it works. And we really have a group in here that believes that now.”

This is the best and deepest team Hitchcock has coached in St. Louis, loaded with steady defensemen, balanced scoring and elite goaltending. It was also nearly eliminated in the first round by the reigning champions, the Chicago Blackhawks, who trailed the series by three games to one and overcame a two-goal deficit in Game 7 before losing.

The next day, Hitchcock told reporters how nice it had been to return to his condominium afterward and see so many supportive messages.

“It wasn’t ‘get rid of Hitch,’” he quipped, “so that’s a nice sign.”

Hitchcock, 64, may not like the unceasing speculation about his job security, but by now he accepts it. He has been fired from N.H.L. head coaching jobs three times. Ousting the Blackhawks very possibly helped him avoid a fourth.

In each of the past three seasons, St. Louis lost in the first round to a lower-seeded team despite having a much higher level of talent. After Minnesota paddled the Blues last year, Hitchcock dangled for about a month — as the team reportedly pursued Mike Babcock and Todd McLellan — before coming back on a one-year deal.

The Blues retooled, trading the popular wing T. J. Oshie for the power forward Troy Brouwer — the team’s conscience, Hitchcock said. They integrated younger players like center Robby Fabbri and defensemen Colton Parayko and Joel Edmundson, none older than 22, into a core led by David Backes, Alex Pietrangelo, Vladimir Tarasenko and Alexander Steen.

As the Blues parlayed their contributions to survive, another perennial contender, Anaheim, reached its threshold for despair, for expectations unfulfilled, last week. The Ducks fired Bruce Boudreau, another coach with a stellar regular-season résumé whose teams underachieved in the postseason. In the first round, Anaheim lost Game 7 at home to the Nashville Predators — its fourth consecutive Game 7 loss at home, all after holding a 3-2 series lead.

Boudreau won three playoff series with Anaheim, one more than Hitchcock has so far with St. Louis.

“You’re not fooling Hitch; he knows he’s got a shelf life because of how he coaches,” Corey Hirsch, a former Blues goalie coach under Hitchcock, said in a telephone interview. “He eats, sleeps and breathes hockey — it’s what makes him great. But people can only be around that for so long and be pushed for so long before you say: ‘I’ve had enough. I just can’t do it anymore.’”

Hitchcock is exacting but engaging, insistent but impish, a master of in-game tactics who demands perfection, or the closest thing to it. He conveys those demands through what Backes, the Blues’ captain, called Ken-isms — like Hitchcock’s wish that players must be “comfortable being uncomfortable.”

“He’s always pushing you to get better, and he’s seemingly never satisfied with what we’ve done or what we’ve accomplished, and he’s always looking for more, and rightfully so,” said Backes, who scored the overtime winner in Game 2 and added two goals in Game 3.

He added: “That really doesn’t let anyone get comfortable with where you are or what you’ve done so far. I think that’s a good mind-set to have and something that’s really sunk in here. Because you can’t change what’s already in the past. It’s been written.”

Much like Peter Laviolette of Nashville, Hitchcock excels at shepherding underachieving teams to prominence. The Stars, the Flyers and the Blues each made the playoffs in his first full season in charge; the Blue Jackets got there in his third, and he was dismissed in his fourth.

The Blues were 6-7 when Hitchcock fielded a call from General Manager Doug Armstrong, with whom he worked in Dallas. Hitchcock got in his car and drove from Columbus, where he consulted for the Blue Jackets, and piloted St. Louis to a 43-15-11 finish.

“Those players thought that they were playing at the highest level they could play at — that’s what they think in the back of their mind, but Hitch knows there’s another level,” said Hirsch, who was fired as goalie coach in May 2014 and is now an analyst for Sportsnet. “If you look at what’s happened in St. Louis, that’s exactly what he’s done. You can always play harder, you can always perform better.”

Dallas wing Patrick Sharp, who made his N.H.L. debut for Philadelphia while Hitchcock was coaching there, credited Hitchcock for molding him into a more complete player.

“He taught me how to compete, how to battle harder,” Sharp said. “Who knows if that would have happened if I didn’t play for him?”

All that demanding, all that pushing and exhorting — it can produce a negative side effect. His style can grate on players, who in past coaching stops have tuned him out. But Hitchcock has evolved, players said.

“As hard as it is to believe, I think he’s calming down behind the bench a little bit,” forward Ryan Reaves said. “I don’t want to jinx anything because he’s going to come back in full force sometimes. But I just think it’s a testament to the team we have. I think as our team matures, you don’t have to be that guy who’s all over everybody all the time.”

During the morning skate Tuesday, Hitchcock barked at Parayko for making two poor passes. Hitchcock’s best teams — among them the 1999 Stars, who won the Stanley Cup, and the 2004 Flyers, who lost in Game 7 of the conference finals — were driven by veterans. He has studied football coaches, who deal with frequent turnover and roster purges, to learn how they connect with younger players.

“I soften the blow a little bit sometimes when I want more,” Hitchcock said, referring to Edmundson, Fabbri and Parayko, “but I treat them as go-to players, and I’ve learned to look past the age.”

Hitchcock has carved a worthy legacy for himself. Only three coaches have won more regular-season games, and they are the same three who lead in postseason victories: Scotty Bowman, Joel Quenneville and Al Arbour.

They managed to master what flustered Hitchcock nearly 20 years ago, what he is still seeking to solve. His status in St. Louis may depend on it, although as the quest continues, this much is certain: His team is not overwhelmed, and neither is he.


