


Cecily Koppuzha’s parents were introduced to Lionel Sotomayor in October 2008, when he tried to contact them by cellphone from a Boston hospital.

“Hi, this is Lionel, I’m a student at M.I.T. and I’m calling to tell you that Cecily was in an ice skating accident,” Mr. Sotomayor said nervously before his call was lost to poor reception.

That call, made from the emergency room, marked the beginning of a painfully secret relationship forged by Ms. Koppuzha and Mr. Sotomayor, 18-year-old fellow Floridians and freshman classmates at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

“I wasn’t sure if her parents received my message that day,” said Mr. Sotomayor, who is now 26 and working in Brooklyn as a transportation manager for Amazon, overseeing facilities in the Northeast. “When we got disconnected that day, I didn’t have time to call her parents again because Cecily was being treated and I needed to rush over to be at her side.”

A few hours earlier, he and Ms. Koppuzha were enjoying their first date at a rink on the M.I.T. campus in Cambridge. When he challenged her to a race and sped off, she playfully clung to him before losing her balance and tumbled to the ice. As she rose to her skates, she noticed a small pool of blood beneath them.

“His right skate blade had accidentally run over my left hand,” she said. “But it was so cold in there, I didn’t even feel it. I had no idea I was bleeding.”

Now 26 and a physician, having received her medical degree last month from Florida International University, she recalled being whisked away in the back of an ambulance, where a paramedic asked her for some identification.

“I told him I had left my ID in my bag at the skating rink and that the gentleman I was with probably had it,” she said.

She was told that the same gentleman was now sitting in the front of the ambulance.

“That was when I really started developing strong feelings for Lionel,” Dr. Koppuzha said. “He took it upon himself to look after me that day, which told me how loyal and caring he is, and from that moment on, I just felt so much closer to him.”

Shortly after she was released from the hospital she realized that her parents, who are both internists in private practice, had been frantically trying to contact her from their home in Port Charlotte, Fla.

“Needless to say, they were beside themselves,” she said. “But they’re both doctors, so when I finally told them what had happened with me and Lionel, and that my cut only required about five stitches, they got over it pretty quickly.”

But what she failed to share with her parents was the kind of news that would have cut too deeply for stitches: “When they asked me about Lionel, all I told them was that he was just a friend,” she said. “If I had mentioned that we were dating, they would have been very upset, so I kept our relationship a secret.”

Dr. Beena Koppuzha and Dr. George Koppuzha were born and raised in Kerala, a state in southwest India. They are Knanaya, Christians whose religious heritage traces back to Abraham and whose culture goes back to Jews of the Aramaic-speaking regions of Israel and Syria, who migrated in A.D. 345 to the Malabar Coast. The Knanaya do not believe in marrying outside the faith.

When Cecily was just a year and a half old, her parents moved to the United States. The second of three daughters, she grew up in what she described as a “very strict Indian household,” where her parents insisted that their daughters do not date or marry outside of their tight-knit ethnic and cultural circle.

“All I ever heard was that one day I was going to marry a nice Knanayan boy,” she said. “Well, Lionel is from a loud Puerto Rican family, so I knew my parents wouldn’t like it.”

Still, Dr. Koppuzha, who was studying neuroscience, and Mr. Sotomayor, who was studying aerospace engineering, continued to date.

“I was horrible at physics and he was horrible at chemistry,” she said. “We would tutor each other, and the more we worked together, the stronger our relationship grew.”

But while Mr. Sotomayor’s parents were delighted to learn that he had taken her to his freshman pledge formal in November 2008, their son would remain a secret to the Koppuzhas for the next two and a half years.

“We understand that every family is different, but we happen to be a diverse family that is loving and accepting of all cultures,” said Mr. Sotomayor’s mother, Nilda Correa, who teaches English as a second language at Kissimmee Middle School in Florida. “Cecily is a wonderful girl. As far as my husband and I are concerned, if you love our son, we love you.”

By January 2011 Dr. Koppuzha decided to invite her parents and two sisters to Boston for what she described as a family get-together, but she had something else in mind.

“At that point, not telling my parents about Lionel was becoming too difficult to handle, too much of a struggle,” she said. “I had brought up his name so many times in our conversations because I didn’t want to completely hide him, but I never told them we were actually dating.”

“I was also feeling pressure from Lionel’s side of the family to talk to my parents about him,” she said. “So I figured it was just time, for everyone’s sake, to tell the truth.”

She eventually met with her family at a hotel near campus. When the conversation turned to dating, the oldest of the three daughters, Ann Koppuzha, who had known about Lionel, asked their father what characteristics he valued in a future son-in-law.

After listening to his answers — Catholic, Indian and good-hearted — Cecily jumped in and joked about how two out of three weren’t so bad. But then she turned serious and summoned the courage to admit that she and Mr. Sotomayor had long been an item.

“My father took it surprisingly well,” Dr. Koppuzha said. “But my mother, she just went silent.”

When the bride’s mother did speak, she did so in a rather terse manner. “Did you come to M.I.T. to study or to date?” she asked.

“I’ll never forget those words,” said Dr. Koppuzha, who will begin a residency in emergency medicine next month at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.

Neither will her mother.

“I have to admit, I was very upset,” Dr. Beena Koppuzha said. “I didn’t say much to Cecily because it was a very unexpected conversation. I had no idea that the Lionel who called us when Cecily went to the hospital had been her boyfriend all along.”

The next day Mr. Sotomayor met the Koppuzha family for dinner, and Cecily’s mother, by her own admission, was still in protest mode.

“I think I said ‘Hi’ to Lionel, maybe, but I was still very reluctant to accept the situation,” she said. “It was upsetting to me that my daughter was probably going to marry someone from outside of our community.”

Ann Koppuzha, who is three years older than her sister, said that while “Lionel was a great guy who was very down to earth, our parents were worried that Cecily, being so young, might lose sight of her academic goals.”

“They wanted Cecily to go to medical school,” she said. “They didn’t want her relationship to be a distraction.”

Later that year, Mr. Sotomayor received a surprise invitation from his intended’s parents, who asked him to Port Charlotte for Thanksgiving dinner.

“At that point, my mother came around to realizing that Lionel was a significant part of my life,” Dr. Koppuzha said. “She finally began accepting him.”

Though he was grateful for the invitation, Mr. Sotomayor said that the thought of visiting to his girlfriend’s childhood home and seeing her mother for the first time since that cold meal in Boston 10 months earlier “was definitely nerve-racking.”

But this time around, he found her parents, especially her mother, warm and receptive.

“They were so welcoming,” he said. “They asked about school and my family, they were genuinely concerned about me, and Cecily’s mom fed me lots of spicy food, which I had trouble handling at first. It was wonderful.”

After graduating from M.I.T. in 2012, the couple began a long-distance relationship. He took a job as a systems engineer with Boeing in Los Angeles, and she headed for Florida International University.

In May 2014, Mr. Sotomayor shortened the distance between them by taking a job at Amazon in Tampa, Fla., a four-and-a-half-hour drive from her. “At least we were back in the same state,” he said.

The sacrifice that Mr. Sotomayor made to be closer to his fiancée was not lost on her mother.

“I appreciate everything Lionel has done for my daughter,” she said. “He is a very smart and very humble person, and he and Cecily have been bringing each other joy for many years now.”

The couple were married on May 21 at the 131-year-old St. James Catholic Cathedral in Orlando, Fla., the pews bursting with 354 guests, some from as far away as India, Canada, Puerto Rico and New York.

Women of Indian heritage — and the groom’s mother — wore traditional gold earrings, necklaces and bracelets, and henna art on their arms and hands.

After the exchange of vows, the Rev. Teófilo Useche, a Roman Catholic priest, wrapped a stole around the couples’ hands as he blessed their union.

A few days before the wedding, the bride’s mother said she accepted seeing her daughter’s hand in his.

“I must admit that Lionel and Cecily make a great team, and I know they will do well together in life,” she said. “From that very first day, when he called from the hospital to tell us that she got hurt, they have always been there for each other.”


