


LONDON — In the face of mounting criticism over inaction on episodes of anti-Semitism in the Labour Party, Jeremy Corbyn reversed himself on Wednesday and suspended a party lawmaker for endorsing anti-Israel posts on social media before she became a member of Parliament.

The legislator, Naseem Shah, 42, also known as “Naz,” was elected last year in Bradford West, unseating George Galloway, a sharp critic of Israel who has himself been accused of anti-Semitism.

Ms. Shah emerged from a tough childhood in Bradford that included a forced marriage, and has been considered a rising star in the Labour Party. As the scandal built, she resigned on Tuesday as parliamentary private secretary to John McDonnell, the party’s spokesman on the economy.

Mr. Corbyn has been accused of not doing enough to combat anti-Semitism from Labour’s far left. He met earlier on Wednesday with Ms. Shah, who he said had issued a “full apology” for comments that “caused upset and hurt to the Jewish community.”

But another Labour legislator, Lisa Nandy, called on the party to suspend Ms. Shah pending an investigation. “There is a real problem for the Labour Party if we don’t look like we are taking these things seriously,” she told the BBC. “But this is not just about the impact on the Labour Party, there is also the question here about what is the right thing to do.”

In Parliament later in the day, Prime Minister David Cameron said it was “extraordinary” that Ms. Shah was still a full member of Labour’s parliamentary party and also urged suspension. “Anti-Semitism is effectively racism and we should call it out and fight it whenever we see it,” he said.

Labour said later that a suspension was agreed upon mutually by Mr. Corbyn and Ms. Shah while the party’s national executive committee investigates.

In 2014, before being elected, Ms. Shah endorsed a Facebook post displaying a graphic that showed Israel’s outline superimposed on a map of the United States. The map was under the headline, “Solution for Israel-Palestine conflict — relocate Israel into United States,” with the comment, “Problem solved.”

The post suggested the United States had “plenty of land” to accommodate Israel as a 51st state, allowing Palestinians to “get their life and their land back.” It said Israelis would be welcome and safe in America, while the “transportation cost” would be less than three years’ worth of Washington’s support for Israeli defense spending.

Ms. Shah added a note suggesting the plan might “save them some pocket money.”

The post was uncovered by the Guido Fawkes website, which also highlighted another post in which Ms. Shah compared Israeli policies to those of Hitler.

In a statement, Ms. Shah said: “I made these posts at the height of the Gaza conflict in 2014, when emotions were running high around the Middle East conflict. But that is no excuse for the offense I have given, for which I unreservedly apologize.”

She set out a more detailed apology in an article for Jewish News. “The language I used was wrong,” she wrote. “It is hurtful. What’s important is the impact these posts have had on other people. I understand that referring to Israel and Hitler as I did is deeply offensive to Jewish people for which I apologize.”


