


Service Game: When my parents met, in the summer of 1959, my father was working as a busboy. My brothers and I followed suit in our turn, refilling water glasses at local restaurants, running bread to the tables and clearing dirty dishes. But I’m pretty sure none of us ever sold drugs to “every server within a 10-block radius,” the way one busboy does in “Sweetbitter,” Stephanie Danler’s racy novel about the high-end restaurant world of New York City, new at No. 14 on the hardcover fiction list. Set in a fictional version of Danny Meyer’s Union Square Cafe, where Danler was hired after arriving in the city in 2006, the book features lots of casual sex and substance abuse — think of it as a female version of “Bright Lights, Big City,” with professional kitchens instead of magazine offices as a backdrop. “I would always think to myself as I was waiting tables,” Danler told NPR last month, “if the guests had any idea of the rich life that is going on behind the scene and the drama and the sexual tension and the sadness and the joy and the friendship — I think that those currents add a lot of energy to restaurants. Like, I prefer to dine in places where I can feel the staff a little bit, they have a little bit of a personality. But I hadn’t ever seen it written about. I saw that there was a space to create something there.”

Love Game: One unresolvable argument about romance novels is to what extent they can be called feminist. Pro: They’re overwhelmingly written by women, read by women and devoted to women’s stories and fantasies. Con: They tend to reinforce traditional gender roles and rely on men for their formulaic fairy tale endings. In the recent book “Happily Ever After: The Romance Story in Popular Culture,” Catherine M. Roach — a professor of gender and culture studies who also writes romances under the name Catherine LaRoche — argues that, in fact, “romance fiction is porn, but it’s a particular type of woman-oriented feminist porn” in which the hero’s declaration of love is the climax. “Here is the moment,” she writes, “when our hero declares, I can’t live without you — even if I’m a duke and you’re a courtesan; I’m a vampire and you’re a human; I’ve devoted my life to vengeance and you’re my sworn enemy; I used to love you years ago but you cruelly betrayed me and broke my heart; I’m from the 11th century and you’re from the 21st; I’m a dragon and you’re a wolf; I’m a pirate and you’re my captive; I’m a feline alien sex-slave and you’re my spaceship captain slave owner — despite all such trivialities, I am incomplete without you.”

War Game: Sebastian Junger’s “Tribe,” which seeks a cultural explanation for PTSD, hits the hardcover nonfiction list at No. 5. “War is traumatic or can be, but it’s also a situation of incredible, intense bonding,” Junger told Yahoo News recently. “We have to explain why soldiers miss war. Many of them do, . . . and the reason that they miss it says a lot about what’s missing in our society.”


