


One of Shakespeare’s wildest yarns, “Pericles,” receives an extremely imaginative production that delivers plenty of freewheeling entertainment at Two River Theater in Red Bank.

The Jacobean stage equivalent of a road movie, “Pericles” propels its princely title figure on journeys all over the eastern Mediterranean for more than 15 years: escaping assassination, enduring storms at sea, gallantly jousting to win the love of his life, tragically losing his wife, Thaisa, and experiencing other woes and adventures.

A similarly improbable secondary plot involving Marina, Pericles’s brilliant daughter, is by turns perilous, droll and finally affecting with its happy conclusion of reunions that is, if not completely miraculous, at least divinely inspired.

Thought to be a partial collaboration with another writer, and first performed around 1608, “Pericles” is said to have been hugely popular in its day. Because of its appeal, unauthorized versions were published; by the time “Pericles” was added to a collected edition of Shakespeare’s works in 1664, the original manuscript had been lost and only the so-called “corrupt” texts had survived. Ever since, scholars and makers of theater have cobbled together different versions.

What might be among the most radical incarnations of “Pericles” so far now brightens the Two River stage, where Rinde Eckert, a songwriter and performer, and David Schweizer, a director long known for staging offbeat works, have reshaped Shakespeare’s episodic odyssey into an enjoyable romp, with music. They have sharply edited the play, added more than 20 songs and maximized the talents of a seven-member cast, most of whom portray multiple characters.

A note in the program describes the show’s present-day location as “a dive bar at the end of the world.” Caleb Wertenbaker, the scenic designer, aptly furnishes a rundown saloon with whimsical bric-a-brac and peeling walls. Lounging upon a little bandstand, a couple musicians listlessly noodle a tune. Sitting among the scattered tables, half a dozen drinkers gaze into nothingness.

Into these bleary environs strides the imposing figure of Mr. Eckert in the person of Gower, the shaggy poet who narrates “Pericles.” Strumming a banjo ukulele, Mr. Eckert launches into a rhythmic musical invocation which galvanizes the others into joining him to perform “this tale of lust and love.”

As the action kicks off under Mr. Schweizer’s confident direction, a scruffy customer assumes the noble bearing of Pericles, even as the neighboring barflies morph into other characters alongside him.

Throughout the performance, everyday objects and extraneous bits of clothing are smartly used in the transformative process: the stringy head of a mop turns a busboy into an incestuous princess; plastic lobster bibs and badminton rackets deck out the neglectful rulers of a starving nation; sheets of aluminum foil transmogrify into armor. And so it goes for a little more than two swiftly-paced hours, even as the actors expertly lend different voices, accents and physical qualities to the characters they portray.

Philippe Bowgen earnestly depicts the young Pericles, who falls in love with Nikki Massoud’s dreamy Thaisa. (A sweet moment of intimacy arises when they each blow into a white balloon that symbolizes Thaisa’s pregnancy.) Midway through the saga, Ms. Massoud reappears as the forthright Marina, the couple’s intrepid daughter, whose blazing virtue melts down a bordello.

With her clarion voice and keen comedic sense, Mary Testa is an especially vivid member of the troupe, which also features Kevin Mambo, J. Clint Allen and Ellen Harvey, all of whom capably act and sing.

Mr. Eckert (who plays Pericles in his later years) provides a percussive and agreeably bluesy score that throbs with emotion and grows cacophonous during the storm scenes, but more often than not swings easily, as when a wacky trio of rhyme-challenged pirates relieves an implausible plot point with wit.

A motley array of costumes designed by Gabriel Berry and Christopher Akerlind’s sharply-cued lighting design enhance the playful charm of the music, staging and performances. Some characters and scenes have been shortened to accommodate the songs, but they will scarcely be missed. Slimmed down and tuned up, this “Pericles” is Shakespeare freshly served with a twist, a perfect tonic for a modern audience.


