


A Prune reunion took place downtown on Wednesday.

“How are you feeling?” asked the chef Ned Baldwin, in the kitchen of his Hudson Square restaurant, Houseman, as the afternoon pace sped up and a crew prepped for dinner.

“I’m doing O.K.,” answered Mashama Bailey, the chef at the Grey, her acclaimed restaurant in Savannah, Ga. She was chopping celery sticks that would be used to scoop up mouthfuls of pimento cheese, and offering guidance on how to form dumplings that would accompany a heap of clams. She murmured, “I’ve got about 10 minutes and then I’m going to freak out.”

Ms. Bailey and Mr. Baldwin have long been attuned to each other’s ups and downs: Years before they set out to open their own places, they worked shoulder-to-shoulder in the chef Gabrielle Hamilton’s intimate and influential restaurant, Prune, in the East Village, where the work space feels roughly the size of a ticket booth.

As a tribute to their friendship and their shared culinary roots, Mr. Baldwin and Ms. Bailey have instigated a swap: On Wednesday night Ms. Bailey cooked 13 dishes of her own (including pickled oysters, braised endive with blue cheese and pecans, roast chicken, lamb roti, an ice cream sundae) at Houseman.

Mr. Baldwin will be in Georgia next Wednesday to serve up specialties from Houseman. He seemed a tad anxious about that.

“People have been reading a lot about her food,” he said. “Nobody in Savannah knows who I am.”

Ms. Bailey spent much of her childhood in Queens; she was born in the Bronx. Returning to New York for a few spring days had energized her. “It’s a great time of year to come here,” she said. “It’s so bright and beautiful. There’s tons of people on the street, and everybody looks great. It makes me miss it.”

A few hours before customers poured into Houseman, Mr. Baldwin remembered the day he hired Ms. Bailey at Prune, where he was the chef de cuisine. Out front, Prune has long vertical windows that open up. Arriving for the meeting, Ms. Bailey walked in through a window instead of the front door.

“And then she laughed — a huge smile,” Mr. Baldwin said. “I knew I was going to hire her immediately.” Even before she had cooked anything, he said, Ms. Bailey struck him as “a settled soul who’s human and positive and grown-up.”

Then she went to the stove and began working with focus and finesse. “She was rocking,” Mr. Baldwin said.

Both chefs have achieved independent success in their 40s, and their culinary approach reflects a mature, no-frills philosophy that they couldn’t help but internalize during their time at Prune. Ms. Bailey explained it this way: “For me, it’s cook what you want to eat.”

Of course, cooking what you want to eat is just as hard as cooking its opposite. She was nervous about that lamb roti, which can get messy because of its reliance on melted butter, and she didn’t want to prepare it in front of prying eyes.

“All right, I’ve got to go make roti,” she said. “I’ve got to disappear for a while.” She laughed and added, “I need a moment.”


