


Three days after Americans watched the Georgia peanut farmer they’d elected move into the White House, Kunta Kinte burst into their living rooms and stayed for a week. Stayed forever, really. “Roots” still ranks as one of the most viewed television series in history, but numbers are a feeble measure. It was the national water cooler; Americans took long, thirsty drafts, and lingered, sometimes looking one another in the eye and sometimes not.

Charlayne Hunter-Gault, reporting in The New York Times on Jan. 28, 1977, with three of the mini-series’ eight episodes yet to be broadcast, sampled the responses.

“Doubters and enthusiasts, whites as well as blacks, young and old, wealthy and poor had reactions they wanted to share,” she wrote. “Some laughed when a hungry Kunta Kinte, who was thought to have learned no English, suddenly thrust his plate toward the older slave, Fiddler, and said, ‘Grits, dummy.’ Some cried as Kunta Kinte finally gave in to the whip’s lash and accepted the slave name Toby.”

There were the patrons at Jock’s bar in Harlem, who had been gathering each night to watch:

“Joe Kirkpatrick, the owner, said that one night viewers got so angry over the treatment of Kunta Kinte that they would not allow the jukebox to be turned on even after the show had ended. ‘They just wanted to talk it out,’ he said, ‘and it wasn’t until they had talked and talked for a very long time that they finally remembered they were in a bar. ‘That’s when they started drinking up.’”

There were the awkward jokes:

“A black man carrying an attaché case stepped into the elevator of the predominantly white company where he worked.

‘Good morning, Kunta Kinte,’ said a white colleague, cheerfully.

The black man lowered his head, smiled and said, ‘Toby.’”

There was the lunch counter where six young men and women talked it over:

“‘I tell you one thing,’ injected a somber young man in the group, ‘Those white folks better not mess with me today. I just might have to stomp one.’

“‘Don’t do that,’ another of the group snapped. ‘Things ain’t changed that much. And jobs don’t grow on trees.’”

There was the breakfast table in Queens, where a white middle-class household had “lively debate over coffee and bagels” after the second part:

“‘It doesn’t show any good white people,’ said the wife. ‘There must have been some decent white people and it should have been more balanced.’

‘No, the good whites had their day with ‘Gone With the Wind,’ said the husband.”

The book by Alex Haley on which the mini-series was based had been published less than four months earlier, making its debut at No. 5 on the New York Times best-seller list, right up there with two Watergate books, a memoir by Lillian Hellman, a biography of Hitler and Gail Sheehy’s seminal “Passages.” Despite its being mostly a novelization of Mr. Haley’s family history, the book was on the nonfiction list.

Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, in his review of the book in The Times, took some issue with the form, as many critics did, but was generally favorable. “Mr. Haley has created a metaphor for the vague awareness felt by most American blacks that they are somehow descended from people who were abducted from Africa,” he wrote. “And perhaps the contrast of this semifiction to what follows it helps to heighten the shock of discovery when Mr. Haley finally confirms his family legend. It is as if he were saying that he knew he was real but didn’t really believe it until he discovered corroborating evidence. Thus, he speaks not only for America’s black people, but for all of us everywhere.”

James Baldwin, writing in the Sunday Book Review for The Times, said of Kunta Kinte: “We are in his skin, and in his darkness, and, presently, we are shackled with him, in his terror, rage, and pain, his stink, and the stink of others, on the ship which brings him here. It can be said that we know the rest of the story — how it turned out, so to speak, but frankly, I don’t think that we do know the rest of the story. It hasn’t turned out yet, which is the rage and pain and danger of this country.”


