


You won’t find the familiar bottles of liquor at Yours Sincerely, a cocktail bar that opened in January next to a faux English pub called Dear Bushwick. Instead, the 30 house cocktails are dispensed from a neat row of custom taps with porcelain doll heads and served in graduated glass beakers, like the kind found in high school chemistry class.

All that is left for the tattooed-and-bearded bartenders to do is add ice and an aromatic spritz — a refreshing break from the mixology bars that insist on making each cocktail by hand from scratch.

THE PLACE

It occupies a former five-and-dime store on an otherwise quiet stretch of Wilson Avenue in residential Bushwick lined with vinyl-sided homes. Inside, the space is long and narrow; the décor is grandmotherly yet cool. Framed paintings of flowers hang on the dark green walls. A chandelier casts a feeble light on the marble bar. A long banquette and a few tables offer patrons a place to gather and set down their beakers.

THE CROWD

Fun-loving 20-somethings not too jaded for small talk. On a recent Friday night, a group of young men in capes, floral T-shirts and drop-crotch pants discussed the Netflix sitcom “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” with a nearby table of jewelry designers. (Verdict: brilliant.) At the bar, a young actress from Bay Ridge told the bartender about going to LaGuardia High School (she said it was “stressful”) and asked him about his hobbies (rock ’n’ roll guitar).

PLAYLIST

During the rush, the music is too faint to notice, but it sounds like Robin Thicke’s “Blurred Lines” on repeat. Off hours, there’s a wistful indie slant that may include Cat Power and Mac DeMarco.

GETTING IN

Like the rest of the Bushwick bar scene, the crowd doesn’t arrive until the clock turns to double digits.

DRINKS

The cocktails-on-tap menu includes an old-fashioned-style Swipe Right made with an organic date-infused bourbon, and a piña colada-like Pineapple Express made with a coconut-infused rum. All cocktails are $8. Burgers and shakes are also available.


