


Husband and wife both publish books in May: Given the vicissitudes of publishing, it would have been quite a feat even if they had bent every effort to it. But this was not uppermost in the minds of Michael Marissen and Lauren Belfer, though they had been working more or less in concert for a decade.

Mr. Marissen, 55, is a musicologist and professor emeritus at Swarthmore College; Oxford University Press is issuing his “Bach & God,” a book of scholarly essays from the last 20 years. Ms. Belfer, 61, is an established novelist (“City of Light,” “A Fierce Radiance”), and HarperCollins has just released “And After the Fire,” which has much to do with, well, Bach and God.

Mr. Marissen had an extremely conservative Dutch Calvinist upbringing in Ontario. Though he now declares himself an agnostic, he has put his profound knowledge of the Bible (“it was shoved down my throat”) to use in examining the sources and deeper meanings of Bach’s sacred texts, especially as regards their attitudes toward Judaism. Ms. Belfer had a liberal, minimally observant Jewish upbringing in Buffalo. No surprise, she shares many of the qualities of her latest heroine, Susanna Kessler, whom she describes as atheist-Jewish. “And After the Fire,” partly based in history, posits the rediscovery of a fictional Bach church cantata with a particularly bilious text.

Over a late lunch at Bar Boulud in Manhattan, where they live, the two discussed their working process, Bachian pillow talk and writing a novel with musicological accuracy. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.

What I find most fascinating about these books is that here is Michael, taking a hard look at Bach’s works to see what ethical problems they might present, especially with regard to anti-Judaisim. And there is Lauren, inventing a work of Bach that seems more anti-Semitic than almost anything Bach actually wrote. Is it possible that Lauren is muddying the very waters that Michael is trying to clarify?

LAUREN BELFER I would say no. It just creates a context for how I came to this idea. When I was growing up, World War II was very close. I lost family members in the war. When I see articles in the paper about lost works of art being rediscovered, I always follow the story.

About 10 years ago, I received an announcement for a class about the music of Bach, part of a Swarthmore College program that brings faculty members to New York to teach classes for alums, and I just had a feeling I should sign up. As it turned out Michael was offering the class, though I didn’t know him at the time. Not knowing very much about Bach at that point, I was overwhelmed at how gorgeous the music was. And yet when we began to study some of the sacred music, I was quite taken aback by how some of the pieces lash out at Catholics, Muslims, Jews, and it was hard for me to reconcile the glorious, exalted music that meant so much to me with these other pieces that had ethically problematic subject matter.

And then one evening after class, as I was walking to the subway, I suddenly thought, “Well, what if I found a work of art that had been stolen in World War II?” And then I thought: “But everybody finds stolen paintings. What if I found something different, a musical masterpiece by Bach? And what if it had an ethically problematic libretto, so that the people who found it had to struggle with what to do with it?” And that was the jumping-off point for the story.

MICHAEL MARISSEN Actually, it might be worth pointing out right away that the anti-Jewish polemic in the fictional cantata is not really any worse than what’s in Bach’s vocal works. There are church cantatas that are just as bad. It’s just that they’re not as explicit.

This comes up a lot in my scholarly work. I‘m accused of being inconsistent. Some of my colleagues say: “It’s fantastic that you sort of made Bach acceptable for us again by making the ‘St. John Passion’ not seem so bad. Why are you digging up this horrible stuff in the church cantatas?” Bach was simply following Luther’s view that there is a time and a place for anti-Semitism, and that the Passion season is not it. There are other times in the church year where it is appropriate and welcome, and those are the places where you actually do get it in Bach.

What’s more, if anyone was muddying the waters, it was me. I wrote the text. It was a sort of game, in a way. We thought that instead of just reporting on the general content of this fictional work, it might be fun to try writing an opening chorus in rhyming German that had the proper accents.

And the proper bile.

MARISSEN Exactly. It got everything in there. But we also made sure that it was not just something we were making up but something you could find in either the writings of Luther or in the New Testament.

BELFER Michael created the music, too, the way he described a few bars.

MARISSEN Yes, we didn’t actually write a score. It’s easier to write [bad] 18th-century theological poetry than it is to write really great music.

When did the two of you go from student and teacher to interested parties to collaborators?

BELFER After the course, I contacted Michael, and he started advising me on research. We became closer and closer friends. Michael was still teaching, and we traveled to Germany together to work on the book.

MARISSEN As Lauren said, I first started as a general historical adviser, and I didn’t seek to get more involved, but eventually you just get drawn in.

I don’t mean to pry, but I couldn’t help wondering what your pillow talk must have been like.

MARISSEN I don’t think we usually talked about Bach at night. But we had plenty of time during the day, because we live together and work together in the apartment.

BELFER People say to us, “How can you live in the same house and work at home all day without making each other crazy?” But we never do make each other crazy. We talk about what we’ve been doing and kind of feed off each other.

MARISSEN We certainly read each other’s drafts.

Yes, I suspect that this is the most musicologically vetted novel ever.

MARISSEN That’s what I’ve been saying. It has the highest level of musicological verisimilitude of any novel ever written.

BELFER If we had any moments of possible tension, it was around this issue of verisimilitude, because I might write something like “X is true.” And Michael would say: “No, you can’t say that. It’s only 99.9 percent true.”

Let’s talk about book titles. Between you, you have come up with one very blunt one and one that is both elusive and allusive.

BELFER “And After the Fire” weaves in several strands in the book. It is originally from the Book of Kings in the Hebrew Bible, but I first came upon it in the oratorio “Elijah” by Mendelssohn, who figures in the historical part of the novel. I was thinking about the contemporary characters in the novel, who are all, in their different ways, coming to terms with what happened in the war and the Holocaust. And the meaning of the word Holocaust is a consuming fire. So I think all of my characters in the contemporary section are struggling to come to terms with life after the fire.

And, Michael, you originally called your book of essays “Essaying Bach and Religion.”

MARISSEN Well, that was the title that I suggested to the publisher, and quite reasonably, they said I might want to consider something a little snappier.

And the early reaction to it?

MARISSEN People who know about it are just saying funny things, like Reilly Lewis, the conductor of the Washington Bach Consort, who said: “‘Bach & God’? That’s redundant.” I replied, “But if it’s a contest, we list the winner first.” Of course, it’s not a contest. The book really is very much about the importance of religion to an understanding of Bach’s music. What I’m trying to show is that in some of Bach’s music, at least, you can’t really understand unless you have the historical and contextual stuff. I’m against the general idea that great art is really art for art’s sake, and everything else is irrelevant.

BELFER I’m not looking at the question of what Bach himself believed or didn’t believe. I’m trying to look at a problematic work of art and at people struggling over what to do with it today.

Are you willing to talk about what you’re doing next?

BELFER Well, I do have another idea, and I’m moving forward with it, and that’s as far as I can go.

MARISSEN I’ve embarked on a new edition of the four-part chorale harmonizations of Bach from his vocal works that students have for centuries been using as models in learning harmony and counterpoint, essentially a textbook. Those pieces would benefit a lot from re-editing from the original manuscripts so that we get the right notes and the right words and the right stanzas from the right hymns and so on. I’m actually not planning to do any more writing about religious polemic. I’ve done my bit.


