


CHEVY CHASE, Md. — Two weeks after Democratic voters in Baltimore selected a state senator as the city’s presumptive next mayor, the Maryland State Board of Elections on Thursday took the rare step of ordering city officials to decertify their primary election results, citing discrepancies in the number of votes cast.

Linda H. Lamone, the state board’s administrator, said she did not “have any indication” that the results of the mayoral election would be invalidated after the board conducted a precinct-by-precinct review of the balloting. But she said it was possible that some Baltimore City Council races, which were decided by very slim margins, would be.

She said she took the action to preserve candidates’ ability to request a recount or file suit challenging an outcome — the deadline for filing would have been Monday — and attributed some of the discrepancies to Maryland’s new system of paper ballots. She said she expected the review, and a final certification, next week.

“I didn’t think it was fair to the candidates to have these deadlines continue to apply when there was some doubt cast,” Ms. Lamone said in a telephone interview. “By rescinding the certification, it stops the clock.”

The move came amid questions in Baltimore about campaign tactics used by State Senator Catherine E. Pugh, the Democratic leader, who emerged from a crowded field last month to win her party’s nomination for mayor. She beat her closest competitor, former Mayor Sheila Dixon, also a Democrat, by more than 2,400 votes; in Baltimore, the Democratic nominee is all but certain to become mayor.

In the waning days of the race, the Pugh and Dixon campaigns traded insults and accusations. The Dixon camp accused Ms. Pugh of “vote buying” by giving campaign workers lunch and driving them to the polls, while the Pugh camp accused Ms. Dixon’s workers of intimidating Pugh voters.

The City Board of Elections certified the results on Monday; on Tuesday, Ms. Dixon said she would not ask for a recount.

But that same day, Ms. Lamone said, city officials discovered 80 provisional ballots — those given to voters who showed up at the polls and appeared to be unregistered — that were uncounted. The state investigated further, she said, and found additional “discrepancies that were out of the ordinary” between the number of people who cast ballots, and the number of ballots actually recorded.

“We are now in uncharted territory,” Martha McKenna, a spokeswoman for Ms. Dixon, said Wednesday afternoon. She said the Dixon campaign would withhold judgment about asking for a recount until the review is finished; in a written statement, Ms. Dixon said she hoped the inquiry would “provide answers to my questions about whether proper procedures were followed.”

Ms. Pugh, in a brief telephone interview, said she was unworried and focused on the general election, though she confessed she does not know who her Republican opponent is. (He is Alan Walden, a well-known former radio personality.)

“I think every vote should be counted,” Ms. Pugh said. “I think transparency in voting and transparency in government is really essential for people to feel comfortable with the process.”


