


The Mets’ Class AA affiliate has been located in Binghamton, N.Y., since 1992. Throughout that time it has had a logical, informative and slightly bland name: the Binghamton Mets.

That will soon change. Next year at this time, the team could well be the Binghamton Stud Muffins.

“Mets” is definitely out. The team has turned to fans to find a replacement name with greater links to the area. Ideas were solicited online, and 1,500 were received. The goal, said John Hughes, the team president, was “a name that captured and embraced the community — something with a positive, uplifting story to it.”

The team has selected six finalists, and fans will now vote for a winner. Four of the choices allude to the local merry-go-rounds that have given Binghamton the nickname the Carousel Capital of the World: the Rocking Horses, the Rumble Ponies, the Timber Jockeys and, yes, the Stud Muffins. The choices are rounded out by Bullheads, celebrating a local fish, and Gobblers, in honor of the wild turkeys of the region.

Hughes stressed that the move was not a slight against the Mets, noting that Binghamton was one of the last teams in the minors to still carry its parent team’s name. “We are a very proud New York Met affiliate in the state of New York and plan to remain so,” he said.

The change will also be a blow to the career of the team’s current mascot, Buddy the Bee. “Buddy has been put on notice, though he may make special appearances,” Hughes said.

Many of the fans’ suggestions, like Stallions and Stampede, were rejected because they were in use in other leagues and sports. Other nominations were just a little too off the wall. Hughes cited “Baseball Players” as one of the suggestions that made him chuckle but did not make the cut.

As you might expect with names this colorful, many critics have emerged.

“I don’t have a problem with the name change, but the names are absurd,” said Dave Scull, 68, a retired software engineer who has been a season-ticket holder since the team came to town.

Scull said that among the fans he had talked to, the reaction was “100 percent negative.” Though he does not like any of the names, Scull said that, if pressed, he would go with Bullheads. But he complained that the bullhead fish and the turkey that inspired Gobblers are prevalent throughout the Northeast, not just in the Binghamton region.

“The choices seem really odd,” said Andy Papaleo, the 34-year-old owner of a D.J. company who has followed the team since boyhood. “They say they are a part of Binghamton history; I’ve lived there all my life, and I’ve never heard any of these terms.”

For more Binghamton-friendly names, he suggested the Carousels or the Spiedies, after the marinated meat sandwich of the region. He also liked the notion of changing the name to the Triplets, the name of the minor league team in town from the 1930s to the 1960s.

“I’m not against colorful names,” he said of the exotic finalists. “But I think it sounds like a merchandise grab.”

Binghamton’s name choices follow a continuing trend of minor league teams picking increasingly outrageous names to attract attention and maybe sell more caps and jerseys. Twenty-first-century minor league team names include the Tri-City Dust Devils, the Albuquerque Isotopes, the Vermont Lake Monsters, the Richmond Flying Squirrels, the Akron RubberDucks and the Hartford Yard Goats.

Teams in independent leagues, more reliant on attendance and merchandise sales for their revenue, include the Kansas City T-Bones, the Texas AirHogs and the Normal CornBelters.

Letting the Internet name something can be fraught with peril. The British science ministry held balloting for a name for a polar research ship this year, only to see “Boaty McBoatface” win.

Officials rejected the Internet’s choice and named the ship after the naturalist David Attenborough, although a promise was made to name one of the ship’s remotely operated submarines “Boaty.”

Anyone with a computer can have a Twitter opinion, and there have been many on the new name for the Mets, from both die-hard fans and those who had never previously heard of Binghamton. Several of the names have brought prurient snickers from those with creatively immoral minds.

Despite some negative comments, Hughes has good things to say about the renaming so far.

“It’s really energized our fan base and got people talking about the team,” he said. “Our goal is to win people over.”

He noted that 5,000 fans so far had submitted votes endorsing one of the six names.

Voting for a new name continues through June 1. The winner will be announced after the season.

With a hint of trepidation in his voice, Papaleo, the longtime fan, made a prediction:

“I could see a lot of people voting for Stud Muffins.”


