


One of the beauties of baseball, baseball people will tell you, is that there is always a chance you’ll see something at the ballpark that day that you’ve never seen before. This always struck me as a rationalization for the countless hours, days, months, years that are given away to the game — O.K., wasted — as if there aren’t more satisfying pursuits.

When the San Antonio Spurs were in New York last year as the Kansas City Royals beat the Mets at Citi Field to win the World Series, a reporter asked Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich if he had seen the game.

Popovich was incredulous. Sports were boring, he said, so why would he waste a night in the city watching a baseball game when he could be enjoying a bottle of wine and a fine meal with friends?

I remember being down with that.

But then there I was late Tuesday night at Yankee Stadium in the right-field seats, trying to get a different perspective on the entrance of the flame-throwing reliever Aroldis Chapman into the game.

As Chapman began to warm up in the Yankees’ bullpen, which is also in right field, reliever Andrew Miller entered the game in the eighth inning to try to protect the Yankees’ lead. Miller had been the team’s closer until Chapman’s return on Monday from a suspension, and he had not allowed a run all season.

My eyes were on Chapman when I heard a loud crack of the bat. I looked to the field and saw two outfielders running toward me. Then I saw the ball. Yep, I thought, that’s going to clear the fence. It was Lorenzo Cain’s third home run of the night, something he had never done at any level.

Several fans raced down the aisle to try to catch it, but the ball bounced off their hands, went up several rows, caromed off a wall and rolled to a stop right at my feet.

I reached down and picked it up.

I had caught a baseball at a game before, one hit by a Molina — I can’t remember whether it was Jose or Bengie — while my wife and children were getting hot dogs. They had to ask every fan around us before they believed me.

But I had never gotten my hands on a home run.

I looked at the ball for a moment and thought: Cool, my son will dig this.

The thought was fleeting. Within a few seconds the chant started: “Throw. It. Back.”

I realized I had a problem. Having grown up a Cubs fan, I was well aware of the tradition at some parks of throwing home runs hit by opposing hitters back onto the field. I believe it started at Wrigley Field.

But I was sitting there with a media credential around my neck; how would it look if I threw it back? And as the chants grew louder — the Bronx was in full throat — waiting out the crowd did not seem wise, either. It was devolving into something a reporter would rather avoid: I was becoming a part of the story.

I had to think quickly. Unfortunately, this is not a strong suit. I’m forever walking away from interviews thinking about the brilliant follow-up question that just popped into mind. (When Kobe Bryant made fun of a fedora I was wearing — his ankle was fine, but my hat was killing him — I just laughed along with everyone else. On the way out of the locker room, I realized this was the guy who once did a ridiculous fashion spread wearing all white. Darn.)

Two seats to my right was a boy sitting with his father. I couldn’t throw the ball back, and I couldn’t keep it. So I reached over and put it in his glove.

A few knuckleheads then got on the kid to throw the ball back, but they were quickly drowned out.

As it turned out, Caleb, 14, had flown in from Miami in the morning with his father, Felix Tejeda, who was taking him to his first Yankees game. They had toured the Stadium in the morning and were flying home Wednesday, in time for Felix to work his night shift as a manager at an industrial laundry business.

Felix told me what the tickets and airfare had cost him and said it was just like the credit card commercial. “The smile on his face is priceless,” he said, nodding to Caleb. “Twenty or 30 years from now, that’s all he’ll remember.”

Later, in the clubhouse, when Miller finished his interviews, I told him I had caught the ball — a loose summary of events, to be sure. “You can give it to him,” Miller said, referring to Cain.

I told Miller I’d given the ball to a fan, but that did not cheer him up.

“It’s unfortunate,” he said. “I wish I didn’t give up a souvenir.”

Miller at least could take comfort in the Yankees’ eventual victory, something Cain said took the luster off his night. But for all involved — the guy who threw the ball, the one who hit it, the one who “caught” it, and the boy who took it home — there was a similar appreciation: What happened Tuesday night doesn’t happen every day.


