


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

Exciting news: There’s a new member of Team Watching! Please welcome Monica Castillo, here to bring you movie insights and delights. Today, she’s scheduled a mini Brian De Palma film festival for you.

Father’s Day is Sunday, so we have you covered if you’re looking for stuff to watch with your dad, or stuff to watch that makes you feel more dad-ish than usual. Ah, if only all the old episodes of “This Week in Baseball” were handily archived somewhere.

Thanks to all of you who wrote in with truly fantastic TV-influenced pet-naming stories. (The most common show your pets are named after? “The Wire.”) This week was just brutal, so I’ve been rewatching a bit of “Friday Night Lights,” and thus, of course, have been crying my eyes out. Among its other amazing achievements, I think it might be the cryingest show I’ve ever seen, even over the great but inferior “Parenthood.”

I’ll cop to being a huge crier in general, so I know my personal scale is off, which makes me curious: What show, or episode, has made you cry the most? Team Watching and I are stocking up on tissues: watching@nytimes.com.

… between one and 12 hours, and my father and I like history:

“Secrets of Great British Castles” and “Tales of Irish Castles,” Netflix

Castles and battles, battles and castles, all explained through earnest, perhaps overly reverent presentations and loving slow pans over bumpy rocks and worn-down thresholds. — M.L.

… two hours, and we like sports and pop culture:

“O.J.: Made in America,” Part 5, Saturday, 9 p.m., ESPN, or watch all five episodes on ESPN’s app

This is the final installment of the superb documentary series and you should watch it even if you didn’t see the other parts. This one goes from the O.J. murder trial verdict to present day, covering the civil trial, the seediness, the subsequent incarceration. There are some odd disclosures from people who were formerly close to Simpson, and the whole series, especially this part, nudges its audience to consider the ethical balances between candor, self-preservation and self-service.

What’s gripping here are the specific ways these supremely ordinary human drives — I was lonely, I was broke — created what became this epic cultural legend. The rest of the episodes cover race, police brutality and the criminal trial itself, but this episode is mostly about fame and how poisonous it can be. — M.L.

… six hours, and we like European television and World War II:

“The Heavy Water War,” Netflix

War, espionage, the atomic bomb, skiing — this Danish-British-Norwegian production about Germany’s plan to build an atomic bomb (using the substance of the title) and the Allied attempts at sabotage has it all. Especially skiing; you cannot commit sabotage in Norway without a heavy dose of skiing. The series is a mix of military procedural (the planning and practicing of various missions) and scientific intrigue (Werner Heisenberg, the German physicist, plays a main role). This is suspenseful television done compactly. — Gilbert Cruz

• Hulu has a NASA channel of NASA-made documentaries about how great NASA is!

•Sundance is airing a marathon of the classic Wild West series “The Rifleman” on from 6 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Sunday.

• Showtime has made the first episode of Cameron Crowe’s new series “Roadies”available for free. Why can’t things still be about rock ’n’ roll, man?

• Here’s a YouTube channel of a red-hot nickel ball destroying various materials. It is absolutely entrancing, and I would nominate it for an Emmy if I could.

James Franco for some reason reimagined the 1996 camp classic “Mother, May I Sleep With Danger?” with a lesbian vampire angle, and its star Tori Spelling now in the role of protective mother. I don’t know how to begin assessing it: It’s terrible, but the point is to be terrible, so I guess it achieves its objectives. But it’s not juicy-funny bad, just mostly bad bad. (Saturday, 8 p.m., Lifetime.)

First came “Bron/Broen,” the Swedish/Danish crime drama. Next came “The Bridge,” an American adaptation on FX that moved the serial-killer series to the American-Mexican border. Soon after came “The Tunnel,” the British/French version that’s making its stateside debut this weekend.

Each of the shows starts the same way: The body of a public official is found, cut in half, on the precise border between two countries. Detectives from each side team up for what turns into a sprawling, challenging investigation. Our leads are a gruff dude and a non-neurotypical blonde woman.

All three shows are good. But they are all deeply similar to each other — to the point where they do feel redundant. My favorite of the bunch is still “Bron/Broen,” but if you’ve never seen any of them, “The Tunnel” is a perfectly absorbing thriller. You’ll still respect it if you’ve seen its brethren, but it’s not as compelling without the suspense or surprise. (Sunday, 10 p.m., PBS.)

‘Finding Dory’

“As often happens in adventure stories, the hero was occasionally upstaged by his sidekick. We rooted for Nemo and choked up when he was found, but the best lines and sweetest grace notes belonged to Dory,” A.O. Scott writes of “Finding Dory,” a sequel to 2003’s “Finding Nemo.” “Now Dory has her own movie.”

• Read the full review

• Rent “Finding Nemo” on iTunes

‘Central Intelligence’

“To call ‘Central Intelligence’ juvenile is to miss the larger point — namely, that juvenile was most likely the goal,” Jeannette Catsoulis writes of this buddy action comedy starring Dwayne Johnson and Kevin Hart. It is “an odd-couple caper of staggering dopeyness that makes you long for the snap and sizzle of the buddy movies of the 1980s.”

• Read the full review

The release of the new documentary “De Palma,” directed by Noah Baumbach and Jake Paltrow, has inspired several movie theaters across the country to program Brian De Palma retrospectives. If you don’t live near one of those theaters, or can’t make it out, it’s easy enough to stream several of the filmmaker’s most interesting movies. Here’s our quick guide. — Monica Castillo

If you’re looking for weird De Palma

“The Fury”: This 1978 movie borrows the adolescent angst and telekinetic teenagers of “Carrie,” but mixes in covert government agencies. John Cassavetes and Kirk Douglas star. (Watch on Netflix and Amazon Prime)

“Phantom of the Paradise”: “The Rocky Horror Picture Show” meets “Phantom of the Opera” in this over-the-top horror musical about an aspiring lyricist out for revenge after a producer steals his work. Real-life songwriter Paul Williams (“We’ve Only Just Begun” and “Rainbow Connection”) plays the villain and provides the movie’s outlandish soundtrack. (Rent on iTunes)

If you’re looking for sexy De Palma

“Dressed to Kill”: There is a strong undercurrent of Hitchcock obsession in much of De Palma’s work (especially the “Vertigo”-like film “Obsession”) and this twisted homage to “Psycho,” in which a therapist (Michael Caine) and a prostitute (Nancy Allen) track down a cross-dressing murderer, takes many of the Master of Suspense’s recognizable moves and adds a fair amount of sex on top. (Watch on HBO)

“Body Double”: De Palma’s tribute to Hitchcock’s “Rear Window” rewrites the leading man as a Peeping Tom who enjoys watching one of his neighbor’s striptease until the night she’s murdered by an intruder. He then teams up with a porn actress (played by Melanie Griffith) to catch the killer. (Rent on iTunes)

If you’re looking for unlawful De Palma

“Scarface”: The movie that launched a thousand dorm room posters was a remake of a 1932 film of the same name that was loosely based on the life of Al Capone. Here, the title character is a Cuban criminal turned drug kingpin in 1980s Miami. Al Pacino stars, along with his many quotable lines. (Watch on Netflix)

“The Untouchables”: In this cops and crooks tale, De Palma takes on the real Al Capone (played by Robert De Niro). The men of the title — Eliot Ness and his enforcers — are played by Kevin Costner, Sean Connery and Andy Garcia. It’s a surprisingly chaste movie from the often overheated director, but one of his most purely entertaining. (Rent on iTunes)

And a few more

“Carrie” (Watch on Amazon Prime and Hulu); “Mission: Impossible” (Watch on Amazon Prime); “The Black Dahlia” (Watch on Amazon Prime); “Passion” (Watch on Netflix).

“Having begun its life as a Silicon Valley tech company, Netflix had somewhat improbably become a television network.” In The New York Times Magazine, Joe Nocera looks at how Netflix became Netflix.

This is a full-length parody of The New Yorker, including the ads. It’s astonishingly good.

And finally, here’s a long, thorough and occasionally ribald Vulture interview with Louis C.K.


