


Boston Ballet announced on Wednesday that it has entered into a five-year partnership with the choreographer William Forsythe, with an agreement to add one work each year, as well as performing the four ballets already in the company repertory. The first acquisition is Mr. Forsythe’s full-length “Artifact,” which will be performed Feb. 23 through March 5 next year at the Boston Opera House.

Mr. Forsythe, who no longer runs his own company, is currently the associate choreographer at the Paris Opera Ballet, but will leave that position when Benjamin Millepied, the current director of dance there, steps down in July. Mr. Forsythe also holds the position of professor of dance at the University of Southern California Glorya Kaufman School of Dance.

Mikko Nissinen, the artistic director of the Boston Ballet, said that the announcement of the partnership with Mr. Forsythe was unrelated to the choreographer’s departure from Paris. “We have been working on this for a couple of years,” he said in a telephone interview from Boston, adding that his own experience of dancing in Mr. Forsythe’s work had changed him as a dancer. “I think Bill Forsythe is an important modern artist and a profound American voice,” he added. “For me, this is a dream come true.”

Mr. Nissinen said that he and Mr. Forsythe were still discussing which works would enter the repertory after “Artifact,” but that he hoped to acquire pieces that were less well-known to North American audiences.

In a statement, Mr. Forsythe suggested that new work was a possibility. “Mikko’s support of the work means that the dancers and I can deepen our wonderful relationship and I will have a new home for new ideas,” he said.

Mr. Nissinen said that in order to give the dancers “a head start” with Mr. Forsythe’s style and working methods, they had already begun workshops with Jill Johnson, a former member of Mr. Forsythe’s company and currently the director of the dance program at Harvard. “We are totally committed,” Mr. Nissinen said. “It’s the biggest priority for the Boston Ballet going forward.”


