


Plans to build a $3.3 billion natural gas pipeline from New York into New England through western Massachusetts and southern New Hampshire have been suspended. Kinder Morgan Inc. of Houston announced Wednesday it had decided to stop work on the project, citing a lack of contracts with gas distribution companies. It also said New England states have not established needed regulatory procedures to allow it to move forward. The company said that given the market conditions, continuing to develop the pipeline is an unacceptable use of its shareholder funds. The project has been met with skepticism and opposition, both from residents along the proposed path of the pipeline and from environmental groups that welcomed Wednesday’s decision to halt work. (AP)

The state will allow thousands of immigrants brought to the United States illegally as children to work in at least 170 professions that require state licenses, including health care and education, after lawmakers overrode Gov. Pete Ricketts’s veto of the measure on Wednesday. Senators voted 31 to 13 on the last day of their legislative session, five days after Mr. Ricketts, a Republican, called it unfair to immigrants who followed the legal pathway. The law applies to immigrants who received lawful status under President Obama’s executive action in 2012 that allowed them to stay. (AP)

A move to override Gov. Bill Haslam’s veto of a bill making the Bible the state’s official book fell seven votes short of the 50 needed in the House on Wednesday. Only 43 members voted in favor of the bill after two hours of spirited — and spiritual — debate. The Republican governor last week turned back the bill over constitutional concerns and because of concerns the measure “trivializes” what he considers a sacred text by adding it to a list of official symbols, including a turtle and a catfish. Supporters argued that the measure seeks to honor the economic and historical impact of the Bible in Tennessee history. (AP)

The authorities said Wednesday that they had discovered a cross-border tunnel that ran a half-mile from a Tijuana house equipped with a large elevator to a lot in San Diego that was advertised as a wooden pallet business, resulting in seizures of more than a ton of cocaine and seven tons of marijuana and the arrests of six people. It was the 13th sophisticated secret passage found along California’s border with Mexico since 2006, including three on the same short street in San Diego that runs parallel to a border fence with a densely populated residential area on the Mexican side. (AP)


