


The transactions usually took place in a car parked near West 166th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue in Manhattan. Abdul Davis would arrive from New Jersey, carrying guns in a bag, the authorities said. He sold them in batches of three or four: revolvers, semiautomatic pistols, shotguns, assault rifles.

All told, prosecutors said, he unloaded 82 weapons over 13 months in exchange for about $94,000, with the money wired to his bank account in advance. What Mr. Davis did not know was that his customer was an undercover police officer, and that the Manhattan district attorney’s office had obtained a wiretap on his phone.

On Monday, Mr. Davis, 52, and his girlfriend, Shelita Funderberk, 50, who is accused of helping him with the sales, were arrested in Linden, N.J., where they live, and await extradition. They are charged with criminal sale of firearms, conspiracy and other crimes, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, said.

Mr. Davis and Ms. Funderberk could not be reached for comment because they were in custody in Union County, N.J., and had yet to be arraigned or obtain legal counsel.

Three men in Virginia and one in Georgia were also arrested near their homes on conspiracy and gun-selling charges. Mr. Vance said they served as straw purchasers for Mr. Davis, buying guns at shops and shows in those states. Mr. Davis negotiated sales with them over the phone, wired them money and traveled to their homes to pick up the weapons, according to a 119-count indictment.

Mr. Vance said that in an effort to slow the flow of weapons into New York City from jurisdictions with lax gun control, he was taking the unusual step of prosecuting people from Southern states.

“It was clear, through the evidence, they knew they were selling weapons to come to New York State,” he said. Robert K. Boyce, the chief of detectives, said there was evidence that Mr. Davis, who had a previous conviction for drug trafficking, had been peddling guns in the city for at least 10 years. The police discovered his business after an informant tipped them off and had the undercover officer pose as a street dealer, he said. Among the weapons the officer bought were five assault rifles, including a Bushmaster Firearms model that had been outfitted with a 100-round drum magazine, court papers said.

Mr. Vance called on the New York State Legislature to raise the penalty for gun traffickers who sell more than 20 firearms, making it a top-tier felony punishable by at least 15 years to life in prison, rather than the present minimum sentence of five years. “We must enhance the penalties they face,” he said. “Currently, whether a defendant sells 10 firearms or 10,000, the penalty is the same.”


