


SAN FRANCISCO — Taralli are like the potato chips of southern Italy, according to the chef Rocky Maselli, who runs the A16 restaurants in the Bay Area. “You get them at gas stations but also at fancy hotels,” Mr. Maselli said. “They’re just the ultimate bar snack.”

They are crisp, melting rounds of dough made with just flour, water, olive oil for taste and richness and a little wine for crunchiness. If you are a fan of grissini, the thin long Italian breadsticks, taralli will taste pleasantly familiar.

But the taralli at A16 are far from plain. They are rich, salty and crumbly, like the best pie crust. And they arrive with a gust of heat, studded with more cracked black pepper than would seem possible, or sensible.

“Our taralli are the perfect thing to eat with an aperitivo,” said Shelley Lindgren, the restaurant’s wine director and co-owner. “Bitter and sweet with pepper and salt is an ideal combination.”

Popular Italian aperitivos (pre-dinner cocktails) like the Spritz and the Americano are often based on bitter liqueurs, like Campari, Luxardo and Aperol, topped up with thirst-quenching soda water or fizzy wine. Taralli also pair nicely with fortified wines like sherry and Lillet, with Champagne cocktails like the Kir Royale, and with rosé and white wines, as long as the wine is not bone-dry.

Taralli are easy enough to buy here, but the packaged variety is usually skimpy on the olive oil and boiled before baking, making them dry, hard and about as much fun to eat as a wood chip. Also, imported taralli are often flavored with fennel seed, which — let’s face it — is not a favorite flavor of most Americans.

All of which helps explain why this peppery little A16 snack has such a big impact.

Black pepper is taken for granted in our cooking; we add it unthinkingly, in mild quantities, to almost every dish. But A16’s taralli are a reminder that black peppercorns can be a powerful, exhilarating spice. The more the heat grows, the more you want to reach for the next one — and then, for your aperitif. Repeat, as desired, all summer.

Recipes: Black Pepper Taralli | More Snacks


