


JUPITER, Fla. — What boosters describe as the nation’s last tackle powder-puff football game is no more, at least for now. After 50 years of spirited competition between seniors and juniors, Jupiter High School’s principal canceled the annual event, saying he did not think that helmets and shoulder pads borrowed from boys’ teams protected girls adequately.

The cancellation surprised residents of Jupiter, a middle-class suburb on the Atlantic Coast. The game packs the stands — something the Jupiter boys’ team rarely does — and raised $7,000 last year, parents said. While boys dress like female cheerleaders, the girls experience the thrill of competing in front of a large crowd instead of playing softball or soccer in front of a few dozen spectators.

“The game makes our town special,” said Haley Osborne, 17, a senior who was disappointed that she was missing her final chance. “It is a once-in-a-lifetime, or maybe twice-in-a-lifetime, opportunity. You can’t come back when you are 30 and play.”

Marcy Murphy, a special-needs job coach, said: “It is almost like a Friday night in Texas. Everyone comes out to watch the game. That is why you see the uproar. That’s what this game means to this town.”

Murphy’s son, Brandon, plays for the boys’ team and helped coach the girls last year.

But Principal Dan Frank, who has led the 2,800-student school for three years, held firm. “This month’s game is off,” he said. “A girl broke her leg a few years ago, each year players get bruises and sprains, and there is always a chance of more serious injuries.”

In a statement, Frank said: “Student safety is my first priority. The narrow window of time for student preparation and practice, and the limited availability of properly-fitting safety equipment, would put our students at risk.”

A last-minute attempt to enlist the city of Jupiter as the game’s sponsor failed when Town Manager Andrew Lukasik rejected the idea, also citing safety concerns.

Some girls and their parents said Frank told them tackle powder-puff games might return under certain conditions: Instead of two weeks of practices, they would be held for two months, so the girls would be better trained. Instead of the girls’ using pads and helmets from the boys’ team and a local youth league, football uniforms designed for girls could be purchased, along with specific insurance for the game.

Frank would confirm only that he had asked the district to help determine whether the game could be resumed at some point.

As for this year, Frank suggested that the girls adopt flag football — something they refused to consider.

Thousands of other American high schools host flag powder-puff games, a no-contact version in which girls stop their opponents by pulling flags off opponent’s belts. But Florida schools already offer girls’ flag football as an interscholastic sport, and the girls in Jupiter said the equivalent of a seniors-versus-juniors scrimmage would be boring after 50 years of tackling.

Osborne and her friends Caitlin Walsh, Megan Mendoza and Sophie Garcia said Frank made another suggestion that they found demeaning — that they play a modified kickball game, and have the runner bob for apples at second base, or spin around at third.

“We are not in elementary school,” Mendoza said.

Frank acknowledged suggesting several alternative events, but he would not be specific.

Members of Jupiter’s class of 2016 fondly recalled last year’s 50th annual game, which they lost, 17-12, to the class of 2015.

“Remember there were three of us saying, ‘Let’s all just get on Amanda,’ but no one could take her down,” one girl said. Another chimed in, “One girl got hit so hard, her helmet flew off.” A third added, “It is s0 fun!”

For the girls and their mothers, the risk of injury has been overblown.

“The car ride to the game is more dangerous,” said Lori Walsh, Caitlin’s mother.

Girls get hurt during cheerleading and while playing soccer and basketball, they said, so why not ban those, too?

They also noted that Florida allowed girls to play on boys’ high school football teams, including several female kickers and a girl who substituted at quarterback in a neighboring county.

“That’s much riskier,” Marcy Murphy said.

For now, at least, the game is over.

The Jupiter alumna Julie Wright, a local preschool director who played in the 1988 and 1989 games, said this year’s juniors and seniors were being deprived of some of their greatest high school memories.

“It is nothing you can experience anywhere else,” Wright said. “I don’t remember the pep rallies or the shows we had at school. I couldn’t tell who did what. But powder puff, I remember. It is an enjoyable tradition that doesn’t cause anyone any harm.”


