


The State Senate has confirmed two people recommended by Mayor Bill de Blasio to serve on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board, strengthening New York City’s voice at the state-run agency that oversees subways and buses.

As the legislative session wound down on Friday evening, the Senate confirmed several people to serve on the board, including David R. Jones, the president of the Community Service Society, whom Mr. de Blasio recommended. Another mayoral choice, Veronica Vanterpool, the executive director of the Tri-State Transportation Campaign, was confirmed on Thursday.

Over the past year, Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, has had only one representative on the board — Polly Trottenberg, the city’s transportation commissioner — even though the mayor is allowed to select four members. He recommended Ms. Vanterpool and Mr. Jones more than a year ago, but the legislative session in 2015 ended without the Republican-led Senate’s confirming his choices.

At a time when the subways are increasingly overcrowded and the authority is weighing the closing of the L subway tunnel between Manhattan and Brooklyn for repairs, city officials and transit advocates had argued that the city needed a full voice on the board. A third person Mr. de Blasio nominated, Ydanis Rodriguez, a member of the City Council, had not been confirmed by the Senate on Friday night.

On Friday, several other people were confirmed to serve on the board, including Peter Ward, the president of the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council, who was appointed by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat.

Another Cuomo appointee, Charles Phillips, the chief executive of Infor, a Manhattan software company, had not been confirmed by the Senate on Friday night. A spokesman for the governor, James Allen, said Mr. Cuomo planned to nominate Mr. Phillips to serve on a different board, for the Empire State Development Corporation.

The Senate also confirmed John Samuelsen, the president of the Transport Workers Union Local 100, to serve. John J. Molloy, Andrew M. Saul, James E. Vitiello, Carl V. Wortendyke and Neal J. Zuckerman were approved to represent suburban counties.

The authority's board makes decisions for the regional transit system — which includes the Long Island Rail Road, the Metro-North Railroad and the Staten Island Railway — and votes on issues like fare increases. In recent months, Mr. Jones and other transit advocates have pushed for reduced fares for low-income riders.

The governor names six representatives to the authority’s board, including the chairman. The executives of Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester Counties each recommend one member, while the members that represent Dutchess, Orange, Putnam and Rockland Counties share one vote. Several nonvoting board members represent riders and labor unions.


