


CHICAGO — An assistant for Jimmy Sexton, the most powerful agent in football, stood face to face with a client, Laremy Tunsil, the 6-foot-5, 310-pound offensive lineman from the University of Mississippi, in a crowded media room in the Auditorium Theatre at Roosevelt University on Thursday night.

Tunsil had just been selected by the Miami Dolphins with the 13th pick in the first round of the N.F.L. draft. But he was also suddenly at the center of one of the biggest calamities in draft history. Sexton’s assistant, Amy Milam, prepped Tunsil for the onslaught he was about to experience. Sweat was pouring off his brow as soon as reporters began lobbing questions.

After a couple of minutes of questioning, Milam, maybe a foot shorter than Tunsil, quickly barged forward, declared the interview over and pushed him to the door.

The N.F.L. draft, the league’s glitziest showpiece after the Super Bowl, has long produced cringe-worthy drama when highly regarded players arepassed over. The farther someone’s stock falls on draft night, with millions of TV viewers watching, the greater the spectacle.

But what happened on Thursday night was an “Are you watching this?” misadventure for the league akin to Janet Jackson’s “wardrobe malfunction” in the 2004 Super Bowl halftime show — but in the social-media age.

And this time, the wardrobe involved a bong attached to a gas mask.

Minutes before the draft began, a video of Tunsil had been posted on his Twitter account showing him wearing the gas mask and seemingly smoking marijuana through the bong. The draft turned dark and chaotic when Tunsil, the most coveted offensive lineman in the country, was deemed persona non grata by several teams.

The video and Tunsil’s Twitter account, @kingtunsil78, were quickly deleted. Later, the account was restored and Tunsil posted an apology. Several other Twitter users managed to grab the video before it was taken down.

His account had been hacked, Tunsil said. But by the time he had the chance to explain, he had fallen very far, very fast. The No. 3 pick in the draft — where many experts expected Tunsil to be be chosen — is projected to receive a four-year contract worth more than $25 million. The deal for a No. 13 pick will be about $12 million.

“It’s one of the worst things, one of the worst lessons to learn,” Robert Nkemdiche, a college teammate of Tunsil’s, said in a TV interview after he was drafted 29th by the Arizona Cardinals. “That’s just the way the world is now.”

Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, declined to comment on the video and other revelations about Tunsil that surfaced on Thursday night,though he said players could be referred to the league’s substance-abuse programs to “give the player the best opportunity to succeed in the league.”

The draft often serves as a demonstration of Sexton’s formidable status in the sport as his clients are paraded across the podium to greet the league’s commissioner, Roger Goodell, and to hold up their new team’s jersey. On Thursday, those celebratory images were overtaken by a player in a gas mask.

Sexton has a stable of college and pro clients including Alabama Coach Nick Saban, Florida State Coach Jimbo Fisher, the former Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick and Dolphins defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh.

His ties to the Dolphins are particularly deep. He helped arrange Saban’s abrupt departure from the Dolphins to the Crimson Tide in 2007, and herepresents the former executives Bill Parcells and Jeff Ireland, as well as the former coach Tony Sparano and the Dolphins’ current coach, Adam Gase, who was hired in January.

The team’s executive vice president of football operations, Mike Tannenbaum, has a strong relationship with Sexton. He considers Parcells a mentor and, as the general manager of the Jets, endorsed the hiring of Rex Ryan, another Sexton client.

After Tunsil was drafted, the situation quickly became an exercise in crisis management.

Tunsil, wearing gold and black studded shoes and a snazzier bow tie, somehow looked small as he sat hunched over and alone at a table on the podium, ready to answer questions after he had been picked by the Dolphins. He responded to a series of questions with platitudes like “I’m just blessed to be in this position.” Tunsil said that he did not know how his account had been breached and that only he knew his password.

He was also asked about a text-message conversation that was published on his Instagram account at about the time that he was selected by the Dolphins. In the exchange, seemingly between Tunsil and an athletics official at Mississippi, Tunsil asked for help paying bills; if he had received such help, it would be a violation of N.C.A.A. rules. When pressed about whether he had received money from his college coach, he mumbled, “I’d have to say yeah.”

Milam, Sexton’s assistant, declared the session over. “Thanks, guys,” she said as she hustled Tunsil offstage.

Milam wanted to keep Tunsil away from reporters, but an N.F.L. employee told her that it would look bad, so Tunsil was ushered into a nearby room, trailed by more reporters, to answer more questions.

Milam eventually stepped in to interrupt that session as well, whisking Tunsil away for good when questions about payments from his college coach surfaced again.

The drama continued Friday when Tunsil did not initially appear for his introductory news conference in Miami. Tannenbaum blamed “an allergic reaction,” and Tunsil eventually spoke to reporters without answering questions about his time at Mississippi.

Even if Tunsil’s social media accounts were hacked, his legal hurdles for restitution are high, several experts said. He could file a civil suit seeking compensation for lost income and damage to his reputation, but that assumes he can find the person who is responsible. Even if he can prove thatharm was done, there is no guarantee that he can collect damages from the hacker.

“It’s very challenging with these computer crimes because people can hide their tracks,” said Bradley Shear, a lawyer who specializes in media cases. “Even if you find the person who hacked, can you even collect on the judgment?”

Tunsil could file criminal charges, which can carry penalties including jail time. A federal prosecutor could take the case as a way to prove that hacking does not pay. But the police are under no obligation to pursue the charges, and Tunsil would presumably have to cooperate in the investigation, which could unearth other unflattering information that could further damage his reputation.

Given that slippery slope, Tunsil might decide to move on with his life.

“He might be the first public hack victim, but I doubt he will be the last,” said Robert Boland, a former N.F.L. agent who teaches sports law at Ohio University. “The better part of valor might be to back down.”

Tunsil’s high school coaches remember him as a supremely talented player and a respectful teenager. When Tunsil was a sophomore at Columbia High School in Lake City, Fla., the new football coach, Brian Allen, turned to a few members of his staff during spring practice and offered a prediction: Tunsil would be a top-five pick in the N.F.L. draft.

Tunsil reminded Allen of the Hall of Fame offensive tackle Walter Jones, who was starring at Florida State when Allen joined the Seminoles. “His ability and athleticism was different from anybody you see in high school,” Allen said about Tunsil in a telephone interview Friday. “He could run like a defensive end but he was built like a left tackle.”

That huge frame — 6 feet 5 inches and, by the time he graduated in 2013, nearly 300 pounds — belied a reserved and humble personality.

“He’s one of the best kids I’ve ever been around,” Doug Peeler, Tunsil’s offensive-line coach for three years at Columbia, said in a telephone interview.

Whenever an N.F.L. team would call Allen to pump him for information, he would say the same thing: Tunsil was loyal and likable and, above all, had an aptitude for reading people.

“If you screw it up with him, he’s done with you,” Allen said. “If you do something wrong to him or someone he cares about, that’s it.”

Not once, Allen said, did Tunsil get in trouble during their time together. Even though he was the best player on the field, Tunsil did not boast about his ability. Tunsil’s mother, Desiree, who worked as a nurse while he was at Columbia, dropped him off at school on her way to work. Sometimes, Allen would drive him home.

Allen said that Tunsil’s mother was a strong presence in her son’s life and that the two were very close.

“She’s his world,” Allen said.

Allen acknowledged the missteps that Tunsil made in college — an N.C.A.A. investigation revealed he had received impermissible benefits, including the use of three loaner cars, which resulted in a seven-game suspension.

“There’s wrongdoing that’s there,” Allen said. “All of my kids who come through my program understand: When you’re wrong, you own it. He’ll learn from it, and he’ll be better because of it.”

Tunsil was once considered a potential No. 1 overall pick. But in the days leading up to the draft, the Rams and the Eagles traded into the top two spots to be in position to select quarterbacks Jared Goff and Carson Wentz.

Then more teams passed on Tunsil.

Ozzie Newsome, the general manager of the Baltimore Ravens, told a reporter he had chosen another offensive tackle, Ronnie Stanley, instead of Tunsil in part because of information the team’s scouts had acquired about Tunsil.

The scouting reports on Tunsil might have included an admission by Nkemdiche, who said that Tunsil had been in the room when he fell out of a fourth-story hotel window in Atlanta in December. The police later found marijuana there and arrested Nkemdiche.

Tunsil was also arrested last summer after an altercation with his stepfather.

Dolphins General Manager Chris Grier said the team had been aware of the video’s existence well before the draft and said it was two years old.

In a radio interview Friday morning, Goodell said, “It’s all part of what makes the draft so exciting.” Referring to the teams’ decisions, he added, “Sometimes they take risks, sometimes they do the right thing and sometimes they don’t, and we’ll see.”


