


The Tony Award-winning actress Audra McDonald announced on Tuesday that she is pregnant and will leave the cast of “Shuffle Along, or, the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed” for maternity leave starting on July 24. The show’s producers announced that the Grammy Award-winning singer Rhiannon Giddens will make her Broadway debut as Ms. McDonald’s replacement.

Savion Glover, the show’s Tony-nominated choreographer, will also join the cast in a capacity still to be determined by the director, George C. Wolfe, according to a spokesman for the show.

Ms. McDonald’s pregnancy means that she will postpone her West End debut in a reprisal of her Tony-winning role in “Lady Day at Emerson’s Bar and Grill,” which was set to begin performances in June. (Her three-month hiatus from “Shuffle Along” to perform in London was announced before “Shuffle Along” opened.)

Her return date to the show, a jazz-and-tap-heavy show about a 1921 all-black Broadway musical, was not announced, although a news release said she would be back “this winter.”

This will be Ms. McDonald’s first child with her husband, the actor Will Swenson, although they have three children from previous marriages. In a statement Ms. McDonald said she was disappointed to postpone “Lady Day” and temporarily leave “Shuffle Along,” but was looking forward “to setting up a 1920s-themed nursery in my dressing room when I return to the show.”

Ms. Giddens, a singer and musician, will make her Broadway debut. She is best known as the leader of the Carolina Chocolate Drops, a band that aims to preserve the tradition of African-American string bands of the early 20th century, roughly the era depicted in “Shuffle Along.” Her solo album, “Tomorrow Is My Turn,” was released in February. In a review in The New York Times earlier this year, Stephen Holden said that Ms. Giddens possessed a “beautiful voice and air of supernal calm.”

“Shuffle Along” was nominated for 10 Tony Awards last week, including best musical. Ms. McDonald, who has a record six Tony Awards, did not receive a nomination.


