


As music streaming numbers continue to rise, the major services are engaged in an arms race that increasingly includes exclusivity windows for albums by superstar artists.

For Beyoncé, whose sixth solo LP, “Lemonade,” was released on April 23, the choice was personal: Tidal, the music service her husband, Jay Z, bought in 2015 (and in which she is a partner), remains the only place to stream the album three weeks after its debut.

So far, that partnership — which benefited from speculation that “Lemonade” pulled back the curtain on Jay Z and Beyoncé’s rocky marriage — has resulted in 306 million global streams for songs from the album, according to data Tidal provided to The New York Times. About 75 percent of those streams (229 million) came from the United States. Tidal is available in 46 countries.

During that same period (from release through Wednesday night), the hourlong conceptual film that accompanied “Lemonade” and had its premiere on HBO has been streamed 11 million times via Tidal. The most popular “Lemonade” tracks on the service include “Sorry,” which is No. 11 on the Billboard Hot 100, followed by “Hold Up” (No. 16), “6 Inch” (No. 28) and “Don’t Hurt Yourself” (No. 37).

Tidal said that it gained 1.2 million user sign-ups, including free trials, in the first week that “Lemonade” was available; the service had said in March that it had 3 million users. As for its competitors, Spotify said that it had 30 million paying subscribers globally; Apple Music said it had 13 million.

Tidal’s Beyoncé exclusive comes at an especially competitive time for streaming. In its first week, “Lemonade,” which made its debut at No. 1 on the Billboard album chart, set a record for weekly streams in the United States with 115 million, according to Nielsen Music.

But the very next week, “Views” by Drake, which was available to stream in full exclusively through Apple Music (with some singles available on Spotify), more than doubled that total with 245 million streams in the United States — more than “Lemonade” has earned in its first three weeks. And although “Lemonade” was streamed another 97 million times in the United States in its second week, according to Nielsen, the album is on track to drop to less than a third of that in its third week out.

According to Billboard, the five largest streaming weeks for an album in the United States have all come in the past six months.


