


BOSTON — Amid a roiling national debate over transgender rights, lawmakers in the Democratic-led House in Massachusetts on Wednesday passed a bill that would expand protections against discrimination for transgender people and allow them to use bathrooms and locker rooms consistent with their gender identity.

The State Senate, also controlled by Democrats, passed a similar measure here last month. With support for the House’s bill from Gov. Charlie Baker, a Republican, Massachusetts appears ready to cut against the current of states that have opposed some protections in public accommodations for transgender people.

“No one should be discriminated against in Massachusetts because of their gender identity,” Mr. Baker said on Tuesday in announcing his support of the bill after months of avoiding a direct endorsement of such a measure.

Transgender rights — particularly concerning bathroom access — have rapidly unfolded as the latest clash in the culture wars. In March, Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina, a Republican, signed a law limiting bathroom access for transgender people in that state. Last month, the Obama administration directed schools to allow students to use facilities consistent with their gender identity; officials from 11 states, most with Republican governors, have sued over the policy.

Now Massachusetts, a deep-blue state with a moderate Republican governor, is poised to go the opposite direction.

“This reflects the continuing and deepening polarization of the American public,” said Jeffrey Berry, a professor of political science at Tufts University. “We’re redder and bluer than we were, even just five years ago.”

Massachusetts passed protections in education, housing and employment for transgender people in 2011; the current bill adds those protections in public accommodations. Criticism of transgender protections here and around the country has focused on whether they would allow male sexual predators into women’s restrooms. The House’s measure, unlike the Senate’s, directs the state’s attorney general to issue guidelines for law enforcement “for any person who asserts gender identity for an improper purpose.”

Mr. Baker, who faced mounting criticism from liberal groups here for not indicating whether he would sign a bill, cited that provision in announcing his support for the bill on Tuesday, saying it “addresses the concerns that some people have with the bill.” The House and Senate versions of the bill will have to be reconciled before a measure can reach the governor’s desk.

The Massachusetts bill is not a groundbreaking measure — 17 states, and Washington, D.C., already provide such protection — but advocates have welcomed its progress at a time of heated controversy over transgender rights.

“The fact that the state is doing it at a moment of heightened awareness around transgender people and misperceptions about what laws protecting transgender people are really about is really an important signal to the rest of the country,” said Sarah Warbelow, the legal director for the Human Rights Campaign.

On Wednesday morning, advocates for transgender, gay and lesbian groups squeezed into the gallery of the House chambers, many wearing green to show their support for the cause, while dozens of opponents chanted and prayed outside the chambers.

Representative Sheila C. Harrington, a Republican who opposed the 2011 protections, rose to her feet and declared her support for the bill, citing her Roman Catholic faith.

“Sometimes, we need courage to change our direction,” she said, pointing to a mural showing Justice Samuel Sewall apologizing in 1697 for his role in the Salem witch trials. She added, “I urge you to support this new era of tolerance.”

But Representative Marc T. Lombardo, another Republican, urged members to vote against the bill.

“I don’t believe that taking away the privacy rights for 99 percent of people is a noble thing to do,” Mr. Lombardo said.

After about seven hours of debate, the bill passed, 116 to 36, and the opponents’ chorus of “Shame on you” echoed down the State House halls. But advocates hugged and cheered.

“I feel validated,” said Erica Tobias, 61, a transgender woman who is a manager at a real estate office. “It’s O.K. to be who we are.”


