


SYOSSET, N.Y. — Travis Hamonic has seen most everything in his six seasons with the Islanders. The chance to play before the home crowd in a second-round playoff game will be a first.

Hamonic, a 25-year-old defenseman, has been a key player on the Islanders’ roster during the course of his career. Hamonic proved that again when he returned from a late-season knee injury to play at his usual high level as the Islanders ousted the Florida Panthers in the first round.

Their second-round series against the Tampa Bay Lightning is tied, 1-1, entering Game 3 in Brooklyn on Tuesday night.

Hamonic, who has been paired with Nick Leddy during the playoffs, said he was eager to skate before the rabid Islander fans at Barclays Center, which was as loud as Nassau Coliseum during two overtime victories against the Panthers in the first round.

“It’s awesome,” Hamonic said Monday. “You play all year to have an opportunity to do this. You get to hit people, the intensity is there, and you have the chance to play for something that’s pretty cool.”

The Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, has been a teammate for Hamonic’s entire Islanders career and cannot overemphasize Hamonic’s importance to the franchise, which selected him in the second round of the 2008 draft.

“Travis is an all-around defenseman who brings different tools,” Tavares said. “You can’t easily find those guys with size and mobility. He plays hard and doesn’t cross the line. He’s a very fair player.”

But looming over the season has been a trade request Hamonic made in November to be closer to his home in St. Malo, Manitoba, for unspecified family reasons. He remains with the Islanders for now, and any potential distraction has not been evident in his spirited play.

There is little question Hamonic has become a fan favorite during his time with the Islanders, as much for his efforts on the ice as away from the rink. When Hamonic was 10, his father died of a heart attack. Hamonic has made it his personal mission to mentor and spend time with youngsters growing up without a parent.

The Islanders signed Hamonic to a seven-year, $27 million contract in July 2013, and having him on the blue line with Leddy and Johnny Boychuk has been a big reason the team reached the 100-point mark and the playoffs during the past two seasons.

Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said he expected his team to bring a physical element against the quick and talented Lightning. Hamonic said he would be up to the task.

“That’s part of our identity, something we try to do as a group my six years here,” said Hamonic, who had five goals and 16 assists in 72 games this season. “We can always do more and be physical.”

They will surely need the 6-foot-2 Hamonic’s mixture of size and skill to counter the speedy Lightning, who won Saturday’s Game 2, 4-1, after the Islanders took the opener, 5-3.

Tampa Bay’s reunited line of Tyler Johnson, Ondrej Palat and Nikita Kucherov, known as the Triplets, is a particular challenge. That elusive Lightning unit gave the Rangers fits in winning the Eastern Conference finals last spring and combined for two goals and two assists in Game 2.

Hamonic said the mission to defend the three was simple.

“We just have to stop them,” Hamonic said. “That’s pretty much it.”

Hamonic is not the only player having a strong series who made a trade request during the season. Lightning forward Jonathan Drouin, 21, wanted out of Tampa, unhappy with his playing time and demoted to the American Hockey League. Since rejoining the Lightning in April, he has three goals and six assists. He scored his first career playoff goal Saturday against the Islanders and has added two assists in the series.

The Islanders are looking forward to their first game in front of their home crowd since dispatching the Panthers in overtime in Game 6. Hamonic and Tavares agreed that the decibel levels would be a motivating factor.

“We saw in the first round what kind of atmosphere we can have and how crazy it can get,” Hamonic said. “I can only imagine it will be even better. We rely on them to bring a certain aspect to our game. They are passionate and intense in the best way possible.”

Tavares added that the team’s core — which includes the unrestricted free agents Kyle Okposo and Frans Nielsen — wanted to achieve meaningful results this spring. The Islanders have already won a round for the first time in 23 years. The rest is new territory for this group, which lost in the first round to Pittsburgh in 2013 and to Washington last year.

“It goes a long way in that we’ve been through a lot together — the sacrifices, the hard work and all the ups and downs,” said Tavares, who leads the Islanders with six goals and 11 points in the playoffs. “We want to do something special. You can see how committed everyone is to getting the job done.”

SLAP SHOTS

Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak practiced with the team, but Coach Jack Capuano said there was no timetable for his return. Halak last played on March 8. ... Defenseman Ryan Pulock and forward Josh Bailey, both of whom have missed recent games with injuries, also skated, though there was no word if they would play in Game 3.


