


Late May, early June: At the right moment, and if you are in the right frame of mind, the world is all abundance, all beauty, all in flower. But sometimes this feeling — like the tulips and daffodils and hyacinths of late winter and the first days of spring — must be forced. One afternoon a few weeks ago, when both the dispiriting news of the world and a loss in my own life had sunk me low, I resolved to drag myself out of bed, out of my apartment and over to the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. Luckily for me, it was cherry-blossom time. As I lumbered along a carpet of soft, fallen pink petals, my senses, which had been so tired and dull for weeks, became heightened and focused.

Even my sense of taste. No, I didn’t reach down, scoop up some petals and eat them. But I started thinking of certain dishes and drinks that make use of flowers and their flavors. On warm days in spring and summer, there’s little that pleases me more than the easiest highball made with assertively floral gin, soda and a dash or two of bitters. It can also be fun to get more creative with flowers. I’m not much of a baker, but as I rested on a bench in the garden, I wondered if the best confection in my limited repertoire — an olive-oil cake made with lavender and lemon — might somehow translate into an elegant cocktail. And whether the incomparable cheerfulness and brightness bestowed by the sight of a too-tall sunflower might also be persuasively rendered in drinkable form.

When I got home, I did some experimenting. I looked for bottles in my liquor cabinet that were heavy on botanicals: those gins to which I already referred, elderflower liqueur, crème de violette. I raided my pantry too: How about some orange-blossom water? Dried lavender? Chamomile tea?

Some things worked (my successes that day are represented by two of the recipes at right: Ah, Sunflower! and the Lavender Hill Cob), and some did not. Chamomile frequently faded out, too demure for many spirits, and orange-blossom water overpowered most. So strong is the affinity between liquor and perfume that I once met a whiskey distiller who spoke of her choice, after completing a chemistry degree, between those two fields for her career. But you must tread lightly when using floral elements in cocktails, lest they come out not only smelling like cologne, which is tolerable, but also tasting like it, which is not.

A walk in a garden won’t soothe away all stress or subdue all sorrow, and neither will a good cocktail. But they can lift us up. Even simply garnishing a drink with fresh flowers (make sure they are edible grade and do avoid mums: in the name of research I learned the hard way how terrible they taste) makes a cocktail more beautiful, more special, more like a John Singer Sargent painting, more like a sunny — even hopeful — spring day in a glass.

Recipes: Ah, Sunflower! | Brooklyn Sunrise | Lavender Hill Cob


