


DENVER — If the Yankees, who have gone through first basemen the way Spinal Tap went through drummers, seem intent on trying to find a first baseman who can stay out of harm’s way, their most recent candidate is a curious one.

On Tuesday they welcomed into the clubhouse Ike Davis, who needs little introduction to New Yorkers.

Davis, a former Met, saw his once-promising career take a turn south on the infield here five years ago when a seemingly innocuous collision with third baseman David Wright caused a season-ending ankle injury.

Then came a debilitating bout of Valley Fever, a sudden inability to hit for average, a trip to the minors, a loss of his spot in the lineup to Lucas Duda and, finally, a couple of mediocre seasons in Pittsburgh and Oakland, ending with hip surgery last September.

The operation was so extensive that Davis was not able to walk for three months. He then sprained a knee ligament during spring training.

So it was understandable that what left Davis so enthusiastic Tuesday was simply being back in a big league uniform.

“Every week and every day I started feeling better and better and more confident,” said Davis, who exercised an out clause in a minor league deal with Texas to sign with the Yankees. “It’s been a long but rewarding road so far, just being healthy and making it back to the big leagues. That’s really all I can say — that it’s awesome.”

The expectations are modest on the Yankees’ part.

For Davis to stay healthy would not be a bad start. Just over two months into the season, the Yankees have lost the first basemen Mark Teixeira (torn knee cartilage), Greg Bird (shoulder surgery), Dustin Ackley (shoulder surgery) and Chris Parmelee (hamstring). Bird and Ackley are out for the season, and Teixeira could also be, if his knee does not respond to rest.

Parmelee is expected to be out at least a month.

The plan for now calls for Davis, a left-handed hitter, to share first base with Rob Refsnyder, a right-handed hitter, who is learning to play the position. Davis, a slick fielder, will be a defensive replacement.

“That’s the thing about the game — if you’re producing you’re going to play,” Manager Joe Girardi said Tuesday before the Yankees’ game against the Rockies, in which Davis, pinch-hitting, had a run-scoring single in the eighth inning. Girardi said he planned to start Davis on Wednesday against the right-hander Chad Bettis.

“I’ll get him in there,” Girardi said, “and we’ll go from there.”

In an unsentimental twist, neither New York team turned to a familiar face when it needed reinforcements at first base. The Mets could have turned to Davis when Duda was injured last month, but instead they acquired James Loney. The Yankees signed Nick Swisher to a minor league contract at the start of the season but did not recall him when injuries to Ackley, Teixeira and Parmelee arose.

Davis said he relished returning to New York — especially to play for the Yankees, whom his father, Ron, represented in the 1981 All-Star Game.

“I loved it,” Davis said. “It was tough, obviously, because I was going through some really tough times as a baseball player, being so young and wanting to do well. Thinking back, besides the year in Pittsburgh, when we made it to the playoffs, I had my best seasons living and enjoying playing — it was in New York.”

Davis, 29 now, was the Mets’ first-round draft choice in 2008 and had a promising debut two years later, with 19 home runs and 71 R.B.I. His made-for-the-back-pages first name and his being half Jewish gave him an identity on a team that was searching for a positive one amid the Madoff scandal and on the brink of a management housecleaning. General Manager Omar Minaya, Manager Jerry Manuel and the scouting director Rudy Terrasas were all fired.

Davis started strong in 2011, hitting .302 with a .925 on-base-plus-slugging percentage and 25 R.B.I. through 36 games when he and Wright collided near the pitcher’s mound May 10 at Coors Field.

“It was a freak injury,” said Davis, who considered the possibility of having microfracture surgery, which is sometimes risky. “It took a whole year to recover — some guys never even come back from that injury.”

Davis has hit .224 since then.

It is hard to know how much the injuries — his back locked up at the start of last season — and illness have kept Davis from fulfilling his early promise, and how much has been because of a lengthy swing that big league pitchers have exploited since his initial success.

Davis described his swing as quieter now and a little bit shorter. He is standing up taller and is not as closed off toward the pitcher, but his hands are doing the same thing. He is not the pull hitter he once was, using more of the field, but he does not believe that will prevent him from taking advantage of the alluring right-field wall at Yankee Stadium.

“My swing has changed like every game since 2012,” Davis said. “Yeah, it’s different this year. I like it a lot better than what I’ve been doing the last couple of years. I’m excited for a fresh start, and hopefully I can help the team in any way possible.”

At the moment, that may be just staying in one piece.


