


VOORHEES, N.J. — With arms crossed and a black baseball cap propped backward on his head, Philadelphia Flyers goaltender Steve Mason wearily took a few more questions Sunday about how he could have been beaten by a measly tip-in from, yes, 101 feet away.

All Washington forward Jason Chimera was trying to accomplish Saturday night was to knock a long pass from Karl Alzner toward the goal so that the Capitals could make a line change, but the puck squirted through Mason’s pads instead for a killer goal in a 4-1 Washington victory.

“You put it behind you quickly and move on to the next thing,” Mason said Sunday.

He seemed to be trying hard to do that, but at one point during a brief interview, he frowned and said, “I’m just tired of talking about it right now.”

Chimera’s second-period goal gave the heavily favored Capitals a 2-0 lead in a game they won to take a 2-0 series lead. Dave Hakstol, the Flyers’ first-year coach, was even asked if he might change goalies for Game 3 on Monday in Philadelphia.

Hakstol made no announcement, but he did say: “I like Mase’s play. He’s been at a high level for six, seven weeks now. He’s been a real integral part of everything we’ve done here down the stretch.”

Later, Hakstol said: “It’s one mistake in a game. It draws a lot of attention because of the nature of the position, but both Steve as well as our team handled it real well.”

The Capitals were going to be an extreme challenge for the Flyers, anyway, but Philadelphia can hardly afford any mistakes if it hopes to win one game in this series, let alone four.

Washington goaltender Braden Holtby has stopped 60 of 61 shots in the series, and the Capitals’ vaunted power play has scored three goals, two of them Saturday on just two shots. A strong series from Mason was essential for the Flyers to have any chance.

Now comes what will surely be the most emotional moment of the series: the first hockey game in Philadelphia since Ed Snider, the Flyers’ co-founder and their owner for their entire 50-year history, died April 11 at age 83 of cancer at his home in Montecito, Calif.

“Win It for Ed” T-shirts are for sale, at $19.95, and the public has been invited to a memorial service at Wells Fargo Center on Thursday afternoon. Players and coaches are planning to attend — but the Flyers’ season could very well be over by then.

“We’ve got to control our emotions a little bit, but we’ve got to follow the game plan,” said center Claude Giroux, the Flyers’ captain. “We’ve played two good games. We’ve got to make the third one great.”

Before the Flyers’ last regular-season home game on April 9, Lauren Hart sang “God Bless America” for the sellout crowd — and for Snider on her cellphone, via FaceTime. Pregame activities Monday are expected to be more celebratory than sentimental.

The Flyers’ challenge will be to set a hard-hitting tone against the bigger Capitals. Philadelphia is 0 for 8 on power plays in the series; Washington is 3 for 8.

Just because Snider oversaw the formation of the Flyers’ roughneck Broad Street Bullies image in the 1970s — when the Flyers won their only two Stanley Cup championships — does not mean the current team would want to stage a retrospective.

“We’ve got to be physical and use the home crowd to our advantage but play under control,” Flyers forward Brayden Schenn said. “We don’t want to be sitting in the penalty box all night.”

When Michal Neuvirth sustained a knee injury, Mason played in 12 straight games over 22 days, including three consecutive games. Mason went 6-4-2, with a 2.21 goals-against average and a .926 save percentage, and the Flyers surged past staggering Boston for a playoff berth.

Even in the playoff series opener, a 2-0 Washington victory on Thursday, Mason played well, giving up two goals on 31 shots. His teammates are not abandoning him.

“Mase is the reason why we’re here,” the rookie defenseman Shayne Gostisbehere said Sunday. “Goals like that are going to happen. You saw two minutes before, he almost tore his groin making a save. He’s the reason why we’re here right now, and we’re going to pick him up. We have 100 percent confidence in him.”

Hakstol pointed out that the Flyers did trim the deficit Saturday to 2-1, with forward Ryan White ringing a shot off the crossbar behind Holtby with more than seven minutes to play in the second period.

“Obviously, he’d like to have that one back,” Schenn said of Mason. “But the way he bounced back — he made lots of good saves after that. That just shows how mentally strong he is.”

Mason said Sunday that he was trying to put the bad goal behind him. Less than a stellar effort Monday — especially Monday — will not be good enough for Philadelphia fans who are weathering a Cup drought going on 41 years without the team’s beloved owner.


