


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Tony Cenicola, a Times photographer, describes a recent attempt at shooting starry time-lapse videos on the Canary Islands.

For a story about astrotourism in the Canary Islands, I was asked by my editor to do a time-lapse video of stars moving across the sky. I’d never shot an evening time-lapse before, but I knew what it would entail: hundreds or even thousands of individual frames stacked together to form a continuous video.

I was happy to discover that I had access (from The Times’s equipment pool) to a camera with a built-in intervalometer — a device that would enable me to set the camera to automatically take an exposure at a given time interval. I took it home to do a test and discovered after a couple of tries that I liked the stars’ rate of movement when I set it at 15-second intervals.

I then did some math: If video runs at 30 frames per second, and I was going to shoot one frame every 15 seconds, it would take one whole hour to shoot eight seconds of video. (Yikes.) I was aiming for at least one minute of video, which meant I’d have to shoot for seven-and-a-half hours.

I did a second test to see how long the camera battery would last, and after turning off the review screen in order to conserve battery life, it lasted a little over two hours.

So much for the testing — and off to the Canary Islands.

I left on a 5 p.m. flight out of Kennedy airport and arrived in Tenerife at around 9 a.m. the next day. After a two-hour drive to the hotel, I checked my bags and went out to shoot various scenes: La Laguna’s old town, the beach made of black sand, the seaside cliffs known as Los Gigantes — as well as any other shots that struck my fancy along the way. The sky was overcast at the hotel that night, so no stars.

The next day I photographed a few more sites on my way back to the airport, then flew to the island of La Palma, where the Gran Telescopio de Canarias is. (The telescope is the largest and one of the most advanced optical and infrared telescopes in the world.)

The sky was still overcast when I arrived at the airport, and I was beginning to worry. To make matters worse, the woman at the car rental counter informed me that the road to the observatory was closed — because of snow, no less — and that even though I reserved a car with four-wheel drive, they only had two-wheel-drive vehicles available.

I departed on the two-hour drive, winding up the mountain on narrow roads. After an hour and a half, I burst through dense fog to find myself above the cloud layer. The views through the trees where stunning, and even though I was trying to get to the observatory before dusk, I just had to stop to shoot some pictures.

The clerk at the observatory residence was just about to leave for the day when I arrived. (There was no snow on the road after all.) I threw my personal stuff into my room and drove to the telescope, a short drive further up the mountain. I met with the engineer, who gave me a quick tour, and I shot some video while he set up the telescope for the night. Then I went out to pick a spot to shoot the time lapse.

I ended up on a hill that would put the telescope between me and the sunset. The whole scene was backed by a sea of clouds that stretched all the way to the horizon.

I started the camera and set the timer on my phone to two hours — so I’d know when to delicately change the battery. (For the photos to align in the time lapse, I’d have to change the battery without moving or even nudging the camera.)

After about two hours I decided to go back to the room for a bit and grab some pillows, blankets and coffee. The temperature was dropping to near freezing, and I wanted to be comfortable in the car while I waited for the camera’s battery to run out.

Once it’s dark, you’re not allowed to drive with your headlights on anywhere near the observatory. To my chagrin, I discovered that the rental car, being of modern vintage, made it impossible to turn the headlights off.

I opened the hood and yanked the bulbs out, but it wasn’t enough; the headlights were surrounded by bright LED bulbs. So I pulled the floor mats out of the car and draped them over the lights — holding them in place with the hood of the car — and drove back to the residence. All the while I was holding a flashlight out the window so I could see.

I gathered up some blankets and pillows, and, using some black gaffers tape, I taped over the headlights. I returned to the observatory and continued shooting until 3 a.m., when cloud cover moved in.

When I looked at the images the next day, I found them disappointing. The scene looked great at sunset, but I hadn’t adequately captured the transition to night, and the telescope itself had disappeared into the darkness — though there was an interesting glow coming from the town below the clouds. Also, every time I’d started the car for some heat, a bright flash of red light had flooded the scene.

I’d missed my only chance at the G.T.C.

The next night, though, I was back on Tenerife, where there’s another array of telescopes. The second time around, I knew to park well away from the camera — and to better frame the shot.

I reviewed them the next morning. After three days of shooting and next to no sleep, I was finally happy with the results.


