


PARIS — The qualifying cutoff for the tennis events at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics comes the Monday after the French Open, adding pressure on many of the players on the Olympic bubble who are now getting their last chance to secure the ranking points necessary to reach the Games.

But a gold-medal goal has proved far from universal among the players.

The 80th-ranked Ernests Gulbis, whose surprise run to the fourth round in Paris will propel him into the top 60 and therefore inside the Olympics ranking cutoff, said he had already decided not to compete in Rio, in part because of the lack of incentives for participation.

“I really don’t like that in Olympic Games there is no points and no prize money,” Gulbis said. “It’s a little bit like tennis tourism, from my side.”

While none of the shortlisted medal contenders have withdrawn, several men who would have safely qualified for the competition have indicated that they have no intention of competing. Months before the Games are to begin, five of the men who fall between 15th and 23rd in the ATP rankings have ruled themselves out. They are the over-30 veterans John Isner, Kevin Anderson and Feliciano López and two players in their early 20s, Bernard Tomic and Dominic Thiem.

Gulbis is not alone in citing the lack of ranking points for Olympic performance — which had previously been on offer for the men’s singles since 2000 and the women’s singles since 2004 — as a reason for not competing.

Isner, a member of the ATP player council, said he had lobbied for increased ranking points at the Olympics after being frustrated at receiving only 135 points for reaching the quarterfinals in 2012 (by contrast, the ATP tournament held that week in Washington offered 500 points to the champion, even though its field had been depleted by the Olympics).

Paltry though they may have been in the past, Isner said the absence of ranking points was “a very, very big factor” in his decision not to play in Rio, as was his not wanting to miss the ATP tournament in Atlanta, where he has won three titles in a row. He noted that two other formerly top-ranked Americans, Andy Roddick and Mardy Fish, had skipped the 2008 and 2012 Olympics.

Still, Isner said most of the feedback he had received about his decision had been negative.

“I’ve been called unpatriotic — I don’t think it’s that,” said Isner, who plans to represent the United States in July in a Davis Cup quarterfinal against Croatia in Oregon. “I don’t consider myself that at all.”

For Gulbis and Anderson, the increased Davis Cup participation mandated for Olympic eligibility was an additional problem. The ATP also stopped awarding ranking points for Davis Cup victories this year. Those changes came after years of negotiations between the ATP and WTA Tours and the International Tennis Federation, which oversees the Olympic tennis events as well as the Davis Cup and Fed Cup team events.

“The I.T.F. believes that players are honored to play the Olympics, and that for the majority of players, ranking points are not a consideration for their participation,” said Nick Imison, an I.T.F. spokesman.

Eric Butorac, president of the ATP players council, said a sticking point between the I.T.F. and the ATP had been the abandonment of a payment structure in which the I.T.F. compensated the smaller ATP tournaments that were adversely affected by the Olympics every four years.

“They helped compensate, because they make so much money off of our players, and they disrupt the tour a lot,” Butorac said of the I.T.F. and the Olympics. “This year, the I.T.F. said they weren’t going to compensate, and they basically told us that they didn’t care if we had points or not.”

Some top players who still intended to compete, including the men’s world No. 1, Novak Djokovic, and the fourth-ranked Stan Wawrinka, expressed frustration at the decision not to give ranking points.

“To be quite frank, I don’t see a reason why not,” Djokovic said. “We have the best players in the world participating in arguably the fifth Grand Slam. It’s of that importance for all of us — even more because it happens every four years. I mean, it’s a subject for discussion. I would definitely encourage people to rethink of getting points out there.”

Butorac said that when negotiations ended last year, most players did not object to the end of ranking points in the Olympics.

“Some wanted it, but the majority that I asked said that they really didn’t want them, and that the Olympics should be about representing your country,” Butorac said. “The Olympics means a lot of different things to different people. There are some players to whom it’s bigger than winning a Grand Slam. Other players, they’d rather win a Masters Series title than win the Olympics.

“And that’s not to say that anyone’s right or wrong; I get kind of upset when people criticize someone like Isner for not playing, because he’s trying to live a professional tennis career. Whether or not he plays in the Olympics is his own business. Tennis players are independent contractors, and they should be able to do what they want.”

The 15th-ranked Thiem, a promising 23-year-old who plays a fourth-round match in Paris on Monday, has in particular faced criticism in his homeland over his lack of Olympic interest. The sports editor of the Austrian newspaper Kronenzeitung published an open letter calling on Thiem to play.

Thiem, who said he hoped to break into the top 10 of the ATP this year, said his conception of tennis had never included the Olympics, where the sport was reintroduced as an event in 1988 after having been absent for most of the previous century.

“I still think that swimming and athletics are the real Olympic sports,” Thiem said.

Roberta Vinci, the United States Open runner-up last year, planned to play in Rio but echoed Thiem’s thoughts on the sport’s attachment to the event.

“Probably if you think one big tournament in tennis, you think Wimbledon, Roland Garros, not the Olympics,” Vinci told WTA Insider. “If you want to swim, the Olympics is unbelievable.”

Those who have tasted Olympic gold possess a deeper attachment to the event. Andy Murray, who won gold in singles and silver in mixed doubles in London, expressed confusion over why other players did not want to play in the Games.

“There are different reasons for playing tournaments, sometimes,” Murray said. “For me, Davis Cup and Olympics, I’m not playing for ranking points.”

Venus Williams, a four-time gold medalist, said her Olympic triumphs were her most prized accomplishments.

“The proudest moment for me when they do the on-court announcements are the Olympic results,” Williams said. “For me, that feels legitimate.”

She later expressed bewilderment at ranking points becoming a sticking point.

“Who needs ranking points if you’re playing for a gold medal?” she said.

The Canadian Milos Raonic, ranked ninth, lost in the second round of his lone Olympic appearance but expressed a similar sentiment.

”Points or no points, it doesn’t really matter,” he said. “I think the goal and the target is very simple: You’re there to win a medal. The shinier the better.”


