


As the memory of high school may cast a lingering shadow on later lives, so “A Brighter Summer Day,” Edward Yang’s magisterial four-hour drama of Taipei teenagers, looms over the landscape of Taiwanese cinema. American recognition has been slower. Completed in 1991 but released in the United States 20 years later, the film is now out on disc from Criterion.

A universal tale of wayward adolescence is woven into complex context. Taiwan, a liberated Japanese colony with a large native Chinese population, was ruled from 1949 on by newly arrived Chinese nationalists backed by the American military. “A Brighter Summer Day” depicts but does not directly explicate the political situation. “Rather than working its way through a neatly predigested story line, it plunges the audience into a vast social fresco,” the British critic Tony Rayns, one of the movie’s first Western admirers, wrote in 1993.

Along with his contemporary Hou Hsiao-hsien, Mr. Yang (1947-2007) helped usher Taiwanese cinema onto the world stage. Mr. Yang was also the new cinema movement’s most cosmopolitan member — born in Shanghai, raised in Taipei and trained as an engineer at the University of Florida. Early films like “Taipei Story” (1985) and “The Terrorizer” (1986) are laconic depictions of Taiwan’s disaffected urban elite. “A Brighter Summer Day,” on which Mr. Yang worked for three years — one of which he said was devoted to rehearsing his cast’s 60 young members — is more ambitious and personal.

“A City of Sadness” (1989), Mr. Hou’s intimate yet panoramic treatment of Taiwan’s turbulent Cold War history, provided a template for Mr. Yang. While not strictly autobiographical, “A Brighter Summer Day” drew on his own experiences; set in 1960, it is based on a juvenile homicide that occurred at Mr. Yang’s school when he was 13. In an interview published in 2005, Mr. Yang called making the movie “a kind of responsibility that I had to take on.”

“A Brighter Summer Day” is largely focused on high school turf wars and imported Elvis worship. (The title refers to a misheard lyric from the Elvis Presley hit “Are You Lonesome Tonight?”) But it is also a family drama that evokes Taiwan’s prolonged period of martial law. The protagonist Si’r, a bright, impulsive 14-year-old, is enrolled in a secondary school where the uniforms and regimentation provide an unforced parallel to military rule.

Originally on the fringes of a local gang, Si’r is drawn into its power struggles, including an emotional vortex around the murdered gang leader’s girlfriend, Ming. The title notwithstanding, much of the film’s action takes place at night, or is otherwise obscured, reinforcing the sense of a clandestine youth culture coursing beneath the frozen surface of a mobilized society.

Seeing “A Brighter Summer Day” in the early 1990s as part of a touring package of Taiwanese films, I was impressed by Mr. Yang’s synthesis of detached European art cinema and florid Hollywood youth films; familiar yet exotic, his movie seemed a Michelangelo Antonioni version of “West Side Story” or a Wim Wenders remake of “Rebel Without a Cause,” with the added frisson of pop ballads by Frankie Avalon and Ricky Nelson performed by Taiwanese singers in phonetic English.

To revisit the movie is to appreciate the precision of Mr. Yang’s period details and novelistic touches. An outsize flashlight stolen by Si’r and his friends from a night watchman in one of the movie’s first scenes reappears throughout to illuminate (or not) the tangled conflicts. The school’s proximity to a movie studio allows Mr. Yang to comment both on his film and his characters as historical actors, not least when the duplicitous Ming is given a screen test.

Dialogue from “Rio Bravo” is heard as well, but Mr. Yang’s lofty aspiration may be gauged by several references to “War and Peace,” a book seen by the movie’s most romantic character as the Western equivalent of the Chinese martial arts novels in which he imagines he lives. That may have been Mr. Yang’s feeling as well. Interviewed by Mr. Rayns, he remarked, “If someone asked me to make a 300-episode TV series about these people, I’d have had the material to do it.”

American television hasn’t lacked for high school drama, but few series are as treasured as “Freaks and Geeks,” created by Paul Feig and produced by Judd Apatow. Broadcast in 1999 and 2000 but set outside Detroit at the dawn of the Reagan era, the series was canceled by NBC at midseason but revived on cable, complete with un-telecast episodes, and has enjoyed a long afterlife as a critical and fan favorite. “Freaks and Geeks: The Complete Series,” a new Blu-ray box out from Shout! Factory, provides all 18 episodes both in the original broadcast aspect ratio and a superfluous wide-screen format.

Mr. Feig (“Bridesmaids,” the coming “Ghostbusters” reboot) and Mr. Apatow (“Trainwreck,” “Knocked Up”) are now kingpins of Hollywood comedy. A number of the show’s stars, including the three main “freaks” — James Franco, Seth Rogen and Jason Segel — also enjoy great box-office visibility, but the series’s real star is Linda Cardellini. In her mid-20s when the show was shot, she was a more convincing teenager than her co-stars, some of whom, like Mr. Rogen, were still in their teens. (More recently, Ms. Cardellini has appeared in AMC’s “Mad Men” and the series “Bloodline” on Netflix.)

If not free of sentimental moralizing, “Freaks and Geeks” is generally unflinching in its identification with high school outcasts. The show’s period and something of its attitude is established by the use of Joan Jett’s “Bad Reputation” as a theme; a geekier alternate might have been the Ramones’ bratty satire of in-group exclusivity, “I Don’t Wanna Walk Around With You.”

NEWLY RELEASED

DILLINGER Warren Oates plays the Depression-era bank robber John Dillinger (with Ben Johnson, Mr. Oates’s brother in “The Wild Bunch,” as Dillinger’s nemesis, the G-man Melvin Purvis) in this 1973 American-International production. This “gleeful fantasia of gangster mayhem,” as the New York Times critic Peter Schjeldahl described it, was written and directed by John Milius. Reissued in a Blu-ray/DVD dual edition. (Arrow Video)

DOLEMITE The R&B singer turned raunchy stand-up comedian Rudy Ray Moore made his move into cinema playing a two-fisted pimp with a stable of karate-smart call girls in D’Urville Martin’s 1975 blaxploitation farce. Writing about the funk revival in The Times, John Leland called “Dolemite” the “‘Citizen Kane’ of kung fu pimping movies.” Out on Blu-ray and DVD. (Vinegar Syndrome)

IN A LONELY PLACE Perhaps the most evocative Hollywood picture made about blacklist-era Hollywood (during blacklist-era Hollywood), Nicholas Ray’s 1950 film gris represents the movie industry as a crime scene. Humphrey Bogart stars as a volatile screenwriter suspected of murder; Mr. Ray’s wife Gloria Grahame, estranged from him at the time, plays the even tougher and more vulnerable dame who lives next door. On Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video. (Criterion)

TRY AND GET ME! Also known as “The Sound of Fury,” Cyril Endfield’s attack on mob violence, with Lloyd Bridges and Frank Lovejoy as guilty criminals who fall victim to vigilante justice, was one of the last movies Mr. Endfield would make in Hollywood before leaving town. “Mr. Endfield has directed the violent climactic scenes with a great deal of sharp visualization of mass hysteria and heat, conveying a grim impression of the nastiness of a mob,” Bosley Crowther wrote in his 1951 review for The Times. Blu-ray and DVD. (Olive)

THE WHIP HAND One of the nuttiest (and most stylish) of Cold War thrillers, “The Whip Hand,” released in 1951, was inherited by Howard Hughes when he took control of RKO and had the movie reworked to substitute communist infiltration for a Hitlerite conspiracy in an upper Midwestern town. The distinguished production designer William Cameron Menzies directed. (Warner Archiv


