


ALBUQUERQUE — Protesters outside a rally for Donald J. Trump in Albuquerque threw rocks at police horses and lighted fires on Tuesday night, according to the police and postings on social media.

The Albuquerque police said on Twitter that contrary to reports, no tear gas had been deployed outside the rally venue, the Albuquerque Convention Center.

The police also said no gunshots had been fired.

Live video aired by KOAT-TV showed officers pushing protesters onto sidewalks.

The police reported that their horses were being attacked.

The police said on Twitter that the only arrests had been inside the rally, but no figures were provided. A spokesman for the Police Department was not immediately available.

The raucous scene outside the convention center was matched by Mr. Trump’s fiery tone inside the rally, which protesters disrupted less than three minutes after he started speaking.

Talking for over an hour, Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, reprised his attacks on Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts and a fierce critic of his. He also dismissed the news media as “dishonest slime” and responded to attacks by Hillary Clinton that accused Mr. Trump of saying before the Great Recession that he wanted the housing market to collapse so that he could make money.

Calling Mrs. Clinton a “lowlife” for an online ad she put out, he said: “I’m a businessman — that’s what I’m supposed to do. That’s what I’m supposed to do.”

He added: “Hey, I feel badly for everybody. What am I going to do? I’m in business, O.K.? Never thought I was going to run for office.”

He also criticized Mrs. Clinton’s voice — a complaint that many view as sexist. “She screams and it drives me crazy,” he said.

Mr. Trump did take time to note that he thought he was beginning to appeal to more female voters, a group with whom he has low favorability ratings.

“I want to set records with women, not with men,” he said. “The hell with the men! Right? The hell with the men. I want to set records with women! But we are doing good. We are doing good.”


