


EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Nearly every N.F.L. team ceaselessly plans for the first night of the league’s draft, trying to anticipate every possible outcome of the teams picking before them. Teams also assess any conceivable off-the-field issue besmirching a top prospect’s worthiness, just in case that player is available when it is their turn to make a first-round selection.

The Giants did all of those things this year. But they still could not have predicted what happened in the roughly 90 minutes between the start of the draft and their first-round pick, the 10th, which they used to select Eli Apple, a cornerback from Ohio State.

Minutes before they were to pick, perhaps the two highest-ranked players they had hoped would be available — Georgia linebacker Leonard Floyd and Michigan State offensive tackle Jack Conklin — were snatched away by other teams, both of whom had made trades to leapfrog over the Giants. Not only were Floyd and Conklin prized selections, they would have bolstered parts of the Giants’ roster viewed as weaknesses.

The surprising series of events, however, did leave the Giants the option of taking the highly regarded Mississippi tackle Laremy Tunsil, who, like Conklin, would have filled a glaring need on the Giants’ offensive line.

But the draft appeal of Tunsil, once viewed as a top-five pick, plummeted Thursday night. Minutes before the draft began, according to Tunsil, someone hacked into his Twitter account and posted a video that appeared to show Tunsil inhaling marijuana through a bong that was attached to a gas mask.

Tunsil’s Twitter account was deleted, along with the video, shortly thereafter. Tunsil later reinstated his account with an apology.

The Giants stayed away from Tunsil, despite their zeal for a new right tackle. Tunsil instead went to Miami with the 13th pick.

Afterward, Jerry Reese, the Giants’ general manager, insisted that Apple had been the team’s highest-ranked player when it was their time to make a selection.

Reese quickly added, however: “Beyond the guys with issues.”

Asked if Tunsil had been taken off the list of potential draft picks before or after the release of the video, Reese answered, “I’m not talking about who’s on our board or who isn’t.”

Reese also praised Apple as a selection who filled a need.

The Giants have two quality starting cornerbacks in Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie and the newly acquired Janoris Jenkins, but they sorely need a third cornerback to play the nickel position in passing situations.

Reese indicated that he expected Apple to play immediately.

“We think he has starter tools and can play anywhere,” he said.

The night’s intrigue did not seem to wear on Reese, who said with a smile: “Every year during the draft, something funny happens. It’s no different this year.”

But even Apple, who was raised in Voorhees, N.J., admitted he was surprised. He said the Giants had talked to him only once at the N.F.L. combine.

In fact, when Apple’s cellphone rang around 9:30 last night and he saw that the call had a New Jersey area code, he thought it was a friend pranking him. Apple answered to discover that Coach Ben McAdoo was on the line.

Apple, 20, is 6 feet 1 inch and 200 pounds. He was the most valuable defensive player of the 2016 Fiesta Bowl and intercepted four passes in two seasons at Ohio State. In 28 games, he made 86 tackles.

Apple’s relatively small number of interceptions did not discourage the Giants’ brain trust. Marc Ross, the team’s vice president of player evaluation, said Apple’s production “was more so shutting people down as opposed to getting interceptions.”

Conklin went to the Tennessee Titans, who had made a trade to acquire him with the eighth pick. The Giants’ woes continued when the Chicago Bears traded to acquire the ninth pick and selected Floyd, who had been widely viewed as the player whom the Giants had ranked No. 1 among those they reasonably expected to be available by the 10th pick.

They were off by one selection.

McAdoo, in his first year as coach, did not lament the turn of events. When asked how he reacted to “those crazy first nine picks,” McAdoo answered, “I think you trust your board and we got exactly what we wanted, where we wanted.”


