


When Gustavo Kuerten, the three-time French Open champion, refers to a “one-in-a-hundred-million” chance of making it in professional tennis, he is not referring to Novak Djokovic or Serena Williams, who have combined for 32 Grand Slam titles.

Those enormous odds more accurately describe Teliana Pereira, a Brazilian compatriot of Kuerten’s who has a 2-8 record at majors.

But wins and losses, the usual formula with which to assess success in sports, are only part of the equation for Kuerten. The path to becoming a tennis professional was littered with obstacles for Pereira, 27, which makes her winning two clay-court singles titles on the WTA Tour and reaching the top 50 in the rankings particularly astounding.

The highest-ranked Brazilian woman by a significant margin, Pereira is expected to represent her country at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics in August.

“I’m really impressed about her ability to overcome challenges in her life, an extraordinary effort for surviving,” Kuerten said in an email.

Djokovic, a Serbian, grew up in a country ravaged by war, and Williams had to avoid gangs while practicing as a youngster in Compton, Calif. Pereira faced her own obstacles, as she and her family lacked what many would consider household basics when they lived in Pernambuco, a state in northeastern Brazil.

Their toilet was in the backyard. For breakfast, bread was a rare treat. Pereira, who has three brothers and three sisters, said another sister died as a baby because of dehydration. No hospital was in the vicinity, she said.

She did not attend school until the age of 8, after the family moved to Curitiba, in the southern state of Paraná.

That is also where she began playing tennis at 9, a late start for a pro. Her father, Jose, worked as a custodian at a tennis academy.

“In the morning I went to school, and after that I had nothing to do, so I went to help my dad clean the courts and also just to stay at the tennis club,” Pereira said.

She started as a ball girl at the club to make some money and eventually took up a racket. Her brother Jose, 25, also became a pro tennis player.

Didier Rayon, who ran the academy, became a mentor to Teliana. He said he did not think anyone in the upper echelons of tennis “ever started as poor as Teliana.”

Rayon recalled a junior tournament in Peru in 2006, when, he said, Pereira went without food for an entire day.

“She didn’t have any money or a credit card, so she didn’t eat for a day until she received the money I sent to her,” said Rayon, who left France for Brazil 30 years ago. “You can imagine the conditions.”

To fund Pereira’s travels in the juniors, people who frequented the academy would chip in 10 euros here and there; on one occasion, someone bought her a plane ticket, Rayon said.

Pereira moved up the tennis ladder despite the dearth of cash. But then she had to contend with a knee injury that required two operations in 2009. Once she was fit again, friends donated money for tennis travel.

The knee injury slowed Pereira, but in 2013 she achieved a significant milestone, becoming the first Brazilian woman since 1990 to appear in the top 100.

Last April in Bogotá, Colombia, Pereira became the first Brazilian woman to claim a top-level title since Neige Dias in 1988. Along the way, Pereira ousted the 2010 French Open winner Francesca Schiavone.

Three and a half months later, with most of her family and Kuerten watching from the stands, Pereira won her second title in Florianópolis, Brazil, about 190 miles south of Curitiba.

“In the final, I was really sick,” Pereira said. “But I was thinking, ‘I have to play my second final, my family is here, a lot of people came from Curitiba to watch me.’ I had to play my best. I couldn’t give up.”

In the aftermath of her triumph in Bogotá, her schedule meant there was little time to celebrate. But after the victory in Florianópolis, Pereira said, she spent two weeks with family and friends and held a “big, big party.”

At the end of her season, Pereira returned to Pernambuco to remind herself of how life used to be. The visit was documented by Brazilian television.

“I told my mom: ‘We have to go back. I have to go back because I have to see where I came from and can’t forget this,’ ” Pereira said. “So I went to see my city and where I came from, because I can feel everything again and start the year stronger.”

So far, though, Pereira is struggling to replicate her 2015 success, earning only one victory outside Fed Cup competition. Her ranking is set to tumble from 55th after she lost in the first round in Bogotá last week.

Competing on clay, her preferred surface, through the French Open should raise her win total over the next two months. The Olympic tournament, which will be played on hardcourts, also figures to be a highlight of Pereira’s season.

But if her career ended now, she said, she would be O.K.

She reveled in being able to buy her mother, Maria, a house last year, mostly a result of amassing $319,000 in prize money in 2015.

“Now my mom has a big house — well, not a big house — but for us it’s a perfect house,” Pereira said. “Now we have everything.”


