


ALBANY — With days slipping away in the legislative session, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo offered a new à la carte ethics package on Tuesday, despite there being seemingly little appetite for such fare.

The target of Mr. Cuomo’s effort was the so-called L.L.C. loophole, which allows donors to funnel almost unlimited amounts of money to political candidates through multiple limited liability companies. Beneficiaries include the governor himself, who has received ample donations via such avenues.

On Tuesday, however, Mr. Cuomo said he would advance eight bills to close the loophole before the end of the session in mid-June, including one that would apply only to races for governor.

“It is a menu selection,” said Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, adding that the governor-only option was “to show that I’m willing to go first, and I’m willing to go it alone.”

The governor’s proposals would cap contributions from limited liability companies at $5,000, covering a variety of mix-and-match races including those for governor, state attorney general and the Legislature. The timing did not seem accidental: The announcement came during a rough month in Albany, in which two former leaders of the Legislature — Sheldon Silver, the ex-speaker of the Assembly, and Dean G. Skelos, the former Senate majority leader — were sentenced to substantial prison terms after corruption convictions.

The governor’s office has also been dealing with the heightened scrutiny of Mr. Cuomo’s signature upstate economic initiative — the Buffalo Billion — by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York. Mr. Cuomo has ordered a state-led investigation of possible fraud, while noting that two of his former aides — Joseph Percoco and Todd R. Howe — are being looked at for possible malfeasance.

Mr. Bharara was responsible for the prosecutions of Mr. Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, and Mr. Skelos, a Long Island Republican, and made a veiled swipe at the governor after Mr. Skelos’s sentencing, saying that “the most effective corruption investigations are those that are truly independent.”

The governor promoted his eight bills in an impromptu news conference outside his office in the State Capitol. But even before he spoke, Republicans who control the State Senate dismissed the effort as “a red herring” that failed to address deeper problems including “a lack of enforcement, a lack of transparency and a lack of full and honest disclosure,” John J. Flanagan, the Senate majority leader, said in a statement.

“If we are going to achieve real campaign finance reform and target corruption,” Mr. Flanagan, a Long Island Republican, added, “you can’t close one loophole and declare the job done.”

The L.L.C. loophole has for years been a bane of government watchdog groups, who say that it has corrupted a system that already allows people to donate tens of thousands of dollars to statewide general elections. The loophole treats limited liability companies — which are easy to establish and often purposefully opaque — as people, allowing them to donate up to $60,800 to a statewide candidate per election cycle.

The Assembly, dominated by Democrats, has moved to close the loophole, only to find such efforts stymied in the Senate. Mr. Cuomo has consistently said he wanted the loophole closed, but breaking apart the bills to address separate races is a new approach.

On Tuesday, several government watchdogs praised the governor’s efforts, as did State Senator Daniel L. Squadron, a Democrat who represents parts of Lower Manhattan and Brooklyn, and has pushed to close the L.L.C. loophole. Mr. Squadron criticized his Republican colleagues for refusing to even consider the bills.

“I’m very pleased to see the governor moving this forward,” he said. “But I hope it does not lead to a situation where the Legislature is allowed off the hook.”


