


An inmate who escaped from a prison in southern New Jersey was apprehended on Monday in the woods off the Garden State Parkway after spending nearly a week on the run, the police said.

The inmate, Arthur W. Buckel, 38, escaped from a minimum-security satellite unit of Bayside State Prison on the grounds of Ancora Psychiatric Hospital in Hammonton, where he was serving a three-year sentence on charges that included aggravated assault and burglary.

Mr. Buckel was convicted of aggravated manslaughter in 1996 in the beating death of his girlfriend’s 10-month-old daughter in Jersey City. He was sentenced to 25 years in prison, without the possibility of parole for 12 ½ years, and was released in June 2010.

On Wednesday, Mr. Buckel was seen on surveillance video entering a CVS drugstore in Barnegat, a town on the Jersey Shore.

As police officers descended on the community last week, schools were placed on lockdown and residents were told to stay inside and keep their doors locked.

Scores of tips flooded in but it was not until Sunday night that the hunt for Mr. Buckel intensified, when he was spotted at the Forked River rest area near Exit 77 on the parkway in Berkeley Township, the authorities said.

The police released video from surveillance cameras at the rest stop that appeared to show Mr. Buckel, clean shaven and wearing a long-sleeve gray sweatshirt, gray shorts and work boots.

The State Police were “advised that Arthur Buckel had reportedly indicated a desire to turn himself in and had been making arrangements through family” and the State Police to surrender at the rest area, a post on the Lacey Township Police Department’s Facebook page said.

But by the time the police arrived, Mr. Buckel had fled.

State and local police officers searched the nearby woods, assisted by dogs and aerial surveillance.

Shortly before noon, the Ocean County Sheriff’s Department posted an update on its Facebook page: “Arthur Buckel is in custody.”

Mr. Buckel was just weeks away from being eligible for parole when he escaped.


