


MINNEAPOLIS — That .500 mark did not last long for the Yankees. Again.

For the third time since May 25, the Yankees lost the day after evening their record, a recurring source of frustration for a team seeking to move up in the American League East race. Minnesota Twins pitcher Ervin Santana limited the Yankees to three runs over seven and one-third innings, and the shaky Twins bullpen secured the final five outs to win, 7-4, on a sweltering afternoon at Target Field.

Brian McCann broke a lengthy slump with two long home runs among his three hits. But the Yankees, leading by 2-0 in the fourth and seemingly on the verge of sweeping four games from the last-place Twins, could not quell a decisive four-run Minnesota rally in the sixth, one that featured two bloop hits and an acrobatic slide by Trevor Plouffe around McCann’s tag.

“We had a good shot to get a win today, and let one get away,” said Alex Rodriguez, the Yankees’ designated hitter, who struck out as the tying run at the plate with two runners on in the eighth.

Now the Yankees, 34-35 after splitting six games on this trip, return home for nine games starting Tuesday with the Colorado Rockies, then Minnesota and the Texas Rangers. That gives Manager Joe Girardi hope his club can move over .500 and possibly stay there.

Since mid-April, the Yankees had held a winning record for one day, June 10, when they were 31-30. Then they lost four straight.

“We haven’t been able to build on it, but I think this is the first time we’ve been this close that we’re going home,” Girardi said. “Hopefully, we can take advantage of nine games at home.”

McCann had been 0 for 15 and batting .125 since returning from a hyperextended left elbow when he homered in the second inning, a drive reaching the edge of the second deck in right-center. His homer leading off the ninth landed on Target Plaza beyond the right-field seats.

“Instead of weak ground balls to the second baseman, I was able to get through the baseball and drive it,” McCann said. “I’ve been swinging at good pitches. When I get ready to hit the baseball, I’m cutting my swing off, not getting through it. Today is a good day.”

But the Twins, who blew a 4-0 seventh-inning lead in Saturday’s loss, rallied to avoid being swept in a series for the 10th time this season.

The rookie right fielder Max Kepler cut the Yankees’ lead to 2-1 with a homer in the fifth, the first of his three hits, a line drive just clearing the 23-foot wall in right.

Eduardo Escobar tripled in two in the sixth to give Minnesota the lead, the second run scoring when Plouffe evaded McCann’s diving tag. The plate umpire, Paul Emmel, called Plouffe out, but a video review reversed the call. McCann did not argue.

“I don’t know if I got his jersey or not,” McCann said. “You don’t know because you’re just diving. You just hope for the best. He made a good slide and slid over my glove.”

Girardi had Dellin Betances ready to relieve, hoping to coax the second out of the inning from starter Nathan Eovaldi, then go to Betances through the seventh. Escobar’s one-out triple changed his mind.

“I wasn’t going to ask him to get five outs. I was going to ask him for four,” Girardi said of Betances. “Once they got it to 3-2, I figured I’d just see if he could get us out of that inning and keep it there.”

Betances could not. Kepler blooped a run-scoring single, stole second and scored on Kurt Suzuki’s double. Brian Dozier added a solo homer off Tyler Yates in the seventh to make it 6-2.

Two Minnesota errors in the eighth — a bad throw by reliever Taylor Rogers and a grounder through first baseman Plouffe’s legs — let in one run and brought Carlos Beltran and Rodriguez to the plate with one out, each with a chance to tie the game with one swing. Beltran, described by Rodriguez as a “one-man wrecking crew,” already had two homers in the series. Rodriguez had a hit in each game in the series, including a run-scoring single in the fourth on Sunday and his 695th career homer the day before.

Neither succeeded. The left-hander Rogers fanned Beltran swinging at a curve, and the right-hander Brandon Kintzler got Rodriguez on a slider, prompting Rodriguez to pound the plate once with his bat.

Rodriguez chose to be optimistic. He and Beltran are hitting. McCann broke his slump. The Yankees averaged six runs a game on this trip. And Mark Teixeira begins a rehabilitation assignment on Tuesday.

“I think we’re chipping away,” Rodriguez said. “For us, it’s been frustrating that we get to that threshold of .500 and take a step back.”

INSIDE PITCH

MARK TEIXEIRA (right knee cartilage damage) will begin a rehabilitation assignment Tuesday with Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. Teixeira will play three consecutive days before rejoining the Yankees on Saturday. “I’ve got to make sure it bounces back,” Teixeira said. “We do no good here if I can only play every other day. I think three days will give us a good opportunity to test it.” … The Yankees activated the left-hander CHASEN SHREVE (sprained left shoulder) from the disabled list but optioned him to Scranton. “He had struggles his last four or five outings, so I think it’s important to get him back on a roll so he can help us,” JOE GIRARDI said.


