


Size still matters when it comes packaged in an unmatched amalgam of skill, strength, speed and smarts while garnished with the hustle of a fringe veteran treating every last play as if his next paycheck depended on it.

In an era of ball-dominating point guards and vanishing post players, LeBron James’s pursuit of Stephen Curry on Thursday night late in the fourth quarter of a game the Cleveland Cavaliers were already leading by 13 was an exclamation point to the convincing argument that James had already made about who remains the N.B.A.’s premier impact player.

James blocked Curry’s shot from behind and then got all mouthy about that and the rest of his concerto as the Cavaliers bullied the Golden State Warriors, sending the N.B.A. finals back to Oakland, Calif., for Sunday’s Game 7, a television ratings bonanza.

What had James said to Curry, bearer of the league’s last two Most Valuable Player Awards we know that James believes he deserved?

James dodged the question like a politician in a televised debate. Curry asked, “What did he say?” and then recalled the message as “nothing.”

How we revel in the spontaneous collisions of the game’s very best. Larry Bird once trash-talked Julius Erving into a Boston Garden flurry of stiff right-hand jabs. Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson had a memorable, if more lighthearted, exchange in Monte Carlo before the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, after Johnson complained about a foul call during a Dream Team scrimmage.

“This may as well be Chicago Stadium,” he whined, referring to the Bulls’ now long-demolished arena.

To which Jordan deadpanned, “No, Magic, it’s the ‘90s.”

Jordan’s time, he meant, and that, too, was the essence of James’s uncharacteristic gloat. He made his league debut as an 18-year-old in 2003 and was here, at 31, to tell Curry that the 21st century’s second decade — awards and even championships notwithstanding — remains, for the sake of individual eminence, the court of the Akron, Ohio, king.

Going home, where they have lost four games all season, Curry and the Warriors still sit poised, if not as pretty, to win a second straight title. But the playoffs are a war of attrition, and James, 6 feet 8 inches and 250 pounds of evolutionary and seemingly indestructible athlete, has grown stronger, more resolute, as the Warriors have weakened after leading by three games to one.

Andre Iguodala, the long-armed defender who stood up nobly to James in last year’s finals and earlier this series, is struggling with back spasms. Harrison Barnes has crashed into a psychological wall and can’t hit a shot. Andrew Bogut, the lane-clogging center injured in Game 5, is gone.

Curry and his skinny bones seem held together by clips and glue after a grueling and injury-marred postseason. Even his trademark calm and body tranquillity surrendered to frustration and fury after he fouled out while trying to poke the ball from James.

Not for the first time in the series, Curry flung his mouthpiece, which hit a front-row fan, earning him his first N.B.A. ejection. He apologized to the fan, but it is time, finally, for him and the rest of the league to hear from Commissioner Adam Silver.

Gerald Wallace, now out of the league, popularized the unsightly and unsanitary dangling fad. The use of the mouthpiece as a projectile gives Silver the perfect excuse to issue an edict to keep it unseen, where it belongs.

James, meanwhile, mouthed his piece with a second straight 41-point game to go along with 11 assists, 4 steals and 3 blocked shots. From late in the third quarter to the seven-minute mark of the fourth, he scored 18 straight Cleveland points.

Remember James’s grudging response in May to Curry’s unanimous selection as M.V.P.? Before the finals, James said he should have kept his mouth shut, praised Curry as supremely deserving.

James was right, though, if not politically correct. Context is key. Curry has ridden a wave of popularity as an astonishingly entertaining and record-shattering long-distance shotmaker on a defending champion team that won a record 73 games.

But this series has been an unambiguous reiteration that James, when assertive, has no peer in the variety of ways he can defeat you.

“I do whatever it takes,” he said matter-of-factly after proving it statistically and otherwise, including what to date is the series’ pivotal moment — James stepping over Draymond Green near the end of Game 4.

Saying, in effect, to the impassioned Warrior who was one transgression from suspension: Hey, Draymond, care to check out my groin?

This Cleveland team is far better than the one James dragged to the 2007 finals to be swept by the San Antonio Spurs and much healthier than last year’s edition, which lost to the Warriors in six games.

It is also no powerhouse. Kyrie Irving has been the offensive stress reliever for James since Game 3. Tristan Thompson has vacuumed offensive rebounds. Richard Jefferson has been a role-playing revelation.

But J. R. Smith remains an enigmatic ex-Knick, Channing Frye can’t guard the pick-and-roll and Kevin Love attests to James’s principal flaw as a de facto front office executive who lobbied for a misguided trade.

If Cleveland is to celebrate its first major professional sports title since 1964 and the Cavaliers are to become the first team to win an N.B.A title after trailing by three games to one, James will most likely need one more virtuoso performance to earn the signature achievement of his already storied career.

Win this title and those murals in Cleveland of James with his arms raised high will stay forever, whether he — with free agency possible this summer or next — does or not.

In winning six titles in eight years, Jordan never had to play in a seventh game of the finals. He also never had to overcome the odds James was facing after Game 4, against the most credentialed regular-season team in league history.

On the Golden State side, Curry has become a little too, well, cavalier. He needs to clean up and energize his game. To make sure, as the Warriors’ point guard, that Klay Thompson, especially, gets the opportunities to make shots, early and often, that James has allowed Irving.

The affirmation of a legacy awaits Sunday night’s winner. For Curry and the Warriors, no one will care about how shaken they were in Games 5 and 6 if they complete — or authenticate — their 73-victory season.

For James and the Cavs, it would be title deliverance to northeast Ohio at last, James’s repudiation of Thomas Wolfe’s contention that you can’t go home again.

On second thought, he has dutifully done that already. Perhaps the most compelling and perhaps the biggest game of his life — though he did win a Game 7 in Miami over the Spurs three years ago — will be played on the road.

“I can’t wait,” he said Thursday night, his eyes and expression convincing all that he was ready to chase Curry across the country the way he ran him down late in the fourth quarter of Game 6.


