


The rapper Troy Ave was formally charged with attempted murder and criminal possession of a weapon in Manhattan Criminal Court on Monday evening in connection with a fatal shooting last week during a concert at Irving Plaza.

Appearing in court in a wheelchair, Troy Ave, 33, whose real name is Roland Collins, asked the judge for $50,000 bail through his lawyers, who stressed that he had no criminal record. But Judge Ushir Pandit-Durant heeded a prosecutor’s recommendation and ordered him held without bail until trial.

His lawyers, Scott E. Leemon and John Stella, said Mr. Collins was not responsible for the gunfire that erupted at 10:15 p.m. on Wednesday in a backstage green room above the club’s stage just before the rapper T.I. was to perform.

One of Mr. Collins’s bodyguards, Ronald McPhatter, was killed in the shooting. Three people were wounded, including Mr. Collins, who was shot in the leg.

“He’s the real victim here,” Mr. Leemon said in court. “McPhatter died a hero trying to protect Mr. Collins. He was not shot by Mr. Collins.” Mr. Leemon also told the court that scientific evidence would show that Mr. Collins did not shoot himself.

The criminal complaint against Mr. Collins shed little light on what happened backstage. Detective John Santiago, who swore out the complaint, charged Mr. Collins with attempted murder entirely on the strength of a security camera video that showed a man the police identified as Mr. Collins firing a weapon.

An eight-second clip of that video was released on Thursday. It shows Mr. Collins bursting through the door of a V.I.P. room on the second floor of the theater onto a balcony. Limping, he scans the room, raises a gun and fires a shot, the muzzle flashing. The complaint said the video showed that Mr. Collins fired in “the direction of other individuals.”

The police said a fistfight had broken out in one of the V.I.P. rooms a few minutes earlier, just before someone opened fire. A video from inside the room, posted by TMZ, shows a group of men trying to break up a fight. Then three shots ring out.


