


The McKathan brothers knew their horses. They might as well have been foaled in a stall themselves, seeing as how they spent the better part of their lives with runners in their backyards. Their father, Luke, trained horses at the long-gone Seminole Downs in Central Florida before deciding to chase bigger purses at racetracks from Florida to California. He did all right on the grits-and-hard-toast tracks of West Virginia and later at Tampa Bay Downs.

Luke McKathan eventually returned to Florida and became a pinhooker, buying horses as weanlings or yearlings, raising and training them himself and then selling them at auction or privately, long before they hit the racetrack. If horses were automobiles, Luke McKathan would have earned a reputation as an ace mechanic who could take apart and put back together a fast machine in the course of a weekend.

No one was surprised that his sons, J. B. and Kevin, ended their formal education after high school to go into the family business. They had already been home-schooled by a master in the only subject they truly cared about. They had learned their lessons well enough to strike out on their own in their mid-20s, owning and operating a 200-acre training, boarding and breaking center in Citra, Fla.

While Central Kentucky had its bluegrass and its history, dating to before the Revolutionary War, Central Florida was an upstart thoroughbred incubator, the vision of a post-World War II highway builder named Carl Rose. He believed horses would thrive in the region’s eternal sunshine and would build strong bones from consuming its calcium- and phosphorus-enriched grass and water, which seeped through more than 70,000 acres of lush farmland.

In 1956, Needles became the first Florida-bred horse to win the Kentucky Derby. Twenty-two years later, in 1978, another colt by the name of Affirmed, born and bred on Harbor View Farm, swept America’s three classic races to become the 11th Triple Crown champ. The wait had been on for another one ever since.

This was as good a place as any for the McKathan brothers to put their name on the gate of a farm and training center, and they did just that in 1988. They worked the horse sales and backside of racetracks to solicit clients. There was nothing they could not do with a horse. They prepped them for sales, getting them fit and buffed up. They rehabilitated injured racehorses, transforming their shedrow into a hospital. They got yearlings ready for the racetrack, putting first a saddle and then the weight of a rider on them, giving them the first taste of their new career on a five-eighths-of-a-mile training track.

The breaking and training of horses kept the place afloat, but the real money was in the pinhooking and bloodstock-agent work. It was what vaulted you into the circle of deep-pocketed owners who could afford to roll the dice on six-figure-plus horses.

Before you landed a real big-money owner, however, you had to find someone as hungry as yourself.

A Perfect Match

In the early 1990s, the McKathans found their soul mate in a California-based trainer named Bob Baffert, who was trying to transition from quarter horses to thoroughbreds the way their father had decades ago. Baffert sported pressed jeans, snap-button shirts and a cowboy hat atop a full head of snow-white hair. He was in his late 30s, not much older than the McKathans, and traveled with not exactly an entourage but a good-time crew of small-time (by thoroughbred standards) owners.

He didn’t have any rich patrons, either — at least not yet. His main client, Mike Pegram, was a former college bookie turned McDonald’s franchise mogul. It was Pegram, after a spontaneous trip to Las Vegas, who had persuaded him to graduate from quarter horses to the more lucrative thoroughbred circuit. Such sage advice should be heeded from a man you just watched sign a voucher for $50,000 from a croupier, as Pegram had, especially when come morning you will be sharing a Jacuzzi with him and two young women with your cowboy hat and boots on, as Baffert did.

In the McKathans, Baffert recognized hands-on horsemen, and he appreciated them for their youth and hustle. They had met in Lexington, Ky., at the Keeneland September Sale, after J. B. became irritated that Baffert had outbid them on nearly every horse the brothers had tried to buy.

“If you just leave, I’ll upgrade your ticket to first class,” J. B. McKathan said.

“I’m already flying first class, buddy,” Baffert said.

It was the beginning of a warm and lucrative friendship. Baffert sent them his babies to break. He already knew they had a similar eye for horses, putting a premium on the way they moved and looked rather than fixating on their pedigree or flaws. The McKathans were his forward guard. He sent them to sales to weed out the unaffordable or not-good-enough and relied on the half-dozen or so horses they put on a list for him that fit his taste. They had done pretty well together, but all were still looking for their breakout horse.

In April 1996, Baffert was at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky., preparing a gelding named Cavonnier for the Kentucky Derby. It was Baffert’s first starter in America’s greatest race, and he was eager because Cavonnier had just won the Santa Anita Derby and definitely had a shot to capture the blanket of roses.

Baffert was hardly an overnight success. It had taken him 12 lean years as a quarter-horse trainer to surpass $1 million in earnings. In fact, he almost quit after his father, Bill, took a horse away from him to train it himself.

Since Baffert had switched over to thoroughbreds, his barn had climbed steadily up the national trainer standings. His stable had earned nearly $3 million the previous year, a solid figure, but he had yet to achieve national prominence as a top-tier trainer. Being at the Derby for the first time with a contender like Cavonnier helped, but he needed to keep coming back.

So he was looking to buy a horse for a client at the Ocala 2-year-old-in-training sale, one that would return him to the hallowed ground beneath Churchill’s twin spires. J. B. McKathan had one in mind, a gray son of Silver Buck. McKathan had watched him work a quarter-mile before the sale and was impressed. His front legs were turned out a bit, but at $80,000 the colt was within Baffert’s price range.

He sent a video of the colt to the trainer in Louisville, but one, two, three days went by without a word. When he finally got to it, Baffert told the McKathans to buy the gray colt privately and promised them a $5,000 fee.

They ran into a problem almost immediately. Baffert’s client did not want the horse. J. B. and Baffert thought about keeping the horse themselves, but neither of them felt financially secure enough to take that kind of risk. Baffert, however, had one big-spending owner in his barn, Bob Lewis, who owned one of the nation’s largest Budweiser distributorships.

There were still two problems. Baffert was Lewis’s second-string trainer, and lately he hadn’t been winning any races for the owner.

D. Wayne Lukas got to spend the big money for the stable of Lewis and his wife, Beverly, and Lewis had already put Baffert on notice with the two phrases that precede a van’s arrival at a stable to spirit a horse to a rival trainer: “You are winning for other people but not me. We’ve had no luck together.”

A phone call was about to change all that. Baffert picked up the phone and told Lewis that he was stuck with what he believed was a pretty nice horse. His name was Silver Charm. Would Lewis be willing to buy him for $85,000?

Finding a Natural

When Silver Charm ran off with the Derby and the Preakness before getting caught at the wire by a head in the Belmont Stakes, it looked like a bargain. By the time Silver Charm retired, he had won the Eclipse Award, the sport’s year-end honor, as the 1997 champion 3-year-old colt and captured 11 stakes — including one of the richest, the Dubai World Cup. He had also banked $6,944,369. It would be a while before people would take a horse away from Baffert or turn their back on the McKathans, especially when the next year the $17,000 screw-and-wire job Real Quiet, another of their joint ventures, came within a nostril of winning the Belmont Stakes and sweeping the Triple Crown.

Still, neither J. B. nor Kevin had seen a horse as talented as the one they were about to unveil on a steamy March morning. This son of Pioneerof the Nile had given both the brothers goose bumps ever since arriving from Saratoga, along with more than a dozen other horses from Zayat Stables. They had worked with a number of the sire’s young horses, in all shapes and sizes, and had recognized they all shared a common trait: desire. They all wanted to win, whether playing out in the field or carrying a rider around the training track.

When the brothers first got a look at the big, rugged bay colt, J. B. turned to Kevin and asked, “How did this guy get through the ring without anyone buying him?”

With 125 horses on their farm, it was easy for one brown one to blur into another, even for the most astute professional horseman. Inevitably, however, a handful of horses make an impression simply with the way they carry themselves, especially in the early weeks and months when not much is asked of them.

Teaching horses to race is a painstaking step-by-step process. They must learn how to accept a bridle or a saddle and girth. They are skittish, anxious or just plain slow to figure out what to do. This Pioneerof the Nile colt was another story altogether. When they put the tack on him, the big bay stood upright like a medieval knight awaiting his armor from his valet. When he walked the shedrow, he high-stepped and looked as if he were ready to bolt out the door and sail clear into the fields. The first time a rider belly-upped, or lay on his back to give him the sensation of weight, he looked bored. With a rider on his back for the first time, he responded to his cues as if he had done it all before.

“His mind was just so far advanced than anything I had ever seen,” Kevin McKathan said. “It was like he was in a hurry to learn his lessons. It was clear early he was the best horse on the farm.”

The first time the McKathans let the colt sample what an open gallop felt like, it was at once breathtaking and terrifying. He burst into a stride that had him skipping over the ground like a hovercraft. He went way too fast and way too far. When the rider finally pulled him up, J. B. McKathan told him, “If you let that horse run again, I’m going to break your arm.”

Soon, the McKathan brothers realized that this long, tall, powerful colt possessed something horsemen dream about and can in no way teach: speed, freaky speed. In fact, the first time the brothers put him on the track and asked the rider to push a button or two, he just ran off from the other horses. He had so much natural ability that the brothers did everything in their power not to tax the colt. He was still growing, still getting fit, and they were afraid he would get hurt.

None of his riders were allowed to use a whip on him. J. B. changed bits — the small piece of equipment put in a horse’s mouth to help a rider communicate with him — repeatedly looking for a safe and effective way to slow him down.

“It was speed! Speed! Speed! Speed!” Kevin McKathan said. “He had plenty of it.”

A Dazzling Premier

On the morning of March 23, 2014, it was time for the McKathans to let some folks, namely Ahmed Zayat and some of his trainers, see exactly how fast this colt was. They were staging a breeze show for Zayat Stable 2-year-olds, an annual rite of spring, during which the owner could size up his next group of contenders and place them with the trainer and circuit that best fit their talents. Zayat ran his horses everywhere — from Florida to New York and from Kentucky to California. Even postbankruptcy, he had a lot of them.

Mr. Z was a slow-payer, and sometimes a no-payer, and farms and small businesses like the McKathans paid for it. The horse business is tough, and the McKathans were always hustling to make ends meet. Still, everyone doing business with Zayat agreed on three things: “He plays the game hard,” Kevin McKathan said. “He buys good horses to give himself every opportunity. It’s fun to be a part of.”

The McKathans could not have asked for a more perfect setting for a magical horse’s premier. The trees had trapped the mist low to the ground and transformed the farm into an enchanted stage. The sun dappled the horses and training track with light as birds sang noisily. The McKathans treated events like these as an open house — the farm was manicured to postcard-quality perfection, and the horses looked ready for a model’s runway.

As soon as they started, timed workouts put the brothers’ horsemanship skills on display. Spirits were high among the contingent on the clockers’ stand. The Kentucky-based trainer Dale Romans and his partner Tammy Fox were there, as was the Delaware-based Anthony Dutrow. All were giving Justin Zayat the fifth degree about dating. Justin, a junior at New York University, was easing his way into the stable as its racing manager.

There were a couple of dozen people on the clockers’ stand, the small gazebo-style house with a wraparound porch on the rail near the center of the track. The stock of Zayat Stables did not disappoint as one well-bred horse after another took its turn blazing either a quarter or three-eighths of a mile around the track. There were colts and fillies from Eskendereya and Zensational and Maimonides and Pioneerof the Nile, each one bounding around the track more impressive than the last.

The McKathans were saving the best for last, though: The Pioneerof the Nile colt out of Littleprincessemma was going to send people home with something to think about. There was no bigger fan of the colt on the farm than Chris Alexander, the brothers’ farm manager. He told anyone who would listen that this unraced 2-year-old was the best horse he had ever been around.

He decided to put Susan Montanye on the colt’s back for the breeze, even though she had never been on him. She was lighter than his regular riders, and although the colt was hard to handle, Alexander believed he would relax under her light touch.

On the clockers’ stand, racetrackers have a talent for carrying on multiple raucous conversations while still meticulously following the flight of the horse around the racetrack. It’s a hand-eye-mouth coordination necessary to make four hours on your feet each day clocking hundreds of horses seem like a breakfast meeting rather than hard labor. There was no pause in conversation or lowering of the voices when Montanye galloped the colt by the stand the first time. He had his neck bowed and his head hanging low and rocked back and forth in a lullaby rhythm, looking every bit like a child’s rocking horse.

Montanye let him lift his head a bit heading into the turn, and the power was apparent immediately. He was barrel-chested and sturdy, almost like one of those horses from an old Hollywood Western that thundered toward the sunset and certain glory. It got awful quiet when she shook her reins ever so slightly and backed into a crouch and he just took off, like a drag-racing car.

“J. B., tell me the time, please,” Mr. Z said.

“Eleven and three,” J. B. McKathan replied, confirming the colt was moving fast: 11.60 seconds for the first eighth of a mile.

Mr. Z was stunned.

“That’ll do,” someone offered reverently.

No one spoke as the colt hugged the rail and then rolled around the turn — smooth, effortless, without a single wasted motion.

“Twenty-two-point-one,” J. B. called out. By then, though, nobody needed a time to understand what they were watching — a fast, beautifully put together machine.

“That’s what I’m talking about,” J. B. said. “Thirty-six and three.”

He added: “I’m scared of this horse. Figure out who you want to send him to, and get him out of here.”

Montanye came by the stand and smiled when she saw every gaze fixed on her mount, every jaw dropped. She had just sat on the colt. She had not asked him to do anything.

“That was him,” she said.

J. B. McKathan wanted to put a fine point on what they had all just witnessed.

“You just don’t see horses work like that,” he said.

“Dale, I want that one,” Tammy Fox said.

“Who’s getting him?” someone else asked.

“It has to be a trainer in attendance,” Romans said to laughter. “You can’t send him to Baffert. He didn’t show up.”

Everyone knew that was exactly where he was going, though.

“What’s his name?” someone asked.

“American Pharoah,” Justin Zayat said.


