


Channing Frye scored 27 points, his career high in the playoffs, and the visiting Cleveland Cavaliers kept up their 3-point barrage Friday night, pulling away in the closing minutes for a 121-108 victory over the Atlanta Hawks and a commanding 3-0 lead in the Eastern Conference semifinals.

Two nights after setting an N.B.A. record with 25 baskets beyond the arc, the Cavaliers were nearly as good in a 21-of-39 performance from long range that moved them one victory away from their second playoff sweep over the Hawks in two years.

Atlanta turned in a much more respectable showing after being blown out in Game 2. But in the end, it was the same result for the Hawks, a team that has lost 10 straight to the Cavaliers going back to last year’s conference finals.

The Hawks led by as many as 11 but were dominated in the closing minutes.

Cleveland’s LeBron James and Kyrie Irving each scored 24 points, while Kevin Love finished with 21.

That was to be expected.

Not so for Frye, whose previous high in these playoffs was 12 points and his best showing ever in the postseason was a 20-point effort in 2010, when he played for Phoenix.

Frye, a 32-year-old forward, made 10 of 13 shots, including 7 of 9 from 3-point range. He also had seven rebounds, a devastating blow for an Atlanta team that already was outgunned by the Cavaliers and could not cope with someone else stepping into a lead role.

The Hawks led, 103-99, with a little more than eight minutes remaining, but the Cavaliers were relentless, and Atlanta — which had matched Cleveland shot for shot — suddenly went cold.

Game 4 is Sunday in Atlanta.

EXTENSION FOR UTAH COACH The Jazz extended the contract of Coach Quin Snyder. The team announced a long-term extension but did not release details.

The 2016-17 season would have been the third year of the initial three-year deal Snyder signed when he was hired. The team has gone 78-86 in two years under Snyder and narrowly missed the playoffs this season.

Snyder is considered one of the bright young minds in the game, with a knack for developing players. The Jazz allowed just 95.4 points per game the past two seasons, the second fewest in the league despite a roster that was ravaged by injuries.

Snyder kept the team in contention for a playoff spot without the starting point guard Dante Exum for the entire season and with Rudy Gobert, Derrick Favors and Alec Burks all missing long stretches.


