


The language on the security clearance forms that Glen Glover and David Polos filled out in late 2011 seemed straightforward enough. “List all your employment activities,” it read, adding, “You should list all full-time and part-time work, paid or unpaid.”

Confronted with those requirements, Mr. Glover, a civilian employee of the Drug Enforcement Administration, and Mr. Polos, then a D.E.A. agent, made the same choice. Each omitted the fact that he was part-owner of a strip club in South Hackensack, N.J.

On Tuesday, the two men sat in a courtroom in United States District Court in Manhattan as their trial began on charges that they had lied about and conspired to hide their involvement with the club, where prosecutors said they both worked regular shifts.

In addition, a prosecutor said that Mr. Polos had lied on the form by saying that he had not had “close or continuing contact” with any foreign national, despite a romantic relationship he developed with a dancer from Brazil who worked at the club after entering the United States illegally.

“These defendants betrayed the trust that was placed in them as federal law enforcement personnel by lying,” the prosecutor, Paul M. Monteleoni, told jurors. “They were warned right on the form that lying was a crime.”

Lawyers for the two men countered that they were merely investors in the club, the Twins Plus Go-Go Lounge, not employees. Cathy Fleming, a lawyer for Mr. Glover, said neither defendant had drawn a salary. Marc Mukasey, a lawyer for Mr. Polos, said his client saw the club solely as a place to “grow a little nest egg while he spent his days fighting the drug war.”

Mr. Polos did not lie on the security form about his relationship with the Brazilian dancer, Mr. Mukasey added, because the two “did not get hot and heavy” until after the form had been submitted.

The opening statements marked the start of an unusual trial that, as well as placing two longtime federal law enforcement employees in unfamiliar roles as defendants, could reveal seamy activities at the club, which prosecutors have said included prostitution and drug use.

Mr. Glover, of Lyndhurst, N.J., has worked for the Drug Enforcement Administration since 1998, tracking cellphone use as a telecommunications specialist, among other things. Mr. Polos, of West Nyack, N.Y., who resigned just before charges in the case became public last year, had worked for the agency since 1991, most recently helping to supervise the New York Organized Crime and Drug Enforcement Strike Force and overseeing agents who investigated Silk Road, a notorious online drug bazaar.

Had the two disclosed their connections with the club, the complaint said, their top-secret security clearances would “most likely have been denied,” preventing them from continuing to work for the D.E.A. Employment disclosures are required, prosecutors said, to ensure that government employees with access to sensitive information are not vulnerable to blackmail or pressure.

Mr. Glover and an unnamed partner bought the strip club in 2010. Mr. Polos became a part-owner, prosecutors said, and handled the club’s advertising. Mr. Glover, they said, managed the bar staff and collected fees that dancers paid to work at Twins Plus.

The complaint said both men supervised shifts there and appeared to monitor goings-on at the club while they were at work in Manhattan, using computers or smartphones to remotely gain access to a video surveillance system. They also participated in email threads that included conversations about firing bartenders and dancers. In one message, the complaint said, Mr. Glover told a manager, “You can get rid of all the black girls if you want if you go find other ones first.”

Many of the dancers at Twins Plus were undocumented immigrants, prosecutors said. The Brazilian dancer was allowed to work double shifts, the complaint said, because Mr. Polos and others knew she needed money to pay smugglers who had arranged her unlawful entry into the United States. In addition, the complaint said, Mr. Polos was said to have lent that dancer bail money when she was jailed in 2012 after an altercation with a police officer.

The first witness to testify was Barbra M. Roach, who in 2010 and 2011 was deputy chief inspector for the D.E.A. office that managed personnel security. While questioning her, prosecutors and defense lawyers appeared to preview aspects of the case they would concentrate on.

Asked by Mr. Monteleoni why supervisors at the agency might have qualms about an employee’s working at an “adult entertainment establishment,” Ms. Roach said, “It raises concerns of the employee being exploited, being blackmailed, being forced to disclose information.”

Later Mr. Mukasey asked Ms. Roach to review the security clearance forms that the defendants had filled out.

“Nowhere on this form does it say list any investment you have in the United States, right?” he asked.

“Correct,” Ms. Roach answered.


