


DOEL, Belgium — Denis Malcorps, a 27-year-old auditor, has been living in this 700-year-old Flemish village since he was 5. He has fond memories of a quiet haven, with river views on the edge of farmland, where everyone knew one another.

“It was actually a really special village, something you don’t see very often in Flanders, because it was really small. But it had so much in the village, so many shops, four big restaurants, lots of cafes,” he recalled recently. “There was a special kind of vibe among the people who lived here.”

Today, he and a handful of other holdouts are all that prevent the destruction of the once-quaint village. For 15 years they have been Davids to the Goliath of a plan to level it to make way for an expansion of the Port of Antwerp.

They have repeatedly won decisions in Belgium’s high court to maintain Doel as a “habitation zone,” and to protect local citizens’ rights to stay. The most recent decision in their favor came in November.

But even as they win the right to live in Doel, there is less and less left to live in. All but a few houses are covered in graffiti. Most of the homes’ windows have been shattered, their doors busted in, their interiors looted by scavengers.

On a recent Sunday afternoon, a white sports car fishtailed down the middle of a main street here and the young men inside cheered. A black car followed close behind, screeching around the corner, with more cheers.

“That’s the kind of thing that’s happening all the time here,” Mr. Malcorps said, shaking his head. “These people come here just to act out, because they think it’s a ghost town, that nobody lives here.”

The town, about five streets wide and deep, was officially established in the early 17th century, but its origins are medieval, said Benjamin Vergauwen, an archaeologist who lives in Ouden Doel, a nearby hamlet also scheduled for destruction, where he operates a small museum of local history.

He shares photographs of a 14th-century shipwrecked cog discovered in a silted creek. It is one of hundreds of objects he displays, including a flute that he said dates to the 15th century, and two mayoral chairs from the now-dismantled town hall.

On one wall is a large color photograph of Doel from a bird’s-eye view. “This was just in 2004,” he said, “before anything was torn down. You can see that it was really a beautiful town.”

Port officials, however, consider it just a matter of time before the area is evacuated and a five-year construction project begins on a $745 million tidal dock that they say could expand shipping capacity by 5.1 million standard containers, create 1,300 jobs and generate benefits worth up to an estimated $5 billion.

“The plans are very concrete, and we’re moving forward as we speak,” a spokeswoman for the Port of Antwerp, Annik Dirkx, said in a telephone interview.

“For part one of our expansion plans we have now a problem because we cannot move forward; Doel has officially become a village again,” she added. “But the Flemish government is responsible for making sure that these plans move forward.”

Jan Hemelaer, the process manager for the development of the Antwerp Port Region, for the Flemish government, said he saw the high court’s latest decision as “a temporary measure.”

In the last few months, he added, all but one of the property owners in Doel have sold their homes to the government, and the last one is in negotiations.

“It’s really coming to an end,” Mr. Hemelaer said. “The people are really setting up their minds to leave.”

Jan Creve, the leader of and spokesman for Doel 2020, an organization of residents founded in 1998 to save the area, brought the first court case against the government in 2000, and won the right to stay.

Yet he said the Flemish government seemed to have no respect for the authority of the courts and the rights of residents who have fought for years to save their community.

“Doel is on the zoning map as a village designed for habitation,” said Mr. Creve, a historian who has lived for 30 years on a picturesque farm in Kieldrecht, one of the hamlets scheduled for destruction, and raised six children there.

“But when you see the houses here, you can see what’s happening,” he said. “The government has organized the dismantling, the destruction of the town.”

The government has sued Mr. Creve several times, he said, because it wants him to leave his home, but he doesn’t want to sell.

“It’s getting very hard to keep on going in that way,” he said, “because you’re not only in confrontation with the government, you’re not only in court, but every day you have to deal with people who are vandalizing the village and the houses, and the government doesn’t do anything anymore.”

Residents say the police rarely patrol the area, and when they respond to calls for help it is usually too late, because they are coming from Beveren, a 25-minute drive away.

“We do the best we can to guarantee the safety of the inhabitants,” Boudewijn Vlegels, third alderman for the municipality of Beveren, said in an email. “Of course there will always be visitors with bad intentions,” he added.

Mr. Malcorps’s family moved here in 1993 as part of an incentive plan to revive Doel, which had previously been scheduled for demolition after two nuclear power plants were built just north of the town.

When his parents were offered a government buyout, they refused. “My father was one of the people most adamant to stay,” he said.

His father later died of cancer, and he and his mother and brother stay on. Mr. Malcorps is also a spokesman for Heritage Community Doel and Polder, an association to preserve the area.

Several times, strangers have broken in to loot their house — while they were at home. Ultimately, he said, his mother sold their house, but they stay as renters, and resisters.

“I stay for moral, ideological reasons,” Mr. Malcorps said, sitting down at De Doolen, a cafe in the center of town that serves as a meeting point for the residents determined to stay.

“I do not want it to be a right choice to sacrifice a nice city like Doel for container docks that just bring containers in and out,” he said. “Doel has a lot of heritage value, and it has a lot of other values that are important, too.”

On a recent Sunday, a group of young men dressed in riot gear costumes, carrying toy Uzi submachine guns, were using the town as a backdrop for a post-apocalyptic video, and about 20 adults in white coveralls had gathered for a paintball battle.

Mr. Malcorps observed it all with a sigh. “It has been so difficult to stay here and deal with all this,” he said. “If you are still here, it’s not because it was easy to stay. It was the hard choice to stay.”


