


It has become a fad among teams to adopt a catchphrase to sum up their approach (while also helping sell T-shirts). As with most things, not all are created equal.

While the Cleveland Cavaliers’ “All In” is a bit generic, the Golden State Warriors’ “Strength in Numbers” has represented an all-encompassing set of values that defined the team as it rolled to a 73-9 regular-season record. The approach carried into the playoffs until the last two games of the N.B.A. finals, when cracks appeared. Going into Sunday’s Game 7 in Oakland, it may be more appropriate to change the T-shirts to “Strength in Numbers?”

Draymond Green, who was suspended for Game 5, did not play up to his standards in Game 6. Andrew Bogut was lost for the playoffs with a knee injury. Andre Iguodala could barely stand after injuring his back in Game 6. At some point, Harrison Barnes, usually a reliable shooter of corner 3s who is seemingly on the verge of lucrative free agency, began playing like a shell of his former self.

The problem for Golden State is that for all the talk of the dominance of Stephen Curry, the secret to its success was often its ability to grind through teams using a 10-man rotation. That was perhaps never more evident than in Game 4, when the Warriors entered the fourth quarter leading by only 2 points but, on the strength of their bench play, went on a 12-1 run that overwhelmed the worn-out Cavaliers starters and effectively ended the game.

Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue acknowledged after the game that riding his starters for so long had played a big part in the loss.

“They brought their bench in, so I thought if we could keep our starters in for a few minutes, we could kind of make a run and then get guys out slowly,” he said. “But they were able to go on the run. So it hurt us.”

Lue made some attempts to expand his rotation, but he also doubled down on his reliance on LeBron James. In Game 6, James’s second consecutive 41-point effort of the series, he played 43 minutes, including the entire fourth quarter.

“With our season on the line, at the end of the third quarter, he said, ‘I’m not coming out,’” Lue said of James. “I didn’t have any intention of taking him out anyway. I don’t care what you all say. We’re going to ride him.”

Still, it has been the Warriors who, in their second consecutive year of a deep postseason run, have seemed to grow fatigued, perhaps as a result of the pressure of pursuing their victory record.

Owing to his ubiquitous presence in the playoffs and his fitness, James has become known for handling an enormous workload. In 11 seasons, he has never played fewer than 3,122 minutes in the regular season and playoffs, and he has played as many as 4,083. But in each of the last two years, the Warriors have had a player who topped him in combined minutes.

Green, even when accounting for the one-game suspension, leads all players in the finals with a combined 3,640 minutes this season, 156 more than James. He edged James in the regular season (2,809 to 2,708) and the playoffs (832 to 775). It is easy to see why the Warriors have asked so much of him. He is the anchor of their defense and the facilitator of their offense.

But it is not just Green. Klay Thompson, who has alternated between unstoppable and absent this series, is not far behind with a combined 3,473 minutes. Even Curry, who sat out so many fourth quarters this season, and missed a few games in the playoffs with injuries, has 3,275, down from his team-leading 3,439 last season, when he topped James’s 3,337.

As the playoffs have dragged on, rumors have swirled that Curry is hiding knee and shoulder injuries. The supporting cast appears to be falling apart, even if Coach Steve Kerr insisted after Game 6 that beyond Bogut, the Warriors would be at full strength for Game 7.

Despite the perceived fatigue, Thompson stuck with the team’s ubiquitous slogan when describing how the Warriors could stand up to James and Kyrie Irving with the season on the line.

“We’ve beaten this team before, and we’ve just got to realize that we’re a deeper team,” Thompson said. “When we play at our best with great effort, we’re almost dang near impossible to beat.”

James, to his credit, also embodied his team’s “All In” slogan when discussing Game 7, and given his comments, it would be surprising for him to spend much time on the bench Sunday.

“At the end of the day, this is going to be it for all of us, including you guys,” James said to the gathered news media after Game 6. “One more game left, and you guys are going to give it all you’ve got, we’re going to give it all we’ve got, and the Warriors will do the same, and we’ll live with the results.”


