


Like on most days, there are hundreds of soccer games being played around the world on Friday. And in many countries, it is perfectly legal to bet on them.

For example, Serie B, the second tier of Italian soccer, is playing its final round of the regular season on Friday. As always, bettors can choose which team they think will win, or wager that a game will end in a draw.

The odds on a draw between Novara and Modena, or Livorno and Lanciana, are about 3-1, a typical figure. Most of the other games are around the same.

But the odds on a draw between Spezia and Ascoli are eye-opening: currently just 4-6 on Betfair. That means that while the chance of a draw in most of the other games is judged to be about 25 percent, in the Spezia-Ascoli game it is fully 60 percent.

Is the high likelihood of a draw a result of the teams’ being evenly matched? Not exactly. Spezia is in seventh place, with a record of 17-10-14, and it is playing at home. Ascoli is only 13-21-7, and in 16th place of 22 teams.

So what is the explanation for the shockingly low odds on a draw?

The main reason could be that playing for a win would not really bring any extra benefit. Spezia is in the hunt for a playoff place. One point would clinch one of the league’s eight playoff spots, but a loss could allow the team to be caught by Novara, which is three points back and has a better goal difference. Ascoli, meanwhile, is fighting to stay out of the relegation playoffs. Again, a single point is all it needs to guarantee safety.

The fact that both teams are seeking a draw is certainly well known to bettors. Betfair does not set its own odds. It is a sports market, matching an individual who wants to bet on a result with another individual willing to bet the other way. When a wager becomes popular, the odds change, much as a stock price goes up and down. It is the ultimate manifestation, therefore, of the wisdom of crowds: a Betfair price represents what the world’s bettors are thinking, not one bookmaker’s opinion.

And the world’s bettors are expecting Ascoli-Spezia to end in a draw.

Interest in what might otherwise be an obscure game is strong. As of 9:30 a.m. Eastern on Friday, $400,000 had been wagered on the game on Betfair, about 20 times the typical amount for a Serie B game.

Many traditional bookmakers, who stand to lose money if too many bettors are right, are declining to take bets on the game at all. On Friday morning, Ladbrokes was offering odds on 10 of the 11 Serie B games, but not on Ascoli-Spezia.

Bettors are not exactly predicting that the game will be fixed; rather they expect that with both sides needing the same result, there will be little motivation for either team to press for a victory, especially since the consequences of a defeat could be grave.

There have been similar matches before, even at the game’s highest level. At the 2004 European Championships, Sweden and Denmark went into their last game knowing a 2-2 draw would send both teams through. The game ended 2-2. At the 1982 World Cup, a one- or two-goal win by West Germany over Austria in the final group game would send both teams through to the next round. West Germany scored quickly, then neither team made any effort to attack for 80 minutes. Embarrassed by what most agreed had been an “arranged” result, FIFA soon ordered that the final matches in group play be played simultaneously.

That is the case is most leagues today, including Serie B.

Friday’s game is at 2:30 Eastern time. We’ll see.

[Friday evening update: The game did end in a draw, 0-0.]


