


If you thought spelling “scherenschnitte” was a challenge, wait until you watch this year’s Scripps National Spelling Bee.

Scherenschnitte, which means “scissor cuts” in German, was one of the words to be spelled correctly in the final rounds of last year’s contest, which ended in a tie with two co-champions.

But after two years in which the competition ended in a tie, the organizers are making it more difficult for competitors in this year’s contest, which takes place from May 22 to May 27.

Harder words and longer rounds will be introduced “to raise the bar even higher” in recognition of the competitors’ “advanced skill,” the organization said on its website.

No longer will the contest be limited to a list of 25 “championship words.” The final rounds could have as many as 75 words, with judges allowed to select harder ones if it appears the contestants are breezing through the words given to them, The Associated Press reported.

“As difficult as those words offered those co-champions were, we had a more difficult section in our word list, but we couldn’t go to them because our rules bound us to stick to that 25-word championship word section,” Paige Kimble, the bee’s executive director, told The A.P..

Vanya Shivashankar, 14, of Olathe, Kan., who was one of the co-champions last year, said the competition would be interesting to watch with the revised rules. Gokul Venkatachalam of Missouri was the other co-champion.

Vanya, who competed in the national bee five times, said she had definitely seen the competition improve from one year to the next. “I want to see how that works out,” she said in an interview on Thursday night. “Viewers at home will love to see a show. They want to see spellers spelling hard words.”

The bee, televised in prime time by ESPN, has exploded in popularity over the last two decades.

Vanya said it was difficult to predict whether the new rules might make the final rounds shorter.

“You never know,” she said. “The spelling bee is really unpredictable. It takes hard work and a bit of luck. It does create a level of suspense. Who will keep their endurance and keep fighting?”

Also changing are the awards for the winners. The first-place cash prize is rising to $40,000, from $30,000, while the second-place winner will now get $30,000 and the third place one $20,000. If there are co-champions again, each will get $40,000.

Vanya, who is now a high school freshman and no longer eligible to compete in the bee, said jokingly that it would be great if the higher cash prize could be awarded retroactively.


