


STRATFORD-UPON-AVON, England — George Bernard Shaw once mocked what he called “bardolatry,” but worship of William Shakespeare is in full swing here, as well it should be, since this pretty town pretty much exists on the Shakespeare industry.

As Britons ponder exit from the European Union in a referendum, a debate full of sound and fury and so far, signifying little, they are celebrating one figure undeniably great, indelibly their own and universally admired, even more than Queen Elizabeth II, who is only 90.

Shakespeare will be celebrated here on Saturday with parties, a jazz procession in the New Orleans style and, of course, plays. It will be the 400th anniversary of his death at 52, after what was said to be a night of merriment with Ben Jonson.

Saturday’s festivities will follow a more highbrow evening on Friday at the Holy Trinity Church, where he was baptized and is buried near the altar under a dusty bust of himself. A commemorative concert is to feature a reconstruction of the actor David Garrick’s “Ode to Shakespeare,” celebrated in the rain in 1769, plus a new ode, “A Shakespeare Masque,” by the poet laureate, Carol Ann Duffy, and composed by Sally Beamish.

Yet the anniversary is being marked by other improvements to the visitor experience in this small medieval market town of about 28,000 people, which normally gets five million tourists a year.

For this anniversary, the renovated 15th-century Guildhall and schoolroom upstairs, where young William had lessons, will be opened, and the land on which his lavish house once stood is being turned into a commemorative garden. The Royal Shakespeare Company will open a new exhibit to display some of the 30,000 costumes it has produced over the years for his 37 (though some say 38) plays.

Holy Trinity has been getting lots of visitors and fending off questions about his supposedly missing skull, according to Paul Harris, the head verger, who said that Shakespeare, who returned here a rich man, “has the best grave in the church that money can buy.”

Shakespeare must have been concerned about body snatching, Mr. Harris said, since he arranged for his body to be entombed in the building, not in the churchyard, and under heavy stone. As extra insurance, of course, Shakespeare put a curse on anyone who “moves my bones.” Still, scientists continue to try to discover whether his skull is missing, lately through ground-penetrating radar. Mr. Harris said that requests to uncover the grave are regularly denied.

“We believe he’s buried there,” Mr. Harris said with a disarming honesty, since so much is really unknown about the bard, including his actual birthday. Although the first decent collection of his plays, the First Folio, was not published until seven years after his death, his genius was recognized early. He rose to the ranks of the gentry, being granted his own coat of arms — not without controversy — featuring a quill pen.

Shakespeare, owning 12.5 percent of the London theater company that put on his increasingly popular plays, made enough money to return to Stratford to buy what was in 1597 considered the largest (or, some say, the second-largest) house in town, known as the New Place, where he spent the last 19 years of his life and wrote works like “The Tempest.”

The house in which he was born still stands, preserved and open to visitors, who are invited by guides to admire the wall hangings that kept out the chill and the various beds — a great luxury at the time. It was bought for “the nation” in 1847 by a subscription campaign led by Charles Dickens when the American showman P.T. Barnum wanted to buy it and bring it to the vulgar New World.

The New Place was demolished in 1759. But the site was preserved in the 1860s, as a Victorian garden. Now the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, the inheritor of the group that outfoxed Barnum’s, is opening a new commemorative garden on the spot after further years of archaeological exploration.

The garden will feature art and sculpture related to Shakespeare and his work, including a depiction of his desk and chair, a ship to represent “The Tempest” and a five-yard-high bronze tree, supposedly, according to the wordsmiths of the trust, “bent under the force of Shakespeare’s power of imagination.”

Ben Jonson, his fellow playwright and drinking pal, famously called him “the sweet swan of Avon,” giving rise to the name of the best pub in town — once called The Black Swan but now known to locals and the actors of the Royal Shakespeare Company, who are working through the entire cycle of his plays, as “The Dirty Duck.”

Shakespeare is said to have introduced about 1,700 words into the English language, according to the British Library, whose exhibit on Shakespeare is fascinating for its choices.

It features, for example, the first woman who ever played a female role in a Shakespeare play, as Desdemona, in December 1660. But as Tanya Kirk, a co-curator, points out, the actress was featured as a novelty, and her name has been lost to time.

The exhibit also features the first black man to play Othello in London: a freeborn American, Ira Aldridge, in 1825, at the age of 17. He was known in the British press as “the African Roscius,” after a famous Roman actor born a slave; his performance, though praised by a few critics, was lambasted by others in crude racial terms. The play closed after a few days, under pressure from the pro-slavery lobby.

Though Mr. Aldridge’s appearance would seem to have been a landmark, no other black man played Othello on a British stage for more than 100 years, according to the British Library, until Paul Robeson did so in 1930. He received 20 curtain calls. He was “killing two birds with one stone,” Mr. Robeson said then. “I’m acting, and I’m talking for the Negroes in the way only Shakespeare can.”


