


How do you cast a diva starry enough to sing “Casta diva”?

Anna Netrebko’s decision not to take on the title role in Bellini’s “Norma,” the bel canto masterpiece famous for that aria, left both the Royal Opera House in London and the Metropolitan Opera scrambling to find replacements for major opening night productions they had planned around her.

But if Ms. Netrebko’s New York fans are losing a Norma, they are gaining a Tosca. Ms. Netrebko plans to perform the title character in Puccini’s “Tosca,” a role debut for her, in a new production at the Met in the 2017-18 season, sharing the role with Kristine Opolais.

For those keeping score as the latest example of the prima donna-mo effect unfolds, this is how Ms. Netrebko’s decision not to sing Norma will ripple through the opera world.

In London, the soprano Sonya Yoncheva, who has made a name for herself gamely stepping into roles at the last minute, will replace Ms. Netrebko as Norma at the Royal Opera House this fall, in what will be her role debut. That will require her to withdraw from five performances as Mimì in “La Bohème” at the Met, where she will be replaced by Ailyn Pérez. (Ms. Pérez was available because she recently withdrew from a production of Tchaikovsky’s “Eugene Onegin” which was to open the Dallas Opera’s season.)

In New York, the soprano Sondra Radvanovsky, who won accolades for her command of bel canto style when she sang all three queens in Donizetti’s so-called “Tudor trilogy” this season, will replace Ms. Netrebko in the new production of “Norma” that will open the Met’s 2017-18 season. That production will be directed by David McVicar and will also star Joyce DiDonato as Adalgisa and Joseph Calleja as Pollione.

Ms. Radvanovsky was supposed to be singing Leonora in Verdi’s “Il Trovatore” in Vienna that fall. But the Vienna State Opera released her from her contract so she could replace Ms. Netrebko in New York. Replacing Ms. Radvanovsky in Vienna? Ms. Netrebko.

But the Viennese will not be the only ones who will get to hear Ms. Netrebko’s Leonora in 2017-18. The Met said that it would add a revival of “Il Trovatore” to its season so that she could reprise the role, with which she had a big success earlier this season.


