


When the New York Philharmonic awarded the first Marie-Josée Kravis Prize for New Music to Henri Dutilleux in 2011, it became a gift that would keep on giving. Dutilleux, who was then 95 and died in 2013, decided to share the $200,000 proceeds with worthy younger composers of his choosing, in effect commissioning them to write for the Philharmonic.

That led to Anthony Cheung’s Orpheus-themed “Lyra,” performed in 2014, and Peter Eotvos’s opera “Senza Sangue,” performed in 2015. And on Wednesday evening, Alan Gilbert and the Philharmonic added the last of those works, “Après” (“After”), by Franck Krawczyk, who was born near Paris in 1969.

Mr. Krawczyk — who, according to the program notes, abandoned a career as a concert pianist in midperformance, leaving a stage in the middle of Beethoven’s “Pathétique” Sonata — draws heavily on music of the past, writing “after” Bach, Mozart, Beethoven and the like. He briefly alludes to Beethoven in this work in three movements, each dedicated to a model, Dutilleux being the last.

Though the homages and allusions are not obvious, the 18-minute work, starting with elegiac strings and ending with braying brasses, has a pleasing contour and gives the orchestra a good and imaginative workout. At one point, all the players become percussionists, banging implements on their music stands.

Carter Brey, the Philharmonic’s stellar principal cellist, was an excellent soloist in Schumann’s Cello Concerto. This work mostly holds its bravura moments in abeyance until the finale, and Mr. Brey rose to them admirably.

But he was at least as impressive in the lyrical first two movements. It was especially touching to hear his mellow duets with his fellow cellist Eileen Moon, sitting in as principal, in the slow middle movement.

(Talent and artistry run deep among the Philharmonic cellists. On Monday night, Nathan Vickery, 25, a section cellist and, at the moment, the youngest member of the orchestra, gave a fresh and appealing account of Dvorak’s Cello Concerto with the Music and Medicine Orchestra of the Weill Cornell Medical College, at the Kaye Playhouse.)

And the orchestra’s wonderful low strings (with Mr. Brey back as principal cello) sounded truly luscious at the start of Brahms’s Second Symphony, which ended the program. Mr. Gilbert led a basically attractive performance, if not a particularly revelatory one.


