


Ah, the first day of summer. Time to bring on the golf, the picnics in the park, the nature hikes.

But not for everyone.

An oppressive heat wave that began over the weekend in the American Southwest has made going outside a serious health matter.

The heat on Sunday broke records in several cities, the National Weather Service said, with the temperature in Phoenix rising to a ghastly 118 degrees, the city’s fifth hottest day ever. Farther west, Yuma hit 120, while Palm Springs, Calif., touched 119.

The danger was most conspicuous on Arizona’s trails. The severe heat was blamed for the deaths of four hikers over the weekend, Phoenix fire officials said.

Weather and emergency officials pleaded on Monday for the warnings issued in Arizona, Utah, Nevada and California to be taken seriously.

Compared to other weather-related causes of death, heat is a quiet but prolific killer, causing more deaths annually in the United States — about 130 — than flooding, lightning, tornadoes, hurricanes or cold, according to federal data.

This is not the desert city’s first brush with triple-digit heat, said Shelly Jamison, a spokeswoman for the Phoenix Fire Department. But when the temperature rises quickly, as it did on Sunday, people do not always heed the danger, she said.

The department pushes the same message every summer, Ms. Jamison said: “Stay out of it, basically. You go to the zoo in the middle of the day, they’re all hiding.”

On social media, people posted screengrabs of their weather apps, while others seemed to try to outdo one another for the most overwrought description of the heat. The Arizona Republic wondered if it was hot enough to fry an egg. (The answer: sort of.)

Others asked, plaintively, when will it end?

Not soon, said Matt Solum, a meteorologist in the National Weather Service. Phoenix hit an expected high of 113 around 2 p.m. on Monday, the Northern Hemisphere’s longest day. The temperature is expected to hover around that point through Wednesday, he said.

The heat should start to subside Thursday and Friday, if only by a degree or two, Mr. Solum said. “But, yeah, still above 110,” he said. “Still dangerous.”


