


In the land rush to digitize the world, the home is the new frontier. Over the past few years, practically every household item within reach has been technologically upgraded and rendered “smart”: toothbrushes, cutlery, baby monitors, refrigerators, thermostats, slow cookers, sprinkler systems, sex toys, even the locks in doors. Before they achieved enlightenment, they could perform only their rote, mechanical duties; now they can do so while connected to the internet. In the case of the telephone, this has been nothing short of revolutionary, but no other “smart” object has managed to replicate its success. The absurdity of the phenomenon was made unavoidably apparent in May, when a start-up unveiled a “smart tampon,” called my.Flow. If women wear the my.Flow and the sensor that attaches to the tampon by a string (and clips neatly onto your waistband) and use the my.Flow app, they could now, at last, track their periods’ duration and flow.

“Smart” has been slapped onto everything from cups (that analyze what you’re drinking) to surfboards (that let you check your text messages between waves) to clothing (that tracks calorie expenditure). The word is flattering to both the objects and their users, even as it threatens to become a hazy banality.

The vogue for “smart” traces at least as far back as the “smart bomb,” precision-­guided munitions made to be more accurate than the dumb bombs of wars past, which tumbled out of planes and exploded wherever they happened to land. Smart bombs were first used in Vietnam, but during the Persian Gulf war, they became media stars, with generals and news anchors presenting footage of the weapons in action, until the moment the screen went to static as the bombs obliterated their internal cameras along with the target. Much like that well-­timed static, the “smart” in “smart bomb” does some ideological work, masking the inherent violence and mayhem of aerial bombing. A smart bomb is an unerring one. It adds an aura of sensible technocratic efficiency to an inherently messy, bloody affair, occluding the simple fact that bombs are horrific creations.

It also conceals a basic oddity: The word “smart” has roots in a Proto-­Germanic word for pain. It wasn’t until the 20th century, in North America, that “smart” came to be synonymous with brains. Smart bombs combine both meanings of the word, mingling intelligence and harm. Better accuracy may save lives on the margins, but it doesn’t make us consider all the political choices leading up to the decision to kill people half a world away.

When applied to the latest consumer gadgets, “smart” performs a similar sleight of hand; what is presented as an upgrade is actually a stealthy euphemism for “surveillance.” While a “smart” lighting system promises to adapt to an owner’s preferences or help the environment by lowering electricity bills, what it also does is provide a company a permanent foothold in a person’s home from which he can be monitored. That smart-­lighting company knows when the owner of its product comes home, when he goes, when he dims the lights for a date and when he leaves them on.

The intelligence given to these devices really serves twin purposes: information collection and control. Smart devices are constantly collecting information, tracking user habits, trying to anticipate and shape their owners’ behaviors and reporting back to the corporate mother ship. Data is our era’s most promising extractive resource, and tech companies have found that connecting more people and devices, collecting information on how they interact with one another and then using that information to sell advertising can be enormously profitable.

And so the makers of smart devices encourage us to make their creations smarter by confessing more to them, by exposing more of ourselves. As we open our lives to increasingly self-­aware, autonomous devices, we are encouraged — particularly in the case of all-­purpose personal assistants like Siri and Alexa — to use them as much as possible, feeding them more useful data that will allow our gadgets to “learn” who we are and what we like, and to make decisions that might anticipate our needs.

But the true ingenuity of a “smart” device is the way it upends traditional models of ownership. We don’t really buy and own network-­connected household goods; in essence, we rent and operate these devices on terms set by the company. Because they run on proprietary software, and because they are connected to the internet, their corporate creators can always reach across cyberspace and meddle with them. In 2009, Amazon deleted from customers’ Kindle readers copies of “1984” that were sold without authorization. Dealers have begun installing “starter interrupt devices” on cars bought with loans, so that they can kill the engine from afar should the borrower be late on his payments. Consumers will have little possibility for redress, much less rebellion — no way to outsmart these once-­dumb objects.

Using a smart device for anything but the purposes explicitly sanctioned by its manufacturer risks violating a warranty, bricking a device or even breaking the law. (It’s fitting, albeit a touch melodramatic, that unauthorized tinkering with an iPhone is called “jailbreaking.”) The very same elements making these things smart — connectivity, sophisticated software, semiautonomous intelligence — can also make them more frustrating than any devices we’ve ever seen.

At its most expansive, “smart” produces a world where we no longer exert control over objects we’ve bought from corporations, but corporations exert control over us through things we pay for the privilege of using. And when “smart” is crudely applied to the cities we live in — to our crumbling infrastructure and militarized police forces — we give in to forces of privatization, algorithmic control and rule by corporate contract. It seems an indelible symbol of the times that New York City neglects essential but mundane services like public restrooms while promoting other putative municipal innovations, like the mass conversion of pay phones to Wi-Fi kiosks. As with other smart devices, which subsidize their costs with data collection, these kiosks are free — provided you submit to the collection of your personal information and location data. The commons becomes simply another site for private companies to spy on people.

Whether it’s the routes we drive, the songs we listen to or the prices we pay for airline tickets, our lives are increasingly shaped by opaque systems that assess and sort us according to inscrutable criteria. Every one of these systems is, in some sense, “smart.” But that label elides the more important judgment of where power lies and how it operates. A smart tampon may provide some useful information, but many women simply need better access to health services, and laws that preserve their ability to control their reproductive lives. Fitness trackers might help some folks, but they have also become favored tools of insurers and corporate wellness plans while doing nothing to address the underlying causes of obesity. Self-­driving cars represent a potentially lifesaving innovation, but they are increasingly cast as replacements for embattled mass-­transit systems that millions of people rely on. Amid the ritual enumeration of tech specs and price points, we risk ignoring how smart devices represent another example of consumer capitalism’s bulldozing past political questions.

One of the animating myths of American capitalism is that of the savvy consumer. Informed, discriminating, wise to manipulation and deceit, this person fluidly navigates the waters of everyday consumption. And through these small decisions, replicated over and over again by millions of others, the free market improves life for all. Essential to this myth is the notion that influence and power work transparently. Experience shows that this isn’t the case, yet we continue to flatter ourselves by adorning our bodies, homes and cities with smart gadgetry and claiming that it serves us. Perhaps the real smarts on display here are those of the tech-­industry mandarins who convinced us that we needed all this stuff in the first place.


