


Goals from Emanuele Giaccherini and Graziano Pelle, combined with excellent defending in Lyon, France, helped Italy beat Belgium, 2-0, in its first match at the European Championships on Monday.

Described as one of the worst Italian teams ever by the country’s news media, Manager Antonio Conte’s aging squad defied the odds to take the lead in Group E with an impressive display.

Second-ranked Belgium, which fielded a team with top Premier League players including Eden Hazard, Kevin De Bruyne and Romelu Lukaku, dominated the game’s early stages but was forced to pay for errors by a makeshift defense and a lack of finishing up front.

Italy, the 2006 World Cup champion, finally broke the deadlock in the 32nd minute when Leonardo Bonucci found Giaccherini inside the Belgium penalty area with a lofted long ball over the defense. Giaccherini controlled it with a fine touch and curled his shot past goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois.

Pelle made it 2-0 in extra time with a well-struck volley after a counterattack.

Spain 1, Czech Republic 0 Gerard Pique finally broke down the Czech Republic’s stubborn defense in the final minutes in Toulouse, France, giving Spain, the two-time defending champions, an opening victory at the European Championships.

Pique ran behind the defenders and headed the ball into the net after a well-placed cross by Andres Iniesta in the 87th minute.

Spain had created a series of scoring chances throughout the Group D match at the Stadium de Toulouse. But victory looked unlikely after a combination of poor finishing and a superb performance from Czech Republic goalkeeper Petr Cech.

The Czechs had a chance to break the deadlock in the 65th minute, but midfielder Cesc Fàbregas saved Spain with a goal-line clearance after a header by Theodor Gebre Selassie.

Mexico 1, Venezuela 1 Jesús Manuel Corona’s goal in the 80th minute in Houston gave Mexico a 1-1 tie against Venezuela and first place in Group C of the Copa América Centenario. By winning the group, El Tri most likely avoids a quarterfinal matchup with the tournament favorite Argentina.

After missing several opportunities to score, Corona took on five defenders and fired a shot from 10 yards out to thrill the overwhelmingly pro-Mexico crowd.

José Manuel Velázquez gave Venezuela the early lead by volleying in a headed assist from Christian Santos in the 10th minute. Venezuela had a chance to take the lead in the 84th minute, but goalkeeper José de Jesús Corona saved a bicycle kick by Josef Martínez.

Uruguay 3, Jamaica 0 Uruguay’s Abel Hernández and Matías Corujo scored and Jamaica added an own goal in Santa Clara, Calif., in a battle between two Group C teams that could not advance in the Copa América.

Sentencing for Rioters A Marseille court convicted six English soccer fans and handed prison sentences ranging from one to three months to five of them for involvement in rioting at the European Championships in recent days.

The swift trials and sentencing appeared aimed at sending a message to potential hooligans for the rest of the monthlong tournament being played throughout France.


