


LIFT Festival Various venues, through July 2

Performing arts pieces from Australia, Belgium, Greece and Japan will appear in this festival, set in venues across London including a dance theater and a cemetery. Performances in the international lineup include “Miss Revolutionary Idol Berserker,” a dance and music spectacle featuring confetti and disco lights; and “Depart,” the cemetery-set piece, which brings together electronic musicians, chorus singers and circus performers. liftfestival.com

At the Seams: A Political History of Palestinian EmbroideryDar el-Nimer for Arts and Culture, through July 30

The $24-million Palestinian Museum opened in the West Bank in May, but because of a dispute between the museum’s director and its board, there was no art inside the alluring new building when it opened its doors. The museum is holding its first satellite exhibition in Beirut right now. The show looks at Palestinian embroidery, focusing in particular on how textiles from the region changed in the later decades of the 20th century in response to political and social upheaval. darelnimer.org

Luminato Festival Various venues, June 10-26

“The James Plays,” the National Theater of Scotland’s epic stage telling of the lives of several medieval Scottish Kings; “Situation Rooms,” an interactive theater piece that deals with the worldwide weapons trade by the German theater troupe Rimini Protokoll; and “Song of Extinction,” a music and video piece about environmental threats to animals, will all appear in this festival, a wide-ranging affair taking place in Toronto’s city center. The singer Rufus Wainwright will perform “Rufus Does Judy,” in which he recreates a well-known 1961 concert that Judy Garland performed at Carnegie Hall. luminatofestival.com

From Kandinsky to Pollock Peggy Guggenheim Collection, through July 24

Big 20th-century art names from the museum’s collection — like Duchamp, Rothko, Klee and Lucio Fontana — are showing in this exhibition. The show focuses on art from the 1920s to the 1960s and examines the aesthetic differences between prewar European modernists and the American up-and-comers who rose to prominence starting in the 1940s. “Imagine. New Imagery in Italian Art 1960-1969,” an exhibition that examines the avant-garde movements that emerged from Milan in that time, is also on view. guggenheim-venice.it

Isle of Wight Festival Various venues, June 9-12

This rock music event started in the late 1960s and has maintained a hardcore edge while other British festivals, like Glastonbury, have turned their attention to the mass pop market. Acts in this year’s lineup include the Who, Stereophonics, Queen (who now tour with the frontman Adam Lambert), Jess Glynne and Iggy Pop. As the name suggests, the festival takes place on the Isle of Wight, just off England’s south coast. isleofwightfestival.com

Rauschenberg in China Ullens Center for Contemporary Art, through Aug. 21

The American pop artist Robert Rauschenberg spent around 16 years creating his “The 1/4 Mile or 2 Furlong Piece,” a 1,000 foot-long visual artwork that he referred to as a “retrospective” of his own career. That work serves as the centerpiece of this exhibition. The show also looks at Rauschenberg’s relationship with China through photographs that he took on a trip there, and documentation of the exhibition of his artwork that was held at the National Art Museum in Beijing in 1985. ucca.org.cn

Isabel II: Images of Power between Spain and Puerto Rico, 1833-1868 Museo de Arte de Ponce, through Sept. 5

The 19th-century Spanish queen Isabel II oversaw the country during a time of political upheaval at home and abroad. During her reign, Puerto Rico began to forge an independent identity (it seceded from Spain several decades after she left her post). This exhibition includes portraits of prominent Spaniards from Isabel’s court and her empire, including José Laureano Sanz y Posse, the governor of Puerto Rico Miguel de la Torre y Pando and the queen herself. museoarteponce.org

Bosch: The Fifth-Centenary Exhibition Prado Museum, through Sept. 11

This year marks 500 hundred years since the death of the otherworldly Dutch artist Hieronymus Bosch. Around 20 of his paintings and some of his drawings are on view in this show, including his iconic rendering of hell and heaven, “The Garden of Earthly Delights.” The exhibition also features some reliefs, miniatures and paintings by other artists that aim to provide context on the world in which Bosch worked. museodelprado.es

Sydney Film Festival Various venues, June 8-19

The outback-set thriller “Goldstone,” which is directed by the indigenous movemaker Ivan Sen and stars the Oscar nominee Jacki Weaver, opens this festival. The lineup includes some indie darlings from the 2016 film festival circuit, like “Swiss Army Man,” which stars Daniel Radcliffe as a semi-animate corpse. Special screenings of virtual reality movies, which viewers can watch while wearing a special headset, are taking place at the festival’s Hub venue. sff.org.au


