


LONDON — J. K. Rowling always said that the seventh Harry Potter book, “Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows,” would be the last in the series, and so far she has kept to her word. But though she’s written many new things in the intervening nine years, including four adult novels, she’s never been able to put Harry to rest, or to leave him alone.

What’s an author to do when she once seemed to be done? Taking an approach that some fans love and others do not, Ms. Rowling has never made a secret of her continued immersion in Potter-world. Over the years, she has regularly interjected new elements into the old stories, sometimes through sudden Twitter pronouncements, sometimes by other means. (In 2007, for instance, she announced at an event at Carnegie Hall that Dumbledore, whose sexuality in the books was obscure, is in fact gay.)

She also regularly produces fresh ancillary material — new stories, new elaborations — on her Pottermore website, most recently a series of fictional essays about the history of magic in North America.

And now comes “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” a play in two full-length parts that begins previews in London on Tuesday, June 7, opens July 30 and is being advertised as the official “eighth story in the Harry Potter canon.” Set 19 years after the events of “Deathly Hallows,” the play imagines Harry as an overworked employee of the Ministry of Magic and focuses on his middle child, Albus Severus, and his struggle to come to terms with his family’s legacy.

No one who remembers the frenzy surrounding the publication of each of the Potter books would be surprised to learn there is now a frenzy surrounding this play and all the details around it, like the disclosure that a black actress, Noma Dumezweni, is portraying Hermione.

The news has been released slowly — Ms. Rowling is a master of controlled publicity — and on Tuesday cast photos of a grown-up Harry (Jamie Parker) and Ginny Potter (Poppy Miller), along with Albus (Sam Clemmett), were unveiled on the Pottermore website.

Performances, at least for the first of the two parts, are sold out through May 2017. Secondary-market tickets to the first preview are selling for as much as 4,000 pounds (nearly $5,800). And the play’s script — by Ms. Rowling, Jack Thorne and John Tiffany, who is also the director — is No. 1 on the Amazon best-seller list, despite the fact that it won’t be published until July 31, Harry Potter’s birthday.

If that wasn’t enough, next fall comes “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” a movie that is both a spinoff and a kind of prequel. Written by Ms. Rowling (who did not write the screenplays for the eight Potter movies), it is very loosely based on her book of the same name. That volume was a fictional wizarding-school textbook; the film takes its supposed author, Newt Scamander, sends him back many years to when he was a young man, and transports him to America. The movie, starring Eddie Redmayne, is expected to be the first of a trilogy.

Clearly Ms. Rowling has not wanted to put Harry Potter behind her. It’s an interesting dilemma for an author, particularly one who creates an elaborate world over many volumes: How do you stop? (Do you want to stop?)

Both Philip Pullman, author of the “Dark Materials” series, and Stephenie Meyer, author of the “Twilight” series, have spoken about further books to come, years after those stories were apparently put to rest. On the other extreme, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle grew so weary of Sherlock Holmes that he killed him off, only to resurrect him years later in response to widespread public unhappiness.

In an interview, Maggie Stiefvater, author of the wildly popular young-adult “Shiver” and “Raven” series, spoke of the temptation to revisit characters she thought she had finished with. The “Shiver” books were meant to be a trilogy, she explained, and she even put a note into the third one promising never to come back to the story. But then, while writing the “Raven” books, she changed her mind and published a fourth “Shiver” book.

“I had thought, No outs whatsoever, and then I looked like a total idiot,” she said.

Stephen King, who has written many series as well as stand-alone novels, said the same thing tends to happen to him. In 2012, eight years after completing his seven-volume “Dark Tower” series, for instance, he produced an eighth book, “The Wind Through the Keyhole,” whose action takes place between Books 4 and 5.

Characters with unfinished business inveigle themselves into his head, he said in a telephone interview. He’s currently toying with going back into his Bill Hodges trilogy, though “End of Watch,” coming out next month, is meant to be the final installment. “There’s a character named Holly I keep thinking about,” he said.

Ms. Rowling gives interviews very rarely and declined to comment for this article. But Mr. King said he sympathized with her relationship to her material. “There are two things,” he said. “I think she likes the Harry Potter people, and it’s a little bit hard for her to let go. And she’s aware that there are millions and millions of people who loved those books. Writers feel responsibility to their readers, and some of that is a way of saying to the fans, ‘If you want a little more, I’ll give you a little more.’”

Indeed, all this new material is proving very exciting to very many Potter fans. They can’t get enough. The “Dumbledore is gay” revelation, in 2007, became a major world news event. And now, even the smallest snippet of information about the play — the introduction of hand-carved sconces for each of the Hogwarts houses and of new wand designs, for instance — sends the internet into ecstasy.

On May 2, Ms. Rowling issued a Tweet apologizing for killing off Remus Lupin, the reluctant werewolf, in the final book. So far, it has been retweeted more than 100,000 times and “liked” more than 140,000 times.

Though the occasion was the anniversary of the (fictional) Battle of Hogwarts, the date for the last two years when Ms. Rowling has expressed sorrow over deceased characters, it also came at a time when excitement is building over the play.

Details have been few and far between; Ms. Rowling likes to tease her fans by doling out information sparingly. Sometimes she’ll respond to questions on Twitter, as she did recently when a follower asked if “Cursed Child” would make him cry.

“If it doesn’t, we’ll be checking your vital signs,” she replied, launching a thousand headlines about how she has revealed that the play will be “sad.”

All those tidbits are just fine with Melissa Anelli, who runs the Leaky Cauldron fan website and also organizes a Potter-themed fan convention known as LeakyCon.

“I love everything about Harry Potter,” she said. “So when I get one of those plot details or a new piece of writing, it’s like a nice, full exhale.”

But not everyone agrees, and this speaks to a debate deep within fandom culture, starting with what counts as the canon in a fictional world like Harry Potter’s. Should the plot snippets that Ms. Rowling lets slip — that Hagrid can’t conjure the soul-like being known as a Patronus, that Hogwarts has Jewish students but not Wiccans, for instance — be considered part of the series, or something outside and apart? (In fan fiction, ex parte remarks by an author or, in the case of a television show, by a writer are known as the Word of God.)

“Some people say the canon is within the actual covers of the seven books and that anything she says afterward you should take as opinion,” Ms. Anelli said. “Others say that anything she says is true, no matter if it’s on Pottermore or on Twitter or wherever — no matter what she says, it’s canonical.”

Readers in the first camp consider the material in the seven books to be inviolate, immutable. Hearing new details about things they hadn’t realized were open to interpretation feels like cognitive dissonance, as if someone were tampering with the wording of the Constitution. “It’s dispiriting to be faced with daily reminders that one of your former heroes is still tinkering with a world they thought you left behind perfectly preserved in childhood,” Heather Schwedel wrote recently in Slate.

For her part, Ms. Stiefvater said that she never acquiesces to fans’ requests for extra information. “Some people come up to me and ask me to give them material outside the books — for instance, what is Gansey’s favorite ice cream flavor?” she said, referring to one of her teenage protagonists. “I never respond to them. Personally, I think it’s unfair — it rewards only some readers and not those who don’t dig through all the archives to find the new little factoids.”

She counts herself a Rowling fan and considers Harry Potter’s world to have closed after “Deathly Hallows.”

“I have such respect for what J. K. Rowling has done,” she said. “I know I engaged with her series at a moment in time, like a lot of people did. And if you return to it, it feels like it’s stretching on — people aren’t remembering the series as much as the cultural phenomenon.” Of the new details that have emerged over the years, she said, “they ripple throughout fandom, and for fandom it’s highly rewarding, but as a reader it’s not how I engage with books.”

With a new set of movies on the horizon, some fans worry that Ms. Rowling will make the same mistake that George Lucas did after the three original “Star Wars” films, producing inferior work that detracts from the brilliance of the original.

They mention, too, how Harper Lee’s “Go Set a Watchman” dismayed readers who loved “To Kill a Mockingbird” and wanted its world to remain intact. (An article in The Atlantic last September about Ms. Rowling’s post-Potter, Potter-rich work was titled “Harry Potter and the Never-Ending Story.”)

But to Ms. Anelli, who was a teenager when the books were published and is now 36, there can’t be enough new material.

“It’s not like she’s a prophet who’s being handed down something from someone else,” she said. “She’s creating it, and whatever she creates becomes part of the story. As long as she wants to make it, as long there’s more story coming from her, I’m super-happy.”


