


When I asked Harold Jaffe, the owner of Harold’s New York Deli Restaurant in Edison, how much one of his pastrami sandwiches weighed, he said 13 ounces.

“I lied,” he admitted quickly. “It’s really 20 ounces, but I didn’t want to scare you.”

The sandwich arrived speared with an American flag toothpick. This wasn’t just to hold the sandwich together but also, I suspected, evidence that something this huge might become a United States territory.

Harold’s is one of the few places in New Jersey where you can still get a decent hot pastrami sandwich. For all the talk of authentic Jewish delis going extinct, I found a few that still took great pride in their pastrami. (We can debate hand-sliced versus thin-sliced another day.)

If the 32-ounce, nine-inch-high, extra-large pastrami at Harold’s seems daunting, don’t order the triple-decker, which weighs in at 3 ½ pounds. “I always tell customers to order the least amount,” Mr. Jaffe said. “If they want more, we’ve got good service and can get food to you in two minutes.”

Sharing is encouraged at Harold’s. A sign above the entrance to the seating area warns patrons of the “humongous” sandwiches and promises no fee for sharing. The large sandwich is meant to feed one to three people; the extra large, five to seven; and the triple-decker, eight to 10.

The deli sells 8,000 pounds of pastrami a week, all of which is made at the restaurant, Mr. Jaffe said. This is a rarity for modern delis, which mostly buy from outside purveyors. Mr. Jaffe sharpened his pastrami-from-scratch skills at Carnegie Deli in Manhattan, where he worked for 10 years.

Veteran customers order their sandwiches and head for the “World’s Largest Pickle Bar” (as proclaimed by the green neon sign above it), where they pile a plate high with half-sours, spicy pickle chips and “health salad,” whose cabbage blend is mixed with oil and vinegar, not mayonnaise.

The bar also has slices of rye bread, which customers often use to make sandwiches with their surplus of meat later. “I have a very high paper bill for all those doggy bags,” Mr. Jaffe said. “But I’m very happy to pay it.”

Pastrami was a new thing to Avi Friede, an owner of the Kosher Nosh in Glen Rock, when he immigrated to the United States from Israel in the late ‘60s. The other owner, Haim Peer, whom Mr. Friede met in high school in New Jersey, had immigrated from Israel independently the same year.

“After I moved here, I embraced pastrami, lox, corned beef and all the rest of the traditional deli foods,” Mr. Friede said. “I came to this country and I got back to the food roots of my parents from Eastern Europe.”

The Kosher Nosh offers Hebrew National pastrami, which is made from the navel of the steer, he said. “Slice it thin and it melts in your mouth,” he said. There is also a leaner cut of pastrami available, which is made from brisket, Mr. Peer said.

Mr. Friede and Mr. Peer celebrated 40 years in business on May 26. “We’ve had three generations loyal to the store and we’ve customers of every denomination,” said Mr. Friede. “That’s what makes community.”

Sam Brummer bought Hobby’s Delicatessen and Restaurant in Newark in 1962, and he shared everything he knew about running an old-school deli with his sons, Marc and Michael, before he died last year.

“Our father would say, ‘Buy quality goods, prepare them well, provide excellent service and be a mensch,’” Michael Brummer said.

“Our dad taught us to treat everybody well,” he continued. “We’ve served a president — Bill Clinton — and we have people who can’t afford to pay who ask for a sandwich, so we give it to them. Everyone deserves respect.”

The brothers, who became the owners of the restaurant in 1988, have expanded the menu to suit modern tastes.

“When our dad bought the business in 1962, the menu was two pages long; a salad was a bed of lettuce with some potato salad and a scoop of tuna,” Marc Brummer said. “Today, I have one page just for salads, and our menu is now 12 pages long.”

For all the talk of new items, including what the Brummers say is a very popular pan-seared salmon, the pastrami sandwich is still the restaurant’s best seller.

Hobby’s gets its pastrami from Desola Provisions in the Bronx. The brothers insist on the navel cut.

“We get a geschmack piece of pastrami, with fat in all the right places,” Michael Brummer said, using the Yiddish word for tasty. “It’s so good,” he added, “you want to give it a hug.”

“We boil it and steam the meat until it’s tender,” Marc Brummer said. “Only then does it become a Hobby’s pastrami.”

When it comes to running a deli, Michael Brummer explained that there is one other thing as important as properly steaming and slicing meat: schmoozing. “More than once people have come in and said that eating at Hobby’s is like coming home for lunch,” he said.


