


In late January 1948, Tennessee Williams arrived for the first time in Rome, a city that the playwright, then 37, would quickly call “the capitol of my heart.” After more than a decade toiling in poverty and obscurity, Williams had been catapulted to national fame three years earlier when his loosely autobiographical “memory play,” “The Glass Menagerie,” became an instant critical and commercial hit. Its follow-up, “A Streetcar Named Desire,” opened in 1947 to packed Broadway houses and rave reviews, cementing Williams’s position as a major figure in the American theater establishment. Four months later, he set out for Europe.

After a brief, disappointing stopover in France (“I found nothing very good about Paris but the quality of the whores,” Williams wrote his friend and longtime collaborator Elia Kazan), Rome won him over instantly.

“As soon as I crossed the Italian border my health and life seemed to be magically restored,” he wrote in his memoirs. Williams spent much of the next decade in Rome, which became the backdrop and inspiration for one of his most personally and creatively fruitful periods — as well as the setting for his 1950 novella, “The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone.” Despite recurring bouts of writer’s block, when the sensitive, melancholic playwright found himself “battering my head against a wall of creative impotence,” he wrote many of his greatest works here, in whole or in part, including “Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,” “The Rose Tattoo” and “Baby Doll” during numerous extended visits to the city.

To search for Williams in today’s Rome is to explore the vestiges of that heady, messy period after the fall of Mussolini but before the so-called Italian economic miracle of the 1950s and 1960s. When he arrived in 1948, the newly open city was the epicenter of a just-dawning golden age of Italian neorealist cinema. The dollar was strong, prices were low, and, as Williams put it, “an Americano could get away with a whole lot.”

Williams’s first place of residence was a top-floor room at the Ambasciatori Palace, a grand neo-Renaissance hotel along the tree-lined Via Veneto. Today, like many of Williams’s former haunts, both the boulevard and the hotel feel somewhat past their prime. Via Veneto is still upscale, but its touristy trattorias and chain hotels would be sadly ill-fitted to its former incarnation as the glorious main drag of “La Dolce Vita,” the 1960 Federico Fellini classic. Still, despite its depressing subterranean breakfast buffet, the Ambasciatori retains a faded elegance that makes it easy to imagine the looks of disdain Williams recalls receiving when, on his second night in the city, he brought home a raggedly dressed Roman teenager whom he calls “Raffaelo” in his memoirs.

For Williams, Rome offered freedom — an escape from the puritanism that plagued his life back home. In a 1949 letter to his publisher, Jay Laughlin, Williams recounted a dinner with Ingrid Bergman and Roberto Rossellini shortly after the Hollywood star and the Italian director had begun their highly publicized collaboration and extramarital affair. Their indifference to the scandal, he wrote, “is very beautiful and should have a salutary affect on discrediting those infantile moralists that make it so hard for anyone to do honest work and live honestly in the States.”

Williams wasn’t alone in this assessment. His social circle at the time included the poet Frederic Prokosch, Truman Capote, “that unhappy young egoist Gore Vidal” and a number of other American writers and artists who, like Williams, were gay or bisexual, and had found in Rome a degree of creative and personal freedom unheard of back home. They also tended to share another of Williams’s well-known traits: a love of drink.

“The American colony is desperately gregarious and you can only work by bolting doors and shutters,” he wrote to his agent and close confidant, Audrey Wood. “Yes, some of them even climb in the window if they suspect you have a little cognac on the place!” In addition to giving house parties, Williams and his friends frequented Via Veneto spots like the Café de Paris, Rosati and the downstairs bar of the Hotel Flora (now the Rome Marriott Grand Hotel Flora).

By now an international celebrity, Williams made regular appearances in the Roman society papers. Yet his fame was still not such as to prevent him from engaging in another activity of which Rome offered manifold new possibilities: cruising.

“In the evenings, very late, after midnight, I like to drive out the old Appian Way and park the car at the side of the road and listen to the crickets among the old tombs,” he wrote to the actress Jane Lawrence Smith. “Sometimes a figure appears among them which is not a ghost but a Roman boy in the flesh!”

“The nightingales busted their larynx!” he wrote to the poet Oliver Evans of a dalliance with a Neapolitan professional lightweight boxer he picked up on one of his first nights in Rome. “I wish I could tell you more … details, positions, amiabilities — but this pale blue paper would blush!”

After the Ambasciatori, Williams moved into a two-room apartment in a “tawny old high-ceilinged building” just outside the Villa Borghese gardens at Via Aurora 45. There he would reside for much of his time in Rome, mostly with his longtime partner Frank Merlo, who accompanied Williams on many extended trips in the capacity of his “secretary.” The building on Via Aurora has since been leveled, and today the lot is occupied by a generic taupe-and-glass office tower housing an Italian subsidiary of the BNP Paribas banking group.

So much of the Rome Williams knew and loved — the swinging, free-spirited Rome of the 1950s and 1960s — is long gone, paved over by anesthetized chain stores, tourist traps and bank branches. Some spots remain in name only — like Doney, a sidewalk cafe on Via Veneto that is now a bland extension of the Westin Excelsior hotel, of which the main clientele appears to be traveling businessmen and their bored-looking female companions.

But in Williams’s day, Doney was a place of singular intrigue and energy, a recurring setting in his recollections and correspondences. In a 1948 letter heralding the arrival in Rome of The New Yorker correspondent Janet Flanner and her all-female entourage, Williams tells Gore Vidal that “the social life is considerably better than when there was just us girls, sunning ourselves like a bunch of lizards on the walk in front of Doney’s.” In another letter to The New York Times theater critic Brooks Atkinson, he recalls passing the cafe and seeing Orson Welles, presumably in town for the filming of the 1949 film “Black Magic,” sitting alone and “reading a book called DECADENCE.”

It was also at Doney that Williams had his first meeting in 1950 with the legendary Roman actress Anna Magnani, whom he had in mind to play the widow Serafina in “The Rose Tattoo.”

“The long-awaited meeting with Magnani has finally occurred,” he wrote to the theater producer Cheryl Crawford. After keeping him waiting for 45 minutes, Magnani sent a messenger to bring him to Doney. “She dominated the whole street,” he wrote. “Her figure is the very meaning of sex. Her eyes and her voice and style are indescribably compelling.”

This meeting would prove the beginning of a decades-long collaboration and friendship that would profoundly influence both of their lives. Williams and Magnani, both temperamental artists who were fearless in their determination to live unconventional lives, had a deep understanding of each other, and beyond the roles he explicitly wrote for her, from 1950 on, Williams’s female characters began to resemble Magnani: passionate, sexually vital, complicated and self-confident.

Throughout the 1950s, Williams, Merlo and Magnani spent countless nights on her terrace above the Piazza Minerva overlooking the Pantheon and at fashionable venues like Rosati, which is still a pleasant place to people-watch over Negronis.

They also made frequent appearances at Alfredo, the restaurant credited with inventing fettuccine Alfredo that today has two self-styled inheritors: Alfredo alla Scrofa, at the original location, and Il Vero Alfredo, run by the original proprietor’s descendants. Both of today’s Alfredos, sadly, are touristy and overpriced, though Il Vero is almost worth a visit for the hundreds of framed photos of the owners mock-feeding giant handfuls of fettuccine to celebrity visitors whose expressions range from hammy complicity (James Stewart, Sylvester Stallone) to perturbation bordering on panic (Peter Sellers, Sophia Loren).

But if Williams’s recollections of a glamorous ’50s bohemia seem sadly obsolete, his lyrical descriptions of the city feel abidingly apt, as in “The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone,” when he describes “the moment before the lamps go on, when the atmosphere has that exciting blue clarity of the nocturnal scenes in old silent films, a color of water that holds a few drops of ink.” Or as in the novella’s opening passage:

“At five o’clock in the afternoon, which was late in March, the stainless blue of the sky over Rome had begun to pale and the blue transparency of the narrow streets had gathered a faint opacity of vapor. Domes of ancient churches, swelling above the angular roofs like the breasts of recumbent giant women, still bathed in golden light, and so did the very height of that immense cascade of stone stairs that descended from the Trinita di Monte to the Piazza di Spagna.”*

For Williams, Rome possessed a singular mix of ephemeral grace and gaudy eroticism, softness and sex, that made it the ideal setting for the story of Karen Stone, a wealthy, recently retired American actress in the midst of an existential crisis (whose story, incidentally, could easily be seen as a superior, darker progenitor of the current retiree travel romance genre in the vein of “Under the Tuscan Sun”).

Mrs. Stone’s feelings of “drift,” of lostness, her “impression that she was now leading an almost posthumous existence,” echo sentiments expressed by Williams himself. Like him, she found in Rome a place to disappear.

At one point in the novella, Mrs. Stone sits in the back of a car as it “twisted at random among the devious ways of the Villa Borghese” and “had a sense of arrival. This was the center. This was what the frantic circle surrounded. Here was the void …”

The years after his “golden time” in Rome were not particularly kind to Williams. Much of his later work was ignored by the public and panned by critics. Many close friends died prematurely, including Merlo and Magnani, who succumbed to cancer, he in 1963 and she in 1973. Returning with decreasing frequency to the Italian capital, Williams sank into depression and drug use, which contributed to his own death in 1983.

Today, the dreamy Villa Borghese gardens, with winding pathways, secretive corners and canopy of parasol pines, still feels just as Williams described it — like a soft abyss. And here, more than anywhere else in Rome, it’s not hard to imagine him as he once was, a man of youth and creative vigor, laughing into the void.

Once an ambassadors’ residence, the neo-Renaissance Ambasciatori Palace (Via Vittorio Veneto 62; royalgroup.it/ambasciatoripalace) features marble columns, damask textiles and other grand flourishes. Classically renovated rooms start at 250 euros (about $290) in June.

Rosati (Piazza del Popolo 5; barrosati.com) was one of Williams’s favorite drinking spots and is still a great place to people-watch over Negronis, which cost €15 at the table, but just €5 at the bar.

Today an espresso will set you back €5 at the now-corporatized inheritor of the storiedCafé Doney (Via Vittorio Veneto125; westinrome.com/en/cafe-doney, or restaurantdoney.com), which serves drinks, desserts and traditional lunch fare, including pizza and pasta (€12 to €18).

Williams was a regular at Alfredo, whose eponymous fettuccini attained global renown. Its two self-styled descendants are Alfredo alla Scrofa (Via della Scrofa 104; alfredoallascrofa.com) and Il Vero Alfredo (Piazza Augusto Imperatore 30; alfredo-roma.it). At both restaurants, dinner and drinks for two feel overpriced at around €100.

Originally the 17th-century estate of Cardinal Scipione Borghese, the bewitching 150-acre Villa Borghese gardens are open to the public from dawn till dusk. At the edge of the park stands the Galleria Borghese, once the cardinal’s “party villa” and now one of Rome’s most beloved art galleries, holding works by Caravaggio, Bernini and Titian, among others.


