


The Cook County state’s attorney, Anita Alvarez, who was widely criticized for her handling of the killing of a black Chicago teenager in October 2014, asked to recuse herself and her office Thursday from the prosecution of a white Chicago police officer charged with murder in the case.

After originally opposing activists who said the case should be handled by a special prosecutor because the state’s attorney was too closely allied with the Police Department, Ms. Alvarez, who lost the Democratic primary in March, asked the court to appoint a special prosecutor to handle the prosecution of Officer Jason Van Dyke in the killing of Laquan McDonald, who was 17.

“While it is has not been an easy decision, I believe that it is the right one because it will help to avoid unnecessary legal delays and provide continuity in the handling of this very important and complicated case,” she said in a statement after Thursday morning’s court hearing. “It would also ensure that one designated prosecutor will handle this case as it proceeds to trial.

While there is no legal conflict of interest that would prevent the state’s attorney’s office from continuing the prosecution of this case, I believe that the results of the recent election and the impending transition of this office make this the best and most responsible decision.”

Kim Foxx, the Democratic nominee for state’s attorney who defeated Ms. Alvarez, a two-term incumbent, by almost 30 percentage points, said the call for a special prosecutor was “clearly the appropriate decision in this case.”

Cook County Judge Vincent Gaughan said he would consider the question, and set a hearing on the matter for June 2.

Ms. Alvarez was criticized for the delay in bringing charges for Mr. McDonald’s death — and her refusal to make public the police video showing that Mr. McDonald was shot 16 times, most of them after he had crumpled to the ground. An autopsy found that he was shot in the back at least twice.

The dashboard camera video became public in November, but only after a judge ordered that it be released. Ms. Alvarez filed murder charges against Officer Van Dyke just hours before the video was released. Protests erupted in Chicago in the wake of the video’s release.

Officer Van Dyke and others said Mr. McDonald had been aggressively swinging a three-inch folding knife and moving toward the police, as if to attack.

But the dashboard camera showed that although the teenager was carrying a knife, he seemed to be trying to walk past a group of officers, veering slightly away from them.

Last April, even before a lawsuit was filed, Chicago agreed to pay Mr. McDonald’s family $5 million.


