


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. We spent a couple of hours making breakfast pizzas in the rain last weekend up in the Catskills, sliding pies into an outdoor oven humming with the heat of dry hardwood coals and eating them standing up in the kitchen nearby, in advance of a long drift on the Delaware River looking for trout. It struck me then and now as one of the highest, best uses of our time on the planet: to cook with friends, outside, before spending time outside, observing always the exigencies of the elements: fire, air, earth and water. (Aristotle added ether, or quintessence. We added guanciale.)

Maybe you could do some of that this weekend, out in a park or the yard, before a walk or a bike ride or a fishing trip or a visit to some place where you may see some birds or insects. Even if you just grab a sandwich from the bodega before a long walk in the Village with your baes, time spent outside in the presence of food and friendship is a balm, and we should take advantage of it.

This could be the weekend for grilled paella. John Willoughby has a great recipe for a grilled paella made with seafood; another for grilled paella made with chicken and rabbit. I square the circle, with a recipe for grilled paella with shrimp, chicken and clams.

Or you can make Melissa Clark’s recipe for timpano, then take it somewhere to eat on Sunday. (Here’s a size-large version of that recipe, from the actor Stanley Tucci.)

You could make our recipe for Eli Zabar’s egg salad sandwiches. Or Martha Rose Shulman’s recipe for grilled leeks with romesco sauce. Maybe just bake Christine Muhlke’s whole-wheat bread and take it somewhere with some good cold cuts, salted butter and a tub of roasted peppers.

And, of course, Sunday is Mother’s Day. (Check out the art historian Jean Sorabella of the Metropolitan Museum of Art talking about motherhood and art.) You could join the hordes taking Mom out to brunch, but we’re hoping you don’t. We have a fine collection of Mother’s Day recipes you could make at home instead — never, ever, underestimate the power of a good breakfast in bed, served to a mother who’s usually up before everyone else.

Try baked eggs with prosciutto and tomato; a green strata with goat cheese and herbs; some French toast amandine; some fruit-filled scuffins.

Many more recipes to cook this weekend are available on Cooking. Save the ones you’re interested in to your recipe box. Rate them when you’re done cooking, and leave notes on them for yourself or for others if you’ve got information to share. You know the drill. If anything goes wrong, you can find us at cookingcare@nytimes.com. We’ll get back to you soon as we can. Have a great weekend.


