


The story of a mathematical partnership is told in the film “The Man Who Knew Infinity,” written and directed by Matthew Brown. It looks at the early 20th-century collaboration between Srinivasa Ramanujan (Mr. Patel), a shipping clerk who was in truth a mathematical genius, and G. H. Hardy, a lecturer at Trinity College at Cambridge University.

In this scene, Mr. Ramanujan, who lives in India and has been invited to Cambridge by Mr. Hardy, is discussing his proofs with the professor, who says they have not been up to par. During an interview in New York, Mr. Brown discussed the scene and his film. Here are excerpts from that conversation.

Q. What is at the core of this scene and the film?

A. This is a story of two very different men. Ramanujan believed that for him, an equation had no meaning unless it expressed a thought of God. For G. H. Hardy, he was an atheist who was all about rigor and proof. What’s fascinating to me about this scene is that it’s the moment where these two confront one another about their philosophical differences.

What was exciting for you shooting this scene?

We had so many interior scenes behind desks and in classrooms. This is one of the few scenes we got outside and we were able to incorporate some Steadicam and movement to what is some heavy, serious dialogue. Trinity College allowed us to shoot on their campus, which is the first time they’ve allowed that to happen.

Why is Mr. Hardy carrying an umbrella on a sunny day?

In his mind, if he holds up an umbrella, it’s definitely not going to rain because God is going to spite him. It’s a funny thing, but it’s difficult as a filmmaker when you have one hour to shoot the scene and you need it to be sunny in rainy England.

What made you want to do a film about mathematicians?

The math was always a subtext for me. It was always the background to a human story. I was blown away by the story between these two people and what it means for us to be open in society and for people to get past themselves to be able to connect. Because I think that’s the only way that we are able to recognize outliers and encourage talent.

What was the biggest challenge making the movie?

Well it took 12 years. At a certain point we were offered an opportunity to make the film if we would only make Ramanujan fall in love with a white nurse at Trinity. And we said, absolutely not. It was incredibly frustrating on that level. When we finally did get to make the movie, we had the constraints of an independent film trying to make a broader, sweeping epic. If there were more commercial factors going on here, it would have been easier.

And how authentic were you with the math?

I worked with Ken Ono, one of the top mathematicians in the world. Every single page of the notebooks is reproduced. Whenever Ramanujan points at a formula, it’s the right formula. We went to great lengths so that the actors could feel confident in all the dialogue as well. I’ve seen the rewards. In some of the screenings, mathematicians have said it’s the first time they feel that people of their profession are played authentically.


