


OPELIKA, Ala. — At times in a courtroom here on Tuesday, as when a prosecutor and a defense lawyer spoke about Heisman Trophy winners and a revered college football coach, it was nearly possible to forget that the defendant is considered by many to be the most powerful man in Alabama.

But over a dizzying day of numbers and names, and after months of intrigue and scandal that could plunge Alabama government into chaos, a jury received its first collective glimpse at the cultivation and use of political clout in this state as Michael G. Hubbard, the speaker of the state House of Representatives, went on trial on 23 felony ethics violations.

“He just didn’t want to obey,” Matt Hart, a prosecutor, said here in Lee County, where a grand jury indicted Mr. Hubbard, a Republican, in October 2014. “He just didn’t want to be held accountable to the law.”

Much of what Mr. Hubbard did to draw the attention of prosecutors, such as steering Republican Party money to his printing business, is not in substantial dispute. But a lawyer for Mr. Hubbard, who is also accused of soliciting contracts and clients from people with interests before the state, said that he had acted within the limits of the ethics statute he helped strengthen as House speaker.

“He tried to follow every part of the ethics law,” said the lawyer, Bill Baxley, who noted that Mr. Hubbard had sought advice from state officials. “He went to great efforts, the evidence is going to show, not to run afoul of the ethics law.”

Although Mr. Hubbard has consolidated remarkable power in Montgomery, the state capital, his trial in Lee County Circuit Court might well undo a rise built in part on his engineering of the Republican Party’s 2010 takeover of the Alabama Legislature. He faces up to 20 years in prison on each of the 23 counts against him.

Mr. Hubbard is not the only public official in the state facing a burst of career-threatening scrutiny. Some lawmakers have called for the impeachment or resignation of Gov. Robert Bentley, a Republican who is confronting investigations about his relationship with a top aide, with whom he has acknowledged engaging in sexually explicit conversations.

And the chief justice of the State Supreme Court, Roy S. Moore, has been accused of judicial misconduct and could be removed from the bench for the second time in less than two decades.

So Mr. Hubbard’s trial, expected to last into next month, will further unsettle a political landscape that has already devolved into something of a national spectacle. Much of the courtroom’s gallery was full on Tuesday when Mr. Hart, in an opening statement that lasted more than 90 minutes, repeatedly hinted at his plan to summon a roster of witnesses who will be asked, under oath, to describe how power works in Mr. Hubbard’s Montgomery.

“A lot of good things happen in the Legislature,” Mr. Hart said, “but not all good things.”

Mr. Bentley will be a witness, said Mr. Hart, who often referred to the House speaker as “the defendant Hubbard.” So, too, will former Gov. Bob Riley, a Republican, and an array of lobbyists, corporate leaders and officials from state agencies.

Mr. Hart has not accused Mr. Bentley or Mr. Riley of criminal misconduct, but he said that they would help showcase the nature and scope of Mr. Hubbard’s business dealings while he ran the House. Lobbyists, Mr. Hart said, would explain how Mr. Hubbard sought “things of value.”

“He went and made choices,” Mr. Hart said of Mr. Hubbard during a presentation that included a primer on Alabama’s system of government and its ethics standards. “He knew what the law was.”

Gesturing to a slide that included an excerpt from the ethics law, Mr. Hart said, “Once you are a public official, that is the standard.”

But since his indictment, Mr. Hubbard has retained substantial support here. The day after he was charged, he went to a hotel just miles from the courthouse and staged what was effectively a campaign rally. Within weeks, he was re-elected to the House and, then, as speaker.

And on Tuesday, in a renewal of a familiar argument from Mr. Hubbard’s backers, Mr. Baxley, his lawyer, said that the speaker had not behaved any differently from any of the state’s other part-time legislators.

Occasionally reading from notes scribbled on a napkin, Mr. Baxley said prosecutors had targeted Mr. Hubbard with an attack overflowing with “mumbo jumbo” that was “not exactly as cut and dry” as Mr. Hart made it seem.

“What they say happened didn’t happen with the sinister implications that they say,” said Mr. Baxley, a Democrat and a former lieutenant governor, who argued that Mr. Hubbard “didn’t misuse his speaker’s mantle.” Instead, Mr. Baxley said, Mr. Hubbard had turned to longtime friends to support his business interests.

But Mr. Hart, who spoke before Mr. Baxley, said that Mr. Hubbard’s contacts could not merely be perceived as personal friends.

“Every single one of those friends needs Mr. Hubbard for something official,” said Mr. Hart, who added that Mr. Hubbard had received assistance “because he was speaker, and what was valuable to everyone who dealt with him was that he was speaker.”


