


SOCHI, Russia — The idea of luck, either good or bad, in car racing is one that few drivers or their engineers like to admit: They win thanks to skill, or they lose because they did not perform as well as they could — or should — compared with the competition.

But the question of luck permeated the Russian Grand Prix weekend from Friday to Sunday. This was not only for the Mercedes drivers Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton, who finished first and second, respectively, but especially for Sebastian Vettel, the Ferrari driver who was jousted off the track on the first lap by the same driver who had destroyed his previous race, in China, two weeks ago.

But if Hamilton, who had yet more technical problems on his Mercedes, refused to attribute anything to bad luck, it was Rosberg who could be excused for feeling that luck was on his side as he drove to his fourth victory of the season in the first four races. This was his seventh victory in a row, as he won the last three races last year as well.

He joins Alberto Ascari, in a winning streak from 1952 to 1953, and Michael Schumacher, in 2004, as the only drivers in the series to win seven races in a row. Vettel holds the record of nine victories in a row in 2013.

“It’s been an awesome weekend, the car has been fantastic,” Rosberg said. “I was feeling really comfortable today.”

It was the 18th victory of his career and his first in Sochi, where Hamilton won the previous two races for their Mercedes team, in 2014 and 2015.

Last year it was Rosberg who had most of the problems on his car through the season, including a throttle problem at the start in Sochi that cost him the victory, while Hamilton took his second drivers’ title in a row with Mercedes. This year, the bad luck has come to Hamilton’s car, along with most of the mechanics who worked on Rosberg’s car last year.

Hamilton has had problems in all four races this year, including the same engine problem during qualifying in both the Chinese Grand Prix and in Sochi.

“My side of the garage the mechanics are definitely having a really hard time,” Hamilton said after the race. “A majority of them were on Nico’s car last year, and Nico’s got my guys — from since when I joined the team — and all of a sudden we’re having all these issues.”

Hamilton denied his problems had anything to do with the mechanics or with bad luck, and he also made mistakes in his starts at the previous races.

Still, after his engine problem in qualifying, and having finally made an excellent start in Sochi, climbing from 10th on the grid to second by lap 16, and after climbing from more than 13 seconds behind his teammate to just 7.5 seconds by lap 36, his engineer told him that he had a water pressure problem on his car.

“There wasn’t a doubt in my mind that I could win it,” Hamilton said of how he felt just before he learned of the problem. “I had the pace, but then I had the problem with the engine and so I had to back off.”

For Vettel, having qualified in second position but then being pushed back to seventh on the grid because of a penalty for changing his gearbox, it was a sense of déjà vu two times over. In China, Vettel’s race was destroyed after Daniil Kvyat, the Russian driver at the Red Bull team, collided with him at the start in what Vettel called a “suicidal” move. Though Vettel finished that race in second position, he had made a pit stop for repairs to his damaged car that cost him any hope of victory.

On Sunday, at Kvyat’s home race, with President Vladimir V. Putin as a spectator, the Russian driver again ran into the rear of Vettel’s car at the start of the race, not just once, but twice.

“Somebody hit me in the rear in turn two and then somebody hit me again in turn three,” Vettel yelled over his car radio to his engineer. “What are we doing here?!”

He spun off the track and out of the race before learning that it was Kvyat both times — bringing the total to three. Vettel spoke to the Red Bull team director, Christian Horner, during the race to ask him to have a word with Kvyat.

The race stewards handed Kvyat a 10-second penalty, and also added penalty points to his racing license. Kvyat finished the race in 15th position.

“There was a lot going on at the start and I didn’t expect to slow down as much,” Kvyat said. “I locked the rear wheels and the car was a bit out of control, which caused the contact with Sebastian. On turn three, I couldn’t see what was happening ahead, Sebastian seemed to slow down and unfortunately I didn’t have time to react and this caused the second contact.”

“It doesn’t feel great,” he added. “This is probably the messiest first lap of my career.”

Kimi Raikkonen finished the race in third place for Ferrari, after starting third, giving his Ferrari team its 700th podium finish since it started in the series in 1950.

Rosberg leads the series with a perfect score of 100 points, while Hamilton is in second with 57. Raikkonen is third with 43, Daniel Ricciardo, in the other Red Bull, is in fourth with 36, while Vettel, the series’ favorite behind the Mercedes drivers, is in fifth with 33 points.


