


Anohni — the songwriter and singer formerly known as Antony Hegarty — decided a few years ago to utterly transform the sound and message of her music. She had built an international career in the realm of art-pop as the leader of Antony and the Johnsons, singing sustained, vulnerable, imagistic chamber-pop ballads to an audience that hung on every vulnerable word. But in six years between studio albums, she not only renamed herself with what she calls her “spirit name” but also set herself on a stark new artistic course.

She decided to make a “Trojan horse” of a pop album, she said in an interview in a baronial, wood-paneled upstairs room at the Park Avenue Armory, the same venue where she will debut the album at two events on May 18 and 19. She would jettison the delicacy of chamber pop and seek a “glossy, plastic sound” to pull in listeners while she sang bluntly about the dire state of the world. She turned her gaze outward.

“Artists have different responsibilities in different eras,” Anohni said. “But at this point, I really feel like it’s all hands on deck. An artist that’s fiddle-faddling in opaque, gossamer gestures — I mean it’s fine to do that, totally fine, but there’s no time left. We don’t have the luxury of time any more. Oh, you might be able to carve a little bit out in your life, but you’ll be carving it out of the lives of the people in the future.”

The result is “Hopelessness” (Secretly Canadian), due for release May 6, an album that makes the changes to Anohni’s mission quite clear. She has switched her backup from acoustic to electronic and her lyrics from intimately, poetically personal to starkly political. Surveillance, drone warfare, capital punishment and environmental disaster are among the subjects she addresses, in songs that plunge into electronic maelstroms and quiver with urgency. She comes at her topics from unexpected angles — sometimes identifying with forces of destruction, sometimes mourning their ravages — but there’s no mistaking the intensity of her conviction.

What hasn’t changed is her voice: a liquid, sustained, tremulous, androgynous croon that is simultaneously weighty and unearthly, and immediately arresting. Anohni developed it, she said, by trying to copy favorite singers: dance-pop soul disciples like Boy George, Marc Almond of Soft Cell and Alison Moyet of Yaz and their American role models, like Ray Charles and Nina Simone: “People that were singing their heart out,” Anohni said. “I was drawn to people that were expressing feeling because that was what was taboo in my family, expressing feeling. And that was what I was made of.”

In November — long before her label wanted her to — Anohni released the first song from the album, “4 Degrees,” on the eve of the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris. Over a brusque, irregular beat and blaring, hornlike synthesizers, it exults in an impending catastrophe of global warming, as she sings, “I want to see this world, I want to see it boil.”

The perspective isn’t a mocking one, Anohni said. “My idea with ‘4 Degrees’ was to articulate for a minute, not my ideal vision of how I wanted to perceive my relationship to nature, but the reality,” she said. “If I could give a voice to my behavior, what would that voice be? Taking planes, enjoying first-world fossil fuel, an addict of first-world comfort. So it’s not entirely ironic. There’s actually something kind of desperate about it, too.”

Throughout the album, she added, “I tried to keep a focus on myself in terms of addressing my complicity in so many of these issues — as a taxpayer, as a consumer, as a passive participant. I got to thinking perhaps as an artist, even as an artist with the best of intentions, that I was kind of a microcosm of the brokenness of the whole system. That within my body I contained the whole conflict.”

As Antony Hegarty, Anohni led Antony and the Johnsons, which was named after Marsha P. Johnson, a drag queen and transgender rights activist. Her piano-driven songs were reflections on love, pain, loneliness, gender, nature, belonging and separation. The group’s studio albums from 2000-2010 earned ardent fans, a Mercury Prize in Britain (for the 2005 “I Am a Bird Now”) and collaborators including Björk and Lou Reed. Antony and the Johnsons toured Europe and beyond, performing with local orchestras, and in 2012 the Museum of Modern Art commissioned an elaborately staged concert with a 60-piece orchestra at Radio City Music Hall. By then, the songs’ exploration of femininity and creative power held echoes of environmentalism, thinking about Mother Earth.

“Subjugation of women and of the Earth are one and the same,” Anohni said during the interview. “Kill the mother and appropriate her power. That’s what I see — I see a boy-child who so resents and is so frightened of her creative power that he seeks to destroy her agency, enslave her body and appropriate her power.”

Ecological themes moved upfront in “Manta Ray,” a ballad that Anohni sang and co-wrote for the documentary “Racing Extinction.” It was nominated for a 2016 Academy Award for best original song — and probably the only nominee ever in the category to mention “biodiversity” in its lyrics. After the Oscars telecast left Anohni in limbo about whether she would perform, eventually announcing that she wouldn’t, Anohni decided not to go to the ceremony.

“The reason I didn’t attend wasn’t because I wasn’t invited to perform,” she said. “That’s completely their prerogative.” But, she added, “they could have called me at the beginning of the process and said, ‘You’re not going to be performing,’ rather than leaving me for weeks wondering. And they could have said, ‘We’ll take care of the press so you won’t be reflected on in a poor light, as if you’re being deprived of something when really we’re trying to honor you.’”

In the six years since the last Antony and the Johnsons studio album, Anohni toured her own songs, played a central role in the large-scale performance piece “The Life and Death of Marina Abramovic” and worked on drawings, paintings and sculptures — including a 2012 exhibition at the Hammer Museum and a coming one at the Kunsthalle Bielefeld in Germany.

She changed her name: first among friends, then as a public figure. “I’ve been talking about myself as transgender for as long as I can remember, so it’s not so much an issue of transformation as it is just a slow shifting,” she said. “It was just about changing the lens a little bit to see slightly differently, just to have a more feminine name. It was incongruous for me to have a man’s name, because I don’t identify as a man and I never have.”

She also decided to write openly political songs. “Hopelessness” was three years in the making. She started it with Daniel Lopatin, who as Oneohtrix Point Never produces absorbingly disorienting electronic tracks. They had initially thought about making music that, Anohni said, was a “kind of ‘Blade Runner’-Kitaro-Japanimation soundtrack.’”

But as they squeezed album sessions between other projects, Anohni was also drawn to the opposite of those pastoral electronics: the sharp, brittle fits and starts of the Chicago footwork records made by DJ Rashad, who died in 2014. Anohni approached the Scottish producer Hudson Mohawke, who has made hip-hop tracks with Kanye West and others, to join the project. “I was looking for the right opportunity to do something that did have some teeth to it,” Anohni said. “And the kind of relentless, exuberant, almost ecstatic positiveness of Hudson’s music was the perfect foil for more challenging lyrics than people would be used to hearing from me.”

None of them were entirely sure the concept would work. “You shouldn’t have these sort of sugary sweet, almost R&B style mainstream instruments, with quite heavy lyrics on them,” Hudson Mohawke recalled thinking at times. “This might turn out terrible.”

Both producers worked on all the songs, along with extensive “painting over” by Anohni herself. “Part of the magic of this record is the volleying of ideas back and forth in a haphazard way,” Mr. Lopatin said. “The whole record was basically undergoing metamorphosis up until the 11th hour. Anohni is really a producer, and she’s not just writing these songs. She loves getting in there and twisting stuff up in Pro Tools and chopping stuff up and editing and rearranging. She’s permanently finding all of these little magic things that wouldn’t have occurred to us. Until I heard the final mixes I didn’t realize, this is how it goes?”

The proportions of haze and drive fluctuate throughout the album, with Anohni’s voice at the center. “Her range is crazy, the ideas are nuts, the movement is wild — you basically don’t have to do that much,” Mr. Lopatin said. “All you have to do is set up a staging area for an incredible performance.”

The album includes songs like “Watch Me” — with plush, creepy 1980s-style synthesizers as the singer addresses an all-seeing “Daddy,” crooning, “I know you love me because you’re always watching me/Protecting me from evil, protecting me from terrorism” — and “Drone Bomb Me,” which envisions annihilation as a kind of all-consuming love. The indictments are nonpartisan; a song called “Obama,” with slow-dive synthesizer lines, is a bitter threnody, punctuated by the programmed sputters of trap drums, for the hopes of 2008: “Now the news is you were spying, executing without trial,” Anohni sings.

“I was scared singing a lot of these songs,” Anohni said. “The words aren’t necessarily that savory — they’re obviously unsavory and scary. And that was also weird: to appropriate my own voice, which is something that people typically trust. People trust me to bring them to a safe place. This is the first record where I’ve not really done that. I’m using my voice to express more conflicted, multifaceted kinds of problems and perspectives that are less settled and less comforting.”

For Anohni, “Hopelessness” defies its own album title. “A child that’s hopeless doesn’t speak out,” she said. “I really believe in raising spirits, shaking the spirits out. I wanted to find that up feeling a lot of the songs.”

“My fantasy,” she added, “is that it’s kind of a dance record.”


