


Sixty-nine small wooden spoons hang along a gallery wall near the entrance to the Samuel Dorsky Museum of Art. All hand carved from different types of wood and mounted on a narrow horizontal board, they include long-handled mixing spoons, two-sided ladles and a spoon so tiny its scoop is barely a quarter inch across.

The installation was made by Joshua Vogel, who founded Blackcreek Mercantile & Trading Co., a woodworking studio and small manufacturer of furniture and housewares in Kingston, with his wife. It is among dozens of works in “Made for You: New Directions in Contemporary Design,” an exhibition of one-of-a-kind creations that highlights the growing appeal of handcrafted, customized goods in an era of mass production.

The show is one of three concurrent exhibitions at the Dorsky, each with its own genre, premise and viewing experience. In “Made for You,” which was curated by Jennifer Scanlan, a director at the Oklahoma Contemporary museum in Oklahoma City, museumgoers can wander from furnishings to housewares to fashion. There is the white ash bench handmade by Jessica Wickham, its contours shaped by the log it was built from, and Christopher Kurtz’s three-legged redwood writing desk that evokes flowing liquid. There is the whimsically asymmetrical glassware by Jill Reynolds and Daniel Spitzer of Malfatti Glass, and “The Mysterious Lagomorph,” a fantastical chandelier by Kathy Ruttenberg in which lit-up white resin rabbits frolic around the trunk of a ceramic tree. Three scarlet 3D-printed bracelets by Doug Bucci, who is diabetic, derive their patterns from data transmitted by the glucose monitor he wears. Three not-quite-identical porcelain vessels are versions of Sharan Elran’s “Unlimited Edition — 1 of 6,227,020,800,” representing the artist’s intention to design a unique vase for every person on earth.

In organizing the show, Ms. Scanlan confronted the permeable boundary between functionality and personal expression, between design and art. “In my opinion, the definition of design is expansive and fluid, especially when you’re talking about one-of-a-kind pieces,” she said. “A unique object is also an art object. Whether it is a functional piece that you can use, or an artwork that you experience visually, it is part of an artistic continuum. In a show called ‘Made for You,’ with lots of unique objects, there’s obviously going to be crossover.”

An example of crossover — this one between science and art — underlies the works in “The Floating World: Holograms by Rudie Berkhout.” Organized by Daniel Belasco, the Dorsky’s curator, this exhibition includes 11 holograms produced between 1978 and 1989 by Mr. Berkhout, one of the medium’s pioneers.

Some of the holographic plates in the gallery are positioned on tripods, some are suspended from the ceiling. But visitors will see nothing until they approach each one, and then images will pop into sight: vibrantly colored squiggles, dotted lines, geometric shapes, speckled fields and radiating planes. Ethereal and dramatic, they hover in space, transforming as the viewer moves from side to side, in and out, up and down. “It upends your way of seeing,” Mr. Belasco said. “The work doesn’t exist until you’re in the right place.”

Holographic technology was developed for scientific purposes in the 1960s, but for Mr. Berkhout, who began experimenting with the medium in 1975, it was a means of artistic expression. “These were designed to be museum pieces,” Mr. Belasco said of the holograms in the show. “He was one of the few holography artists who strove for that.”

In the 1980s, Mr. Berkhout’s holograms were exhibited alongside pieces by artists such as Barbara Kruger, Judy Pfaff and William Wegman. Since then, Mr. Belasco said, they have rarely been shown.

Mr. Belasco likened Mr. Berkhout to the “Made for You” artists who work with 3D printing. “They are using new technologies,” he said, “but they are using their own invented techniques to make works of art and to express their own philosophies.”

A different kind of light-based imagery fills an adjacent gallery. Here, powerful tableaus shot by master photographers capture urban street life around the world.

Also curated by Mr. Belasco, “On the Street and in the Studio: Photographs Donated by Howard Greenberg” is a two-part exhibition of selections from the 1,148 photographs given to the Dorsky by Mr. Greenberg, an influential photography dealer, gallerist and collector. “On the Street” is open now; “In the Studio” will explore portraiture starting in August.

In choosing prints, Mr. Belasco aimed to reflect Mr. Greenberg’s aesthetic. “All of these photographs spring from his taste, his sensibility, his passion,” he said. “I wanted to honor that.”

“On the Street” presents 39 primarily 20th-century black-and-white prints by photographers including Eugène Atget, Allen Ginsberg and Bruce Davidson. Some are devoid of people. In an untitled image taken by Berenice Abbott around 1935, a large building looms ominously over Manhattan’s rooftops. In Aaron Siskind’s “Chicago 8,” splashes of paint on a brick wall suggest an Abstract Expressionist painting.

Other photographs portray city dwellers engaged in sundry activities. They walk on a street lined with markets and motorbikes in Henri Cartier-Bresson’s “Ahmedabad, India.” They are absorbed in solitary contemplation in Paul Wolff’s “Florence, on the Arno.” They eye the camera boldly in Jacob Riis’s “The Short Tail Gang (Corlears Hook) Under Pier at Foot of Jackson Street.” They scramble and shove in a frantic untitled nighttime composition by Weegee.

One wall showcases New York City scenes photographed during the 1940s and 1950s by Morris Huberland. Mr. Huberland was a member of the Photo League, a group of mid-20th-century social documentarians whose work Mr. Greenberg championed and acquired. He donated a total of 108 of Mr. Huberland’s photographs to the Dorsky. In “Harlem, New York City,” on view in the gallery, a boy perches on a ledge, his arms and legs aligning with a brick building, a fire escape and a metal fence to form a mesmerizing confluence of angles.

During an interview, Mr. Greenberg commented on the photographs he collected. “They were pictures that spoke to me on a deeper level,” he said. “They were photographs that made me feel what any collector would feel: strong.”

Despite their disparate content, the three shows share a common element: the Hudson Valley. Mr. Greenberg established his first gallery in Woodstock and has since maintained his connection to the area, donating works to other local institutions along with the Dorsky. Mr. Berkhout lived in the Catskills from the early 1990s until his death in 2008. And most of the participants in “Made for You” live and work in the region.

“There is a wonderful spirit of cooperation and community among the artists and designers of the Hudson Valley,” Ms. Scanlan said.


