


Golf is deceitful above all things. It hovers over your late 20s, shaking its head as terms like “shin splints” and “plantar fasciitis” filter into your vocabulary. When the chubby ex-frat boys who flock to the Y.M.C.A. basketball courts after market close make fun of your “old-man moves,” golf clears its throat and lets loose a short, condescending whistle. And when the litany of bodily ailments has grown long enough but you haven’t quite accepted the inevitable, golf sidles up next to you with a pamphlet fit for a pyramid scheme and a reassuring smile. Life is long, golf says. Forget the body’s betrayals; golf is a game of the mind.

My first sustained encounter with golf came three months ago. I had just started a new job in a new city, where my only friend was a fellow gambler who once took me for $2,500 in Scrabble. This friend plays only golf now, which meant that if I ever wanted to recoup my debt, I had to play golf, too.

Honestly, I assumed I would be a natural. I am not a coordinated man, but I have an unusual tolerance for pain. If there were a sport in which the athlete moved a stack of cinder blocks across a field while listening to a podcast, I might have been able to ride the pine for a minor-league team. I won my college pub’s corned-beef-eating contest. I can stand in freezing-cold water for long periods. I know a few mantras and spent my early 20s stinking of cheap incense, on a doomed path to enlightenment or, at least, something that looked like it. Novelists, whether Wodehouse or Updike, taught me that the best golfer is a contented, quasi-Zen idiot who blissfully ignores the game’s myriad mental anguishes: the shorted putts, the drives that hook into the trees — which, when you watch them, make you feel as if you’ve been kicked in the groin if your groin were in your brain. The model golfer best exemplified by Chevy Chase in “Caddyshack,” in which he walks the course barefoot and talks about Basho, gave me the confidence that, with time, I could at least keep up with my more athletically talented acquaintances.

It didn’t start off so bad. After work and on weekends, my friend and I would drive out to the city’s cheapest courses, where, surrounded by overgrown willow trees and the kindly septuagenarians of the Pacific Northwest, I would hack my way from rough to trap to adjacent fairway. Every time I went out, I noticed some small improvement, however fleeting. On an unusually sunny day in April, I finally had a breakthrough: Every club felt light in my hands, and half of my shots flew straight and true. By the end of the round, I had clawed back $250 of my Scrabble debt from my friend, who accused me of hustling him. The next day, hoping to build success upon success, I drove to the practice range.

The ground was hard, dusty and unforgiving, but I didn’t think about it much as I lined up with a pitching wedge. The first ball flew like a wing-shot duck, low for about 30 yards before diving hard to the right, into the turf. My second shot did the same. Then the third and the fourth. Of the 200 balls I hit that day, 190 died on impact. Sometime in the 20 hours that had passed between my two trips to the course, I had caught the dreaded slice. I could feel the fog of failure in the roots of my teeth; it didn’t lift for two days.

My temporary home in the new city is on the second floor of a hotel for vaga­bond corporate executives. It is a terrible place, the lobby littered with bowls of individually wrapped breath mints and the garage stuffed full of midsize American rental cars. But it is just two short blocks from one of the country’s best bookstores. During my slice-induced depression, I went there to seek the wisdom of golf literature.

Most golf books are either koany little things filled with visualization techniques and pastoral aphorisms or hagiographies of professional golfers, also filled with visualization techniques and pastoral aphorisms. A third type, largely written by former staff writers at Sports Illustrated or Esquire, tells the duffer’s side of things. All three varieties raise the same mystical question: What must happen in the brain to coordinate the eyes, the shoulders, the forearms, the elbows, the wrists, the hands and the torso into one repeatable golf swing? Is it mindlessness or mindfulness? Is it a lifetime of practice or a gathering up of the will that cleans out the chattering connection between the body and the brain?

“Harvey Penick’s Little Red Book,” a short manual of pithy anecdotes and golf tips from a lifelong caddie, is not a Buddhist text, but it’s not all that far from it. Penick is a terrible name-dropper, but once you forgive him for all the mentions of golf legends like Tom Kite and Ben Crenshaw and what they learned from him, his prose hums along at a grandfatherly, crotchety pace. “As for your grip pressure, keep it light,” Penick advises. “Arnold Palmer liked to grip the club tightly, but you are not Arnold Palmer.” Later, on the topic of anxiety on the course versus unthinking serenity, Penick cautions against being too languid. “Be at ease. If you are at ease, you are relaxed — but ready,” he writes. “The secret is the feeling of ‘controlled violence,’ as Jackie Burke Jr. says.”

Penick didn’t cure my slice. I kept going to the range, and my shots kept flying to the right in the same low-slung arc. As my frustration deepened, I began muttering bastardized sutras under my breath, which did nothing to quiet my harping inner critic:

All form is emptiness.

O.K., Kang, address the ball. Set your shoulders straight.

All emptiness is form.

Nice and easy backswing. Don’t jerk it.

Everything is emptiness.

You definitely just jerked it. Why can’t you listen?

In emptiness, there is no form.

Please don’t overswing, you’re strong enough. The tiny Korean women on the L.P.G.A. tour can hit the ball 250 yards.

There is nothing to attain.

You’re definitely overswinging. Good Christ. There’s nothing that can be done.

All form is emptiness.

Ball right again. Guy next to me definitely laughing. I am a disgrace to the Korean people.

Seeking solace, I began reading “The Bogey Man,” by George Plimpton, a founding editor of The Paris Review, who wrote a series of books about competing, as a quixotic amateur athlete, in professional sports, including golf. Plimpton, whose lanky frame looked as if had been pieced together out of random lengths of industrial piping, starts on Page 1 with an extended metaphor that involves a crew of Japanese admirals screaming at all the unwieldy parts of his body to act in unison. As Plimpton goes from tournament to tournament, he talks to an array of pros, caddies and loiterers, all of whom impart one bit of wisdom or another. None of these maxims help Plimpton at all. He is an 18 handicap at the start of the book, and he is a humiliated 18 handicap at its end. Plimpton talks to Arnold Palmer and walks up the fairway of the 18th hole at Pebble Beach with a huge gallery watching his swing, but the Japanese admirals never stop their yelling.

Plimpton, more than Penick or any other sunburned golf philosopher, seems to understand the game’s one lesson: All philosophy is ultimately meaningless. No profound thought actually works on the course, and nothing that does work on the course, whether standing a couple of inches closer to the ball or relaxing your grip or keeping your left arm straight, is actually profound.

Despite all this, I have bought into golf’s pyramid scheme. I seem to gain three to five pounds every month, my left knee buckles every time I step onto a basketball court and my swimming stroke, which once wasn’t half bad, now looks like what might happen if you stapled a pair of flapping hands onto a filing cabinet and threw it into the ocean. Buddhism tells me to accept these physical changes because even a mountain will ultimately melt down into the soil like a sugar cube under hot water. Golf, on the other hand, prods me to keep inventing new theories, because it’s easier to come up with one that explains my perpetual failure than it is to keep my left arm straight.

Buddhism, of course, is ultimately right — my slice will fix itself when it feels like it, or it won’t — but as I’ve grown older and life’s perpetual suffering has gone from an abstract concept to slow, creeping reality, I much prefer to believe that I can fix my body’s failings through tricks, gadgets and philosophy. To heed the lying but calming voice that assures me: Once you fix this goddamn slice, you can still improve, not only in golf but in all things.


