


Two New York City police detectives have been charged with beating a uniformed Postal Service employee in Queens in October, according to an indictment released on Wednesday. The mail carrier has said that the police have harassed him since 2014, when he gave street directions to a stranger who then killed two police officers.

The indictment was handed up by a grand jury that watched surveillance video of the stop and heard a 911 call that appears to contradict the detectives’ account and shows them kicking, beating and dragging the mail carrier, Karim Baker, 26, who recently testified about his ordeal, his lawyer and law enforcement officials said.

The detectives — Angelo J. Pampena, 31, and Robert A. Carbone, 29 — were charged with felony and misdemeanor assault in an indictment announced on Wednesday by the Queens district attorney, Richard A. Brown, and the police commissioner, William J. Bratton. Detective Pampena, a nine-year veteran, was also charged with perjury, offering a false instrument and official misconduct. Detective Carbone has been with the department for eight years.

The detectives pleaded not guilty on Wednesday and were released, the district attorney’s office said. Their next court appearance was set for June 27, a spokeswoman for the district attorney said. If convicted, both men face up to seven years in prison.

The Police Department said the detectives, who were assigned to the Patrol Boro Queens North Gang Unit, had been suspended without pay. Stephen P. Davis, the Police Department’s chief spokesman, declined to discuss the investigation, but he said the detectives would be automatically fired if they are convicted of a felony.

James Moschella, Detective Pampena’s lawyer, said he believed the video showed the officers had acted with reasonable force. “It’s completely reasonable under the circumstances of Mr. Baker’s resistance to the officers’ lawful inquiry,” he said.

However, Mr. Baker’s lawyer, Eric Subin, said the stop was part of a campaign of harassment by the Police Department that started when Mr. Baker told Ismaaiyl Brinsley how to get to the Marcy Houses on Dec. 20, 2014. Mr. Brinsley then ambushed Officers Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos before killing himself.

After Mr. Baker was questioned by the police, he was stopped approximately 20 times over 10 months, Mr. Subin said.

Mr. Baker initiated a lawsuit in November naming the city, the Police Department and the individual officers. The city was recently served with a summons and complaint and has 30 days to answer, Mr. Subin said.

“He said that he still felt as terrified as the night I met him,” Mr. Subin said Mr. Baker told him after learning of the detectives’ indictment. “But he didn’t feel quite as defenseless.”

Mr. Brown and Mr. Subin said the detectives approached Mr. Baker as he left work on Oct. 21, 2015, in Corona, Queens. Mr. Subin said the encounter was captured on surveillance video from a building across the street, and had been paired with audio from a 911 call from Mr. Baker’s cellphone that recorded what occurred.

Mr. Subin said the officers had asked to see his client’s identification and when he asked why he was being stopped, the officers told him he was parked too close to a fire hydrant. Mr. Baker then called 911 to ask for help, but he dropped the phone when the officers began pummeling him, Mr. Subin said.

The district attorney said Mr. Baker was seated in his car when the detectives punched and kicked him multiple times in the face and body and dragged him from the vehicle. Mr. Baker sustained spinal fractures and a knee injury and has not been able to return to work, Mr. Subin said.

Detective Pampena, in the complaint filed against Mr. Baker, claimed that Mr. Baker had been stopped for parking too close to the hydrant, Mr. Brown said. But the video showed that Mr. Baker’s car was parked more than 15 feet from the hydrant, Mr. Brown said.

Mr. Baker had been charged with resisting arrest, disorderly conduct and criminal possession of a controlled substance before the video came to light, Mr. Subin said. The case was dismissed, Mr. Brown said.

The indictment was announced as the Police Department is investigating officers’ conduct in the March 17 arrest of an on-duty uniformed mail carrier in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.


