


A vintage World War II plane crashed into the Hudson River during a promotional photo shoot on Friday night, killing the pilot, the authorities said.

The plane, a P-47 Thunderbolt, belonged to the American Airpower Museum in Farmingdale, N.Y. It was with two other planes — a P-40 from World War II and a contemporary aircraft — in an area off West 79th Street in Manhattan when it crashed around 7:30 p.m., said Gary Lewi, a spokesman for the museum.

Divers from the New York Police Department recovered the body of the pilot around 10:40. The authorities identified the pilot as William Gordon, 56, of Key West, Fla.

Frank Pijuan, 53, who was walking parallel to the river on the Manhattan side, said he had seen a low-flying plane approaching from the West Side of Manhattan. He said he thought the plane was doing acrobatic stunts. “Then it disappeared,” he said.

The plane, from 1944, had flown twice earlier on Friday with no issues and had been consistently free of troubles, Mr. Lewi said. It was being photographed as part of a promotion for an air show at Jones Beach on Long Island taking place over the Memorial Day weekend.

“Clearly we are dealing with a tragedy,” Mr. Lewi said of the pilot’s death. “It’s crushing.”

Civilian bystanders dived into the water in an attempt to rescue the pilot, said a United States Coast Guard spokesman, Petty Officer Frank Iannazzo-Simmons.

The plane had been part of the museum for 16 years and regularly participated in air shows, Mr. Lewi said.

The P-47 Thunderbolts were considered stalwarts of the United States military during World War II, said Albert J. Parisi, an aviation journalist and historian who is the operations officer of the Army Air Forces Historical Association in New Jersey.

The single-seat aircraft were known for being able to withstand a lot of damage and still fly. They were instrumental in the relief effort during the Battle of the Bulge, Mr. Parisi said.

The Army Corps of Engineers was sending a drift-collection vessel, the Hayward, which has a heavy-duty crane, to work with Police Department divers to retrieve the wreckage, said Ken Wells, a corps spokesman for the New York district.

The recovery effort was expected to take place during slack tide, between 11 p.m. on Friday and 1 a.m. on Saturday. He was unsure where the wreckage would be taken.


