


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Laura Craven and Flora Lee Peir, editors on the Metro desk, provide a blow-by-blow account of how The Times mobilized resources — photographers, editors, reporters — in response to breaking news.

There’s always a story breaking somewhere. (Last week’s breaking news came all week long from Orlando, Fla.) But what happens when news breaks close to home?

Gunfire, for example, crackled inside an Irving Plaza concert hall at 10:23 p.m., just before the rapper T.I. was scheduled to perform on May 25 in Manhattan. Then what? How does The New York Times mobilize its resources to piece together a story that breaks long after office hours?

More than a dozen reporters, editors, photographers and web producers swung into motion and began to put the story together moments after the first shot rang out in Irving Place.

Have a look at how it all unfolded. You’ll get a sense of the attention, the care and the sheer number of people involved in putting together just one of the more than 300 stories The Times publishes in a typical day.

10:23 p.m.: Flora Peir, a night editor on the Metro desk, sees a tweet from Dataminr, a service that combs Twitter and alerts subscribers to breaking news stories. Fortunately Ms. Peir had attended a Dataminr training session hours before.

10:25 p.m.: Peter Khoury, the Metro night editor, forwards an alert from a police scanner service to a photo editor and to a rewrite editor, Christopher Mele.

10:27 p.m.: John Surico, a stringer on Metro, heads to Union Square with Sandra Garcia, a news assistant.

10:50 p.m.: The pop music reporter Joe Coscarelli is on the job, sending background notes on T.I.

11:24 p.m.: The first version of the story posts online: “3 People Shot During Concert at Irving Plaza, Police Say,” the headline reads.

11:30 p.m.: Did you hear that? Rochelle Oliver, a web producer, listens repeatedly to a Twitter feed with Ms. Peir to determine whether there is audible profanity.

Can The Times post tweets that contain audible profanity? The editors discuss the issue; opting to sidestep the question, they decide to proceed with a clip that contains a rush of muffled, discordant sounds. Profanity? Maybe, maybe not.

12:08 a.m. Police scanner report:

The story draws readers all night through Twitter and Facebook. A late update on the shooting posts online, complete with witness accounts from Ms. Garcia and Mr. Surico, and basic information on T.I. supplied by Mr. Coscarelli.

12:10 a.m.: The police wrap up a news conference on the shooting. Ms. Garcia and Mr. Surico update the story with relevant details.

1 a.m.: A number of editors — Ms. Peir, Mr. Khoury, Ms. Oliver, Mr. Mele — and copy editors, Teshia Morris and Jessica Schnall, are on the Metro desk when the final version of the story posts.

5:16 a.m.: Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Public Information (D.C.P.I.) for the New York Police Department emails:

7 a.m. to 8 a.m.: Mr. Surico heads back to Irving Plaza, where the police are still investigating.

Ashley Southall, a reporter, heads to Police Headquarters at 1 Police Plaza for a press briefing by the commissioner.

Al Baker, a police reporter, and James C. McKinley Jr., a court reporter, make inquiries about the victim’s name and whether arrests have been made.

A photographer heads to the scene.

3 p.m.: Mr. Coscarelli emails: The victim is Ronald McPhatter, 33, a k a B$B Bigga, an associate of the Brooklyn rapper Troy Ave, who police say was shot in the leg.

Mr. Coscarelli shares basic information about Troy Ave. He had, for example, enjoyed some success in recent years, had released two albums and had worked with 50 Cent, Rick Ross and Young Jeezy.

He adds that he has spoken with a number of local hip-hop promoters who confirm that it is not unusual for an artist and his entourage to evade standard security precautions at performance venues.

R.I.P. messages pour onto Mr. McPhatter’s social channels.

5 p.m.: Mr. Coscarelli and Ms. Southall hear that Troy Ave has been arrested; the police will not confirm.

5:16 p.m.: D.C.P.I. emails video of the shooting. Is it too graphic to publish? Editors discuss. Tom Wright-Piersanti, a web editor, sends the video to Philip B. Corbett, The Times’s standards editor, for approval. Mr. Corbett approves the publication plan.

5:51 p.m.: Ms. Southall freshens the story’s lead paragraphs.

6:26 p.m.: The video publishes.

7:12 p.m.: Michael Pollak, a copy editor, reviews the final text. Ms. Morris also takes a final look.

9:06 p.m.: Ms. Oliver hits “publish”: “Rapper Troy Ave Is Arrested After Fatal Shooting at T.I. Concert” appears on New York page and on the home page, complete with video from the scene.


