


Artem Anisimov, Trevor van Riemsdyk and Dale Weise scored during a dominant second period, and the Chicago Blackhawks beat the visiting St. Louis Blues, 6-3, on Saturday night to send their first-round playoff series to Game 7.

Chicago’s Andrew Shaw, who had been suspended one game for using an anti-gay slur during the Blackhawks’ Game 4 loss, added a goal in the third period.

Chicago trailed by three games to one in the series but stayed alive with a 4-3 double-overtime victory in St. Louis on Thursday. On Saturday, the Blackhawks, the defending Stanley Cup champions, trailed, 3-1, after one period but clawed back to win a Game 6 for the 15th time in their last 16 tries.

Game 7 will be Monday night in St. Louis.

Brian Elliot made 30 saves for the Blues, who have been eliminated in the first round in each of the last three seasons.

Trailing, 3-1, the Blackhawks roared back with perhaps their best period of the season.

On a power play, Anisimov poked home a rebound for his third goal of the series. That seemed to inspire the Blackhawks, and Elliott needed two terrific stops to keep the Blues in front.

But Chicago only turned up the pressure.

A streaking Jonathan Toews slid the puck to van Reimsdyk for the tying goal 12 minutes 21 seconds into the second.

Chicago went ahead to stay on Weise’s one-timer just under four minutes later. It was Weise’s first goal since he was acquired in a trade with Montreal on Feb. 26.

Shaw’s third goal of the series came during a power-play before Marian Hossa scored on an empty net.

DUCKS 5, PREDATORS 2 Ryan Garbutt scored the go-ahead goal in the second period, and Anaheim beat Nashville for the first victory by a home team in their first-round series.

Anaheim leads the best-of-seven series, three games to two. Game 6 will be in Nashville on Monday.

Nashville had won the first two games in Anaheim before the Ducks tied it with two wins on the Predators’ home ice.

“Those first two games we lost at home were rock bottom for us,” Garbutt said. “We definitely want to finish it off in six.”

The Ducks’ David Perron tied the game earlier in the second with his first playoff goal before providing an assist on Garbutt’s goal along with Ryan Getzlaf.

Anaheim added three goals in the third period: Sami Vatanen scored on a breakaway, Cam Fowler had a power-play goal, and Ryan Kesler scored on an empty net in the closing minutes. Frederik Andersen stopped 27 shots for the Ducks.

Pekka Rinne had 27 saves for the Predators.


