


Hedera

The New York City composer Lesley Flanigan works with electronics and voice to create flickering repetitions with layered vocals, a kind of choral hypnosis. Her new EP, “Hedera” (Physical Editions), has two songs, one long and one short. The long one — the 20-minute title track — is the keeper: A stuttering, machinelike sound acts as the underpinning. You wouldn’t necessarily guess it, but it’s the sound of a malfunctioning tape deck. On top, Ms. Flanigan sings extended tones, making them digitally repeat as she builds up her own choir and creates her own gradual harmonic movement. It’s a slow process, at times beautiful.

Blackball

Blackball is a hardcore punk band from Raleigh, N.C., and Richmond, Va., as of early last year. It has a new self-titled, six-song vinyl EP, released by Sorry State Records, and listening to it feels like inhaling some kind of straight-to-the-point vapor. Hardcore does not operate on a mandate of permanent evolution; this band evokes mid-’80s CBGB matinees. The thrill is in how it’s done. Track 1: “Bone to Pick.” Two guitars whistle through a second and a half of bright feedback; bass and drums join them for a single chord pounded fast 32 times. Both guitars start a four-bar riff, the drums tumble in and the recording crunches into the red. This is distortion as style. The singer Ericka Kingston goes off against an anonymous bully operative, her voice so enraged it sounds like another guitar. “You toe the line!,” she sings. “Self-serving justice!/A righteous initiative!/Heartless and cruel!” Again: “Heartless — and cruel!” Those are all the lyrics; she repeats them; there’s a bridge and then a final section. One minute and 16 seconds. Just about perfect.

Climata

Robert Curgenven, a minimal electronic composer originally from Australia and now living in Ireland, uses sound to transmit something about the space in which sound occurs. He has a natural affinity with the artist James Turrell, who uses light to transmit something about the space in which light occurs. Recently Mr. Curgenven did something sensible and created some sound pieces in conjunction with Mr. Turrell’s “Skyspaces” series, which involves dozens of rooms around the world with holes cut into their ceilings, allowing the changing light to interact with the viewers’ perceptions. In each piece on Mr. Curgenven’s new double-disc album, “Climata,” recorded in Skyspaces across different countries, you hear a pair of mellow, subtly shifting oscillator hums. To hear them is to know that they were very definitely recorded in a large room; sure enough, your brain starts to conjure the space as you listen. They are not the exact equivalent of natural light — they are man-made — but he does allow for outside sounds (birds, weather, a distant car honk) to interact with them. Both CDs are 58 minutes long, and the composer suggests you can play them simultaneously if you like.

Entre Colegas

You might know the bassist Andy González from his position deep within the Fort Apache Band, probably the essential New York Latin-jazz group since the beginning of the 1980s; or Grupo Folklorico y Experimental Nuevayorquino, the band that made syncretic Afro-Latin roots albums in the mid-1970s (go, right now, and get to know the record “Concepts In Unity”); or from his work with Eddie Palmieri, Ray Barretto, Manny Oquendo, Kip Hanrahan and others. “Entre Colegas” (Truth Revolution Records) is his first solo album, at age 65: a jam session with the lid on, including the trumpeter Carlos Abadie, the tres player Nelson Gonzalez and the guitarist Ben Lapidus. It includes versions of jazz standards like Erroll Garner’s “Misty” and Billy Strayhorn’s “A Flower Is a Lovesome Thing,” as well as Cachao Lopez’s mambo “Inspiracion de Cachao” and Mr. González’s original “Vieques.” It’s casual, modern, traditional, deliberately understated, stealthily gorgeous.


