


How does a young boxer turn into a dancer? It starts with situps and ends with a fit.

In Anna Rose Holmer’s directorial debut, “The Fits” (opening Friday, June 3), the focus is an 11-year-old, Toni (Royalty Hightower), who trains as a boxer with her brother at a Cincinnati community center but dreams of joining the dance team that also rehearses there. “Every narrative element of the film is expressed through movement,” Ms. Holmer said in a recent interview. “Every tension and conflict that Toni has, she has to go through physically.”

As such, Toni isn’t much of a talker. During her transformation from boxer to dancer, she finds herself in that awkward teenage place: caught between girl and woman. But there’s an eerie element. The dancers on the team start having fainting episodes: These raw, violent eruptions of self-expression — dances of catharsis — become a mysterious rite of passage. They may be real; they may be fake. How far will a girl go to fit in?

Inspired by real cases of mass hysteria — from medieval times to now — Ms. Holmer, who wrote the film with Lisa Kjerulff and Saela Davis, became obsessed with episodes that occur mainly within groups of adolescent girls in close-knit societies. “I started to think about it in terms of dance — there’s not that big of a difference between flailing and performing,” she said. “I also think about performance in general and how we perform for each other. How you form your own identity and how that becomes a performance, especially in adolescence.”

Ms. Holmer, who is not a dancer, was introduced to the form when she directed and produced, with Matt Wolf, “A Ballet in Sneakers: Jerome Robbins and Opus Jazz,” a companion documentary to “N.Y. Export: Opus Jazz,” a contemporary retelling, conceived by Ellen Bar and Sean Suozzi of New York City Ballet, of the 1958 Robbins work. She also produced, with Ms. Bar, “Ballet 422,” Jody Lee Lipes’s film about the choreographer Justin Peck. In it, the focus is Mr. Peck’s creative process, but the way the film tells the story from the point of view of his body is similar to Ms. Hightower’s quietly riveting depiction of Toni.

Yet “The Fits,” which played to acclaim at the Venice and Sundance film festivals, couldn’t be further from the rarefied world of ballet. The film was shot at a community center in Cincinnati’s rough West End neighborhood, where the Queen City Boxing Club (in the basement) and the Q-Kidz Dance Team (on the first and second floors) meet. The Q-Kidz, which Ms. Holmer discovered on YouTube, are featured in the film; Ms. Hightower, now 11, has been part of the team since she was 6. (Many of the dancers will perform at a free screening by Rooftop Films at the Elevated Acre in Manhattan at 8 p.m. on Tuesday, May 31.)

The dance team specializes in drill. Stand battles, call-and-response sequences for opposing dancers, immediately attracted Ms. Holmer to the form; the sequined costumes also helped. But beyond that, Ms. Holmer found that drill was a way to show a more-complicated version of femininity. “Drill also incorporates a lot of mundane movements into the choreography,” she said, “like fanning your nails or punching or a group pointing at someone.”

Marquicia Jones-Woods, known to all as Ms. Quicy (pronounced KWEE-cee), formed the organization 29 years ago as a way to get kids off the streets. “I actually didn’t start it as a dance team,” she said. “I started working with the kids in my neighborhood to basically give them something to do, to keep them out of the hustle and bustle of crime and the drugs.”

When Ms. Jones-Woods, also the film’s associate producer, was first contacted by Ms. Holmer, she said she thought she was being punked, but after the director described her idea about the fits, she understood. The fits, to her, are less dramatic or literal than those depicted in the film, but are something she sees all the time with her girls. “It’s more like them trying to do something for acceptance,” Ms. Jones-Woods said, “trying to be a part of the ‘it’ group.”

While she loves the movie, she said, it is hard for her to watch. “I see the turmoil, I see the struggle,” she said. “I see everything that my kids go through on a day-to-day basis.”

Ms. Holmer, who called Ms. Jones-Woods “a superhero who’s a human walking around,” regards her film as a collaboration among many. Ms. Jones-Woods’s twins, Mariah and Chariah Jones, the film’s choreographers, focused on the Q-Kidz numbers, while the choreographer and filmmaker Celia Rowlson-Hall served as movement consultant and worked with each dancer on her individual fits.

“I would say, ‘Think of something you really want to get rid of, put it in this part of your body, and then how do you shake it out?’” Ms. Rowlson-Hall said. “I always thought about it as this bundle ball of energy that needs to get out and needs to give space for the body to grow.”

Ms. Rowlson-Hall also worked with Ms. Hightower on her physicality throughout the film: How she walks as a boxer is different than as a dancer. “In a lot of the early takes, we had Royalty hold her breath,” Ms. Holmer said. “She opens up in such a big way throughout the film and is full of air, full of life at the end.”

For Ms. Holmer, who is deeply influenced by Robbins and his ability to fuse “mundane movements with a very formal intention,” one of the film’s most affecting scenes happens in the gym when Toni sweeps the floor with a push broom as Beezy, a fellow member of the dance team played by Alexis Neblett, who is actually Ms. Hightower’s stepsister — she’s an adorable sprite, the sky to Toni’s earth — chatters incessantly and dances around her.

“The way that Beezy moves is with complete freedom and joy, and that’s what she teaches Toni,” Ms. Holmer said. “Toni is literally moving back and forth across the floor on this prescribed path. It’s about Beezy inviting her to play. Toni has to break a routine — break the kind of choreography that she knows — in order to enter into this friendship. Audiences may see that scene as they’re sweeping in a gym, but I see it as dance.”


