


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

June is shaping up to be one hell of a TV month — the return of “Orange Is the New Black,” one of my favorites; the heralded ESPN O.J. Simpson documentary; the season finale of “The Americans”; even Shark Week. Something for everyone! Our TV cup runneth over.

Thank you to the tremendous number of you who wrote in with your ant-battling strategies, product recommendations and deep sympathy. I am glad to report that the situation appears to be under control. If you have any specific TV or movie questions you’d like answered here in the newsletter, ask away: watching@nytimes.com. Or if you’d like to share your big wishes for summer TV, I’m all ears.

… half an hour, and I have children:

Watch “All in With Cam Newton,” Friday, 8 p.m., Nickelodeon.

What wouldn’t I give for more shows to follow in the footsteps of MTV’s late great “Made,” which gave teenagers lifestyle makeovers. (“I’m a girlie girl, but I want to be a BMX rider.”) “All In” is close, at least: Carolina Panthers quarterback Cam Newton meets ambitious kids and introduces them to leaders in their dream fields. Some of these intros are more compelling than others, based on how telegenic everyone is, but it’s over all a sweet little show that is completely tolerable and borderline enjoyable at times.

… an hour, and I want nuclear level heebie-jeebies:

Watch “Outcast,” Friday, 10 p.m., Cinemax. (Or online for free, right now)

If you are at all a baby about scary things — bugs, blood, “Exorcist”-style evil kids — then this is not a show for you. But if you like those things, “Outcast” is your new jam. Created by Robert Kirkman of “The Walking Dead,” the show follows Kyle Barnes (Patrick Fugit, the teenage boy from “Almost Famous”), a young man haunted, psychologically and literally, by demonic possession afflicting those around him. Guess how creepy his small town is? Extremely! Fugit is terrific, the show’s general sense of menace and despair is striking, and at least in the first few episodes “Outcast” appears to have something to say beyond “boo.”

… all day, and I want to be transfixed:

Watch Season 2 of “Fargo,” Saturday, starting at 10 a.m., FX.

FX is airing the entire 10-episode second season of “Fargo” on Saturday, but it’s an anthology series, so don’t worry if you haven’t seen Season 1. (It’s great, though. Watch it on Hulu or buy it on iTunes.) Season 2 is set in 1979 and stars Patrick Wilson, Kirsten Dunst, Jesse Plemons and Ted Danson — all great, especially Plemons. A triple murder in a Waffle House sets off a series of odd events for those investigating the crime (Wilson and Danson) and those tangentially connected to it (Dunst and Plemons). The show’s dark wit keeps it from being too lugubrious, even as it covers multiple murders, but the real crown jewel here is the sound design. The snow’s groans as it’s stepped on; a mop’s slop-sound as it cleans a dingy linoleum floor; the gelatinous fight a casserole puts up as it’s dished out; the whooshing one’s arms make in a parka; the heavy clunk of a police badge on a wooden kitchen table. Listen hard, and I bet those 10 hours will go by in a flash. (Read along with our “Fargo” recaps.)

If you like unsentimental cop shows, ensemble dramas, realism or overlooked gems, this is a show for you. (Watch on Hulu)

“ER” and “Homicide: Life on the Streets” are two of the shows that taught me how and why to love TV. They’re shows I watched religiously in the ‘90s, ones I’ve rewatched over and over since, and those which I hold not just in nostalgic but also in present high regard. “Southland” reminds me a lot of both of those shows, except that it never made much of a splash. Now it’s on Hulu, though, and perhaps this is its chance.

“Southland” premiered in 2009 on NBC and was canceled after a season but rescued by TNT, where it aired four more seasons. It still clocks in at 43 episodes, so it’s a commitment but not a major one. The series is set among L.A.P.D. officers — beat cops, detectives, rookies, veterans. Episodes bounce between several different characters and several different cases, and generally the show is not a procedural; sometimes we see an investigation from beginning to end, but often not. Remember how on “ER” you’d sometimes see a patient “crash” and be revived, but not always see more of them or their eventual treatment? It’s like that.

The show has a jangly, aggressive rhythm, with jumpy visuals and quick editing. Everything has an urgent, often desperate vibe, and episodes open mid-moment, jump backward in time, then work forward up through and past the opening incident. That means sometimes we know more than the characters, sometimes less, and that balance changes throughout an episode, often in surprising ways.

“Southland” sets itself apart from many other cop shows with its format and style, but the biggest way it reminds me of “Homicide” is in the depth and variety of its performances. Do you like Michael Cudlitz in “The Walking Dead”? Man, you should see him in “Southland,” where he plays the abrasive, complicated Officer John Cooper — the show’s emotional center. Do you like Regina King in “The Leftovers” and “American Crime”? If this were a just world, she would have won an Emmy for “Southland,” too. Lucy Liu does a one-season arc in Season 4, and that’s great, too. Come for Ben McKenzie, stay for Tom Everett Scott and Kevin Alejandro.

I guess I’m supposed to call “Southland” “gritty,” since that’s what we call good cop shows, so sure: “Southland” is gritty in that is utterly unglamorous and its characters, major and minor, are not clear types. There are moments that sometimes remind me of “The Shield,” but “Southland” doesn’t position any of its characters as extraordinary. That’s not a knock on “The Shield” — I love “The Shield,” and you should, too (it’s also on Hulu) — but rather another possible reason “Southland” never quite caught on. It was an ensemble drama in the age of the antihero.

NETFLIX

The first three movies in the “Jurassic Park” franchise are now streaming. We’ve all already seen the first one a dozen times, but, like “Jaws,” it’s really a movie that’s hard to grow tired of. (Curious how the filmmakers made sounds like this one? Read this piece.) The sequel, “The Lost World,” which was also directed by Steven Spielberg, is not as great, although it has a stellar cast — Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Jeff Goldblum, Toby from “The West Wing” — and, like the first, a knockout T. Rex attack scene. “Jurassic Park III” also exists. (Stream “Jurassic Park,” “The Lost World: Jurassic Park” and “Jurassic Park III.”)

AMAZON PRIME

In New York this month, there’s a movie theater that has programmed a Brian De Palma retrospective. For those of you who live elsewhere, you can try “Carrie,” which still remains among the best Stephen King film adaptations 40 years later. If you’re looking for something more violent (though, ironically, less bloody) there’s Francis Ford Coppola’s Vietnam War classic “Apocalypse Now” and Sergio Leone’s spaghetti western classic “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly.” And for one of the most gorgeous of children’s movies, try “The Black Stallion.” (Stream “Carrie,” “Apocalypse Now,” “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly” and “The Black Stallion.” Amazon Prime and Hulu often share many of the same new movies added to stream each month, so you can also find these on Hulu as well.)

HBO

Do you like problem solving? Because “The Martian,” which stars Matt Damon and Troy from “Community,” is about two and a half hours of Damon trying to solve space problems. It’s a funny (though not “Best Motion Picture — Musical or Comedy” funny) movie with a great cast and a warm heart. (You can stream it on HBO Now and HBO Go, starting at 8 p.m. on Saturday.) — Gilbert Cruz

The TNT series “Animal Kingdom,” which will make its premiere June 14, is a TV version of the 2010 Australian film for which Jacki Weaver received her first Oscar nomination. (The film also stars Ben Mendelsohn, who is easily the best thing about Netflix’s “Bloodline.”) The story is moved to California from Australia, and Ellen Barkin takes Weaver’s role as a crime family matriarch. You can download the first episode for free on iTunes. – G.C.


