


SUNRISE, Fla. — In a matchup featuring old-school hockey and stellar goaltending on Friday, the Islanders came out ahead in Game 5 of their first-round Stanley Cup playoff series against the Florida Panthers.

While Florida’s Roberto Luongo and the Islanders’ Thomas Greiss engaged in yet another epic goaltending battle, Alan Quine scored the winning goal 16 minutes into the second overtime when, on a power play, he blasted a one-timer past the outstretched glove of Luongo to give the Islanders a 2-1 victory at BB&T Center. The game was the second-longest in Islanders history.

Game 6 will be Sunday at Barclays Center.

“It was one of those games,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We didn’t have to juggle too much. It’s about resiliency, and playing the right way.”

Marek Zidlicky and Thomas Hickey got the assists on the goal, Quine’s first ever in a playoff game.

“I certainly haven’t played a game that long in my life,” Quine said. “It was fun in the dog pile. It was worth it.”

The teams combined for 90 shots, with Greiss stopping 47 and Luongo turning back 40.

“It’s one of those game where the puck just finds you,” Greiss said.

It was the first Game 5 win for the Islanders since 1987 against the Philadelphia Flyers. The previous series that year, against Washington, ended on Pat LaFontaine’s goal in the fourth overtime of Game 7, the club’s longest game.

The Panthers missed a chance to win in the first overtime when Aleksander Barkov was awarded a penalty shot at the 7:19 mark after Islanders defenseman Calvin de Haan was called for covering the puck in the crease. It was the third time in Stanley Cup playoff history that a penalty shot had been awarded in overtime.

Greiss foiled Barkov, making a kick save with his left pad on Barkov’s backhand attempt.

“Every goalie is used to those situations,” Greiss said.

Barkov said of the shot: “The goalie made a great save, but I should have scored. I was pretty confident. I was nervous but sad that it didn’t go in.”

The Capitals’ Joe Juneau was stopped by the Penguins’ Ken Wregget in 1996, and Andy Moog of the Canadiens stopped Aleksey Morozov of the Penguins in 1998. The Panthers’ Jaromir Jagr, the oldest player in the N.H.L. at 44, was involved in all three games.

Frans Nielsen put the Islanders on the board by banging home the rebound of Thomas Hickey’s wrist shot from the slot 13:31 into the first period, silencing the crowd.

Greiss withstood a second-period flurry by the Panthers, who outshot the Islanders, 14-7.

But 1:59 into the third period, Barkov tied the game with a one-timer from the short side off a cross-ice pass from Alex Petrovic. Jagr was also credited with an assist. Capuano used his challenge, arguing that Petrovic had been offside, but the goal stood.

Both teams seemed to be running out of gas through the remainder of the period as Luongo and Greiss stood their ground in the crease. Luongo snuffed out a 2-on-1 rush with just over five minutes left in regulation when he secured a wrist shot by Nick Leddy from the right circle.

Florida called timeout at 14:51 to regroup, and when play resumed, Luongo smothered the puck again after a flurry in front of his net.

To counter the Islanders’ effective fourth line of Cal Clutterbuck, Matt Martin and Casey Cizikas, Florida opened the game with Derek MacKenzie at center, Garrett Wilson at left wing and Logan Shaw at right wing, with Aaron Ekblad and Michael Matheson on defense.

Panthers center Nick Bjugstad was called for high-sticking at 2:53 of the first period, giving the Islanders a power play. The Islanders had already jumped out to a 4-1 advantage in shots, but Florida’s penalty kill was up to the task.

As has been the case throughout the series, the momentum swings were tangible, with the Panthers turning up the heat after the Islanders came up empty on the power play and pulling even on shots, at 5-5, by 10:44.

Bjugstad came up with a steal at the blue line and had a clear path down the left wing with just over eight minutes left, but Greiss swallowed up his slap shot. The line of Jagr, Barkov and Jonathan Huberdeau kept the pressure on Greiss but could not get off a quality shot.

“It’s a tough loss,” Panthers Coach Gerard Gallant said. “We played a great game again tonight. The mood is a little bit down, but by the time they get home and they get something to eat, they’ll be ready to go back and go to New York and have a great game.”

Florida have now lost seven straight overtime playoff games, including last Sunday’s Game 3.

SLAP SHOTS

Panthers center Vincent Trocheck returned after missing almost a month with a foot injury and gave his teammates an emotional boost. ... The Islanders rookie defenseman Ryan Pulock did not make the trip to Florida because of an upper-body injury and is likely to be out for the remainder of the series. ... Marek Zidlicky took Pulock’s place in the lineup.


