


BALTIMORE — Two establishment Democrats — Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland and Katie McGinty, a former chief of staff to the governor of Pennsylvania — won key Senate primaries on Tuesday, ending a contentious primary season in both states.

In Baltimore, The Associated Press declared another favorite of the party establishment, State Senator Catherine E. Pugh, the winner out of a crowded field of mayoral candidates, with the victor in this heavily Democratic city almost certain to prevail in November. The vote came on the eve of Wednesday’s first anniversary of the unrest over the death of Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old black man fatally injured in police custody.

In Pennsylvania, Ms. McGinty will face Senator Patrick J. Toomey, a vulnerable Republican, in one of the races that could help determine control of the Senate. Tuesday’s vote was a test of the strength of the Obama White House and Senate Democrats, who threw their weight behind Ms. McGinty. She lost the 2014 Democratic primary to Gov. Tom Wolf, but later served as his chief of staff and has received his endorsement.

On Tuesday, the two campaigned together in downtown Philadelphia, where Ms. McGinty shook hands with pedestrians. Sekou Davis, 41, a street vendor selling umbrellas and roses, said he voted for her because of her gender.

“I have two daughters, a sister and a mother, and I believe that the heart of our nation is really through the woman,” he said.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. twice campaigned for Ms. McGinty, and President Obama narrated her closing advertisements on radio and television. She also had the backing of Emily’s List, the political action committee that helps elect Democratic women who favor abortion rights.

Ms. McGinty defeated former Representative Joe Sestak, a retired Navy admiral who earned a Ph.D. in political economy from Harvard and has cast himself as a maverick. Mr. Sestak had portrayed his lack of party support as payback: In 2010, he infuriated Democratic Party leaders by refusing to step aside in a primary campaign against Senator Arlen Specter, a longtime Republican who became a Democrat to run in that race.

Mr. Sestak won that primary, and was ultimately embraced by the White House, but lost the general election to Mr. Toomey by two points. In an interview Monday, he said he had been asked to follow orders from party officials in exchange for support against Ms. McGinty.

“One of the senators said, ‘Joe, you have a reputation for independence, we’re going to have to work on that,’” Mr. Sestak said.

“I don’t think I’ve ever been forgiven” for running against Mr. Specter, he added.

Mr. Sestak, 64, had far greater name recognition and began the race with a big lead. But Ms. McGinty, 52, narrowed the gap in its waning days.

Ms. McGinty, a former chemist and lawyer who worked on environmental policy for President Bill Clinton and later ran environmental businesses, rejected Mr. Sestak’s assertions that she was the establishment candidate. In an interview on Tuesday, she said she had earned Mr. Obama’s support by helping shepherd his agenda in Pennsylvania, including the expansion of Medicaid, in her role as the governor’s chief of staff.

The Maryland Senate primary race between Mr. Van Hollen, a white man, and Representative Donna Edwards, a black woman, exposed deep fissures within the Democratic coalition over race, gender and class. The two, both progressive Democrats and both lawyers, were battling for the relatively safe Democratic seat held by Barbara A. Mikulski, the longest-serving female senator in the nation’s history. Like Ms. McGinty, Ms. Edwards had the backing of Emily’s List.

Polls before the primary showed a deep racial divide among voters, yet that played out in sometimes surprising ways. At a polling place in a racially mixed East Baltimore neighborhood on Tuesday, Tiffany Powell, 50, who is white, said she voted for Ms. Edwards because “we don’t need another white guy in the Senate.”

But Erik Pihlgren, 43, who is black, voted for Mr. Van Hollen. He said Ms. Edwards’s argument that the Senate needed a black woman’s voice did not resonate with him. “I don’t think that’s a qualifier,” he said.

Democrats nearly always prevail in Maryland, especially in presidential years. (In 2014, Maryland picked a Republican, Larry Hogan, for governor.) Ms. Mikulski’s planned retirement also created hard-fought Democratic primaries to succeed Mr. Van Hollen and Ms. Edwards.

In Baltimore, a majority black city, the legacy of Freddie Gray’s death hovered over Tuesday’s voting.

Some of the hundreds of poll workers who showed up for training on how to distribute pamphlets for Ms. Pugh arrived late — or had not previously signed up — and were told they would not be paid the $100 they expected. They grew unruly, smashing a window and slashing tires on two Pugh campaign vehicles.

Ms. Pugh stepped in to quell the violence, said her spokesman, Anthony McCarthy, and insisted that all workers be paid. “It was a very trying morning,” Mr. McCarthy said.

Kwame Rose, 21, a self-described “college dropout” who was moved to activism by Mr. Gray’s death, voted for the first time on Tuesday. Mr. Rose, who had been organizing protests this past year, was escorted to the polls by Ms. Pugh, whom he endorsed.

“It was phenomenal,” Mr. Rose said. “It was far easier, but a far greater power as an individual than I ever could imagine.”


