


LONDON — Philips, the Dutch electronics giant, said on Tuesday that it planned to list an initial public offering of its lighting business on the Euronext stock exchange in Amsterdam.

Philips first announced plans in 2014 to spin off the lighting business as part of a reshaping of the company to focus on health care and technology. Since then, the company has pursued a dual-track effort to separate the lighting division through either a public offering or a private sale.

Late last month, Philips said it was “more likely” the company would pursue an I.P.O.

“Today’s announcement is an historic one for Philips as we aim to separate our company into two market-leading companies focused on capturing opportunities in health technology and connected LED lighting solutions markets, respectively,” Frans van Houten, the Philips chief executive, said in a news release.

“We believe that the recent performance of both companies demonstrates that the fundamentals are in place for long-term profitable growth and that Philips Lighting is well positioned for success as a stand-alone company,” he added.

The offering would consist of at least 25 percent of Philips Lighting’s shares. The proceeds from the listing would go to Philips.

Philips would retain a majority of the company’s shares, with a plan to fully sell down its ownership over the next several years.

The lighting business includes divisions that produce traditional light bulbs and LED lamps and that design complete lighting systems. The business had about 34,000 employees and posted sales of 7.4 billion euros, or about $8.5 billion, in 2015.

In April, Philips said that it was “actively engaging” with interested parties about the separate sale of its automotive and LED components business, Lumileds.

In January, Philips called off the sale of a controlling stake in the Lumileds business to GO Scale Capital, an investment fund sponsored by GSR Ventures of China and Oak Investment Partners, because of regulatory concerns raised in the United States.

Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase are acting as global co-coordinators on the offering.


