


Mayor Bill de Blasio and the City Council agreed on Wednesday on an $82.1 billion budget for New York City that adds tens of millions in new spending for initiatives, including summer jobs for youths, after-school programs and reserve funds to help the city weather an economic downturn.

The handshake deal, reached hours before the mayor was to depart for his daughter’s college graduation in California, was the earliest reached since 2001, according to the mayor’s office, and contained few surprises or major new efforts beyond those announced in the executive budget.

Despite the additional spending pushed by the Council, including an extra $21 million to keep libraries open six days a week and $10 million for cultural organizations in the five boroughs, the final number agreed upon was slightly less than what had been proposed in the mayor’s executive budget in late April. The budget contains no job or staff cuts; reductions came mostly from more accurately estimating costs across the city bureaucracy.

“Give-and-take is a wonderful thing in a democratic process when it leads to a productive result and that’s what’s happened here,” Mr. de Blasio said from the steps under the City Hall rotunda amid a buoyant group of council members.

In a vote next week, the Council is expected to formally adopt the budget, which increases city spending by about 4 percent over last year’s level, Council officials said.

Standing with Mr. de Blasio, the Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, celebrated the speed with which negotiations yielded what she called a “smart, responsible budget.” She interrupted herself at one point to tell the mayor — smiling broadly as he joked with another council member — to keep it down. “He misses being on the Council, I can tell,” she said.

Expanding the number of summer jobs, through the city’s decades-old initiative known as the Summer Youth Employment Program, had been a priority for many council members, who secured an additional $18 million for the program in order to create about 60,000 positions this summer, according to the mayor’s office. The budget also allocated funds to keep beaches open an extra week after Labor Day.

District attorneys’ offices in the five boroughs received more money, to increase salaries and support programs to combat domestic violence and the city’s heroin and opioid epidemic, the mayor’s office said.

Some spending was eliminated, including $20 million earmarked for the Board of Elections if it agreed to a series of improvements aimed at addressing Election Day voting issues. The money was taken away, Mr. de Blasio said, because the board had yet to accept the changes.

And Ms. Mark-Viverito conceded that an operating budget gap remained at the beleaguered NYC Health & Hospitals, which runs the city’s public hospitals. She had previously criticized the mayor’s budget for its reliance on state and federal cooperation to close it. “There’s a lot of work to be done in that area,” she said on Wednesday.

As to whether his impending flight hastened the completion of negotiations, Mr. de Blasio said, “The goal is really simple: Get to the handshake at the first available moment.”


