


One of three teenagers who slipped out of a group home and raped a woman in a Manhattan stairwell was sentenced to 14 years in prison on Wednesday after he gave a short apology in court.

Justice Maxwell Wiley said that while he accepted a defense lawyer’s argument that teenagers should be treated more leniently than adults because their brains are not fully developed, he thought the brutality of the crime still warranted a long prison term for the defendant, Eric Pek, who is 17.

“The conduct in this case went beyond rash, went beyond dangerous, went beyond reprehensible,” Justice Wiley said in State Supreme Court in Manhattan. “It was borderline sadistic.”

Mr. Pek had pleaded guilty to rape, robbery and burglary, as had his two co-defendants, Sanat Asliev and Emanuel Burrowes, putting themselves at the mercy of the court. All three were 16 years old and were living at a home for juvenile offenders in Brooklyn when they were arrested in June. Mr. Pek had been sent to the home after being found guilty of trespassing and possession of stolen property.

The three teenagers admitted in their pleas they had accosted the woman, 33, inside an Internet cafe at 75 Eldridge Street in Chinatown at 3:30 a.m. on June 1, groping her repeatedly.

Then they took the woman to the stairwell of a nearby apartment building, where they beat her and raped her for an hour, leaving her bruised, bloodied and dazed, prosecutors said. After the assault, they stole her cellphone, credit cards and keys, and entered her apartment in Chelsea, walking in on her male roommate, a prosecutor, Amanda Goun, said.

The home in Park Slope where the teenagers had been living, which was operated by Boys Town, was closed down shortly after the attack. City investigators later found severe lapses in security and staff shortages at the home, where employees had not only failed to monitor their charges through the night but had also doctored records to cover up mistakes. This month, three Boys Town employees were arraigned on charges of falsifying records.


