


It’s inevitable that the next six installments of the monthly jobs report before the November election will be judged by their political implications. So let’s save some time by looking at the April numbers, released Friday, through that prism.

Hillary Clinton should be feeling pretty good about the economy, but a little less good than she did before the report’s release at 8:29 a.m. If Donald Trump wants to make assailing the Obama economy a centerpiece of his campaign, he has a bit more of a leg to stand on than he did previously.

This was a mildly disappointing report. The total of 160,000 jobs added last month was below the 200,000 forecasters expected, and revisions subtracted 19,000 from the last two months’ previously announced job gains. But those numbers are volatile and probably mean nothing; job gains were even weaker in August and September of last year, and that didn’t signal any meaningful economic slowdown, just the usual ups and downs of these numbers.

And for the rubber-meets-road dimension of the economy for most workers — compensation — the new data are solid. Average hourly earnings rose by 0.3 percent in April, and are up 2.5 percent over the last year. That’s within the range where wage gains have hovered for years now, but in a time of low inflation it signals meaningful improvement in American workers’ purchasing power.

The real bad news in the new data isn’t in the headline numbers but in the details of the survey of American households that generated the (unchanged) 5 percent unemployment rate. For six straight months, the labor force had been growing, including a gangbuster start to 2016 in which 1.5 million more people were counted as either working or looking for work. That was promising news. It suggested that many of the millions who left the labor force during the 2008 recession and the long, slow, recovery were returning.

Those numbers reversed in April, though, as the labor force shrank by 362,000 people and the labor force participation rate fell by 0.2 percentage points.

This too may turn out to be a statistical blip, but it suggests the buoyant story that was told by the first three jobs reports of the year — of a big return of disaffected workers to the labor force — isn’t quite true. Including the April drop, the labor force has increased by an average of 273,000 a month so far in 2016, which is still an excellent result — but a good bit less excellent than the 484,000 monthly gain that was evident from January through March.

For the Federal Reserve, this report will cut two ways. Softer job growth and the reversal on the labor force will weaken the case for raising interest rates in June, while steady wage growth will support the case. On net that will probably make the central bank a little less inclined to move forward with a rate increase than previously, but it’s a close call.

But this is the kind of report that shouldn’t lead anyone to radically rethink assumptions about how the economy is doing. Job growth is steady. Wages are rising, faster than inflation but not as fast as workers might prefer. The basic trend of workers rejoining the labor force remains valid, but isn’t as robust as it had seemed based on the first three months of 2016.

Only six more months of job numbers to go before the Nov. 8 election. Mark your calendars now as we wait to see whether that basic pattern holds for another half a year.


