


Interior design projects that don’t go well, or don’t happen at all, tend to have one thing in common: a failure of vision. You may fail to envision what you want, and do nothing. Or your vision, when completed, fails to match your fantasy. You live surrounded by your regret or spend even more to fix it.

But increasingly, technology offers ways to better visualize, say, how a costly couch would look in your living room or how a proposed kitchen renovation would come together. Virtual reality, augmented reality and 3D renderings are the latest tools designers and retailers are using to give clients a clearer vision of projects and purchases before they commit.

“A lot of design is trying to explain yourself,” said Kevin Hecker of Sea Cliff, N.Y., a software engineer who needed help furnishing the living room of the Victorian-style house he shares with his wife and three children. “You have a feeling of what you want, but it’s hard to articulate. You just know it when you see it.”

That’s why last fall he chose Decorilla, an online interior design service that offers virtual reality depictions of room redesigns. After sending photographs and dimensions of his living room and discussing his style preferences with a Decorilla designer, Mr. Hecker inserted his smartphone into virtual reality goggles he received in the mail to view the designer’s proposal.

“It really looked like our living room,” Mr. Hecker said. “It’s wild. With virtual reality, you can see how multiple pieces go together and from different views, as if you’re walking around.”

He liked what he saw so much, he ended up buying everything (aside from the fur-covered ottoman, because he and his wife were morally opposed) and arranging it just as the designer had suggested. Most of the items came from familiar retailers like West Elm and Crate & Barrel. Mr. Hecker said the discounts he received by buying through Decorilla more than paid for the $445 design fee.

Decorilla’s prices range from $400 to $1,300, depending on the size of the room and the designer’s experience. Alternatively, the online interior design service Havenly charges a flat $199 per room, which includes emailed 3D visualizations of proposed designs.

Three-dimensional plans are not as immersive or as cool as virtual reality, but they do give you a pretty good sense of what your space would look like. Havenly’s renderings are created from photographs of your room overlaid with suggested furnishings, paint color, window treatments, accessories and other additions. Everything is to scale, giving you a sense of depth and proportion.

“We do a lot of testing around here and tried providing the service without the visualization piece,” said Lee Mayer, a co-founder and the chief executive of Havenly. “But when you get a rendering of your space, it creates a 15 to 20 percent lift in your likelihood to purchase through us the furnishings our designer suggested.”

It’s not surprising, then, that some retailers have started developing visualization apps to help customers be more comfortable buying furnishings online.

Because of the expense and level of difficulty, only a few are experimenting with virtual reality. Examples include the Swedish furniture maker Ikea and Doing It Right This Time, or DIRTT, a Canadian company that builds prefab office and residential interiors, including cabinetry, bookshelves and partitions.

Others, like FabIndia, an Indian home and lifestyle brand, are testing augmented reality, often described as “virtual reality lite,” because rather than wearing special goggles, you hold your phone or tablet as if you were about to take a picture of your room and then dynamically bring into view objects such as sofas, tables and chairs from retail catalogs.

“Our products are a significant investment, so we want people to know what to expect before it’s shipped and delivered,” said Calvin Haggard, the chief executive of United States Stove Company, explaining why the nearly 150-year-old manufacturing business began offering an augmented reality app. “The items shown on the app are to scale, so you’re not guessing if things will fit. And you can try out enameled or cast iron and various colors, so you can see what matches your décor.”

There are also free D.I.Y. interior design apps that use augmented reality, including Adornably, Homestyler, Virtual Interior Home Decoration Tool and iStaging. But they are more difficult to use, and offer only a limited (and not that appealing) selection of items.

Although virtual reality, augmented reality and 3D renderings have varying degrees of verisimilitude, many design experts and homeowners agree that they are better than leaving things to the imagination, and they are much easier to decipher than a blueprint.

“It’s definitely the wave of the future, because it allows the general population to make design decisions without feeling hesitant or insecure,” said Khoi Vo, a professor and the chair of the department of interior design at Savannah College of Art and Design. “These programs allow us to not only show, ‘Here’s what a design will look like,’ but ‘Here’s what it will look like at night during a full moon and here’s what it will look like during the day.’”

But, he said, the expense and expertise required to create virtual reality renderings that are lifelike rather than cartoonish remain high hurdles.

For some, a 3D rendering may be just as good.

Kathryn Schmahl, a health care marketing consultant in River Forest, Ill., found 3D renderings from Havenly more than adequate for redesigning the circa 1879 wood-plank farmhouse she shares with her husband and two young sons. And they were much more helpful, she said, than the collages of proposed items provided by an interior designer with whom she had worked and had paid nearly $10,000.

“It was amazing to me that I could send pictures and describe what I wanted and get emailed to me my room redesigned exactly how it would look — even down to what’s behind the windows, like I’d see a tree if there was a tree,” said Ms. Schmahl, who over the last year has used Havenly to redo almost every room in her house.

There is also demand to use this kind of visualization technology recreationally. Some people, it seems, are requesting depictions of their space redesigned with no intention of making any changes.

“We notice a small subsegment who keep coming back and going through the design process for fun, but don’t want to go through the money or actual hassle of doing anything,” said Ms. Mayer of Havenly. “We’ve had one customer come back to us seven times for the same room.”

No doubt sharing the results on social media.


