


Isabelle Huppert, the French actress who starred alongside Cate Blanchett in Lincoln Center Festival’s production of Genet’s “The Maids” in 2014, will return to the New York stage in the title role of “Phaedra(s)” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in September.

The play, a postmodern take on the classic tragedy, reconstructs Phaedra’s tale from three sources — including J.M. Coetzee’s 2003 novel, “Elizabeth Costello” — and is among the 30-plus interdisciplinary productions BAM has planned for its 2016 Next Wave Festival, which runs from Sept. 7 through Dec. 18.

“Phaedra(s)” (Sept. 13-18), a production of Odéon-Théâtre de l’Europe in Paris, is adapted and directed by the Polish director Krzysztof Warlikowski. Ms. Huppert, playing the doomed queen grappling with desire for her stepson, will perform in French with English titles.

Other theatrical productions include “Kings of War” (Nov. 3-5) — a marathon adaptation of Shakespeare’s “Henry V,” “Richard III,” and Parts 1, 2 and 3 of “Henry VI” into a single play — performed by the troupe Toneelgroep Amsterdam and directed by Ivo van Hove (“The Crucible”). Mikhail Baryshnikov, who presented his one-man show “Brodsky/Baryshnikov” earlier this year, will star in “Letter to a Man” (Oct. 15-30), his adaptation, with the experimental director Robert Wilson, based on the diaries of the Ballets Russes dancer and choreographer Vaslav Nijinsky.

Opening the festival is “the loser” (Sept. 7-11), an opera by David Lang that will transform BAM’s Howard Gilman Opera House. The orchestra level, which contains hundreds of seats, will be closed and converted into a stage, over which the opera’s title character (Rod Gilfrey, of “Anna Nicole” at Next Wave in 2013) will be held in midair, with a grand piano hovering in the distance behind him. On Sept. 30 and Oct. 1, Donnacha Dennehy — the Irish composer who had a critically divisive opera debut with “The Last Hotel” — will present “The Hunger,” about Ireland’s famine in the mid-1800s.

Other music offerings include Wordless Music’s screening of Terrence Malick’s 2011 film, “The Tree of Life” (Nov. 18-19), with a live orchestra performing the soundtrack, classical music that includes works by Mahler, Brahms and Bach. On Dec. 2 and 3 the Magnetic Fields will perform “50 Song Memoir,” 50 songs written by the band’s Stephin Merritt for each year of his life.

Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker, the choreographer whose recent works have explored the relationship between dance and music, will continue with this fixation in “Vortex Temporum” (Oct. 14-15), an evening-length work in which she homes in on contemporary music — specifically the title work by the spectralist composer Gérard Grisey. Dance programs also include an evening-length adaptation of the 1991 film “Boyz N the Hood” by the MacArthur recipient Kyle Abraham (Nov. 2-5) and “Rules of the Game” (Nov. 10-12), a mixed bill with music by Pharrell Williams, in his debut composing for the stage.

Closing the festival is Mark Morris’s comic take on “The Nutcracker,” “The Hard Nut” (Dec. 10-18), which returned to BAM last year after a five-year absence and will continue to take the place of American Ballet Theater’s “The Nutcracker,” which moved to the West Coast after its final run at BAM in 2014.

The full lineup for Next Wave is at BAM’s website.


