


Sarah Kathleen Trigg Rapp, a daughter of Mary Kathleen Trigg and Ronald J. Rapp of Bernardsville, N.J., was married June 4 to Adam Zachary Wilson, a son of Sharon A. Kaitz and Dr. Jonathan M. Wilson of Newton, Mass. Sarah Sliwa, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, officiated at the Farm at Pond Lily in Elizaville, N.Y.

The bride, 29, works in New York as the head of product marketing at Behance, a network for creative professionals to showcase their graphic design and other artwork. She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard.

The groom, 34, is an adjunct professor of creative writing at Columbia and N.Y.U. He is the author of the “What’s Important Is Feeling” and “Flatscreen.” He graduated from Tufts and received a master’s degree in creative writing at Columbia.

The couple met in September 2006 through mutual friends at a bar on the Upper West Side, when Ms. Rapp was a sophomore at Barnard and Mr. Wilson was in the first year of his master’s program at Columbia.

“He seemed really interesting and smart,” she said, “but he was five years older than me, so I saw him as this intimidating grad student.”

They went their separate ways but crossed paths again in January 2007, when a friend took Ms. Rapp with her to another Manhattan bar to hear Mr. Wilson read a short story that he had written as part of his course work.

“I was very impressed,” Ms. Rapp said.

So was Mr. Wilson, who got a chance to talk, albeit briefly, with her that night. “I thought she was very smart and very beautiful,” he said.

The following week, she saw him again, this time at a lunch gathering of friends in Manhattan. She approached him and asked if she could film and interview him for a class assignment on messy bathrooms. He agreed, and about a week later, she was at his Upper West Side apartment, taking notes.

“He definitely had a messy bathroom,” she said, laughing. “A 20-something-year-old guy living alone, it wasn’t a very pretty scene.”

As far as he was concerned, he had cleared a difficult hurdle.

“The fact that she was still laughing and talking to me after seeing my bathroom was a very good sign,” he said.

In the ensuing weeks, they both got too bogged down in their studies to make room for each other on their social calendars. But in July, when they bumped into each other on the Upper West Side, Mr. Wilson seized the moment by asking Ms. Rapp on an impromptu date to a bar in Chinatown to watch a friend’s band perform.

She agreed, and arrived there separately that night in the company of friends. They met up with Mr. Wilson and some of his friends at the front door, but on their way in, both Ms. Rapp and Mr. Wilson realized that neither had enough cash to pay the cover charge, so they took off into the night together in search of an A.T.M.

The spent a half-hour in search of cash, which paid handsome dividends in terms of creating a bond between them.

“She was so energetic and fun to be around,” he said.

“Being with him and talking was so easy,” she said. “With other guys I had gone out with, I always felt like I had to drag a conversation out of them. But this was just the opposite: He was dragging conversation out of me.”

They eventually returned to the bar, and afterward their group went back to the roof deck of Mr. Wilson’s apartment building to hang out in the early morning hours. It was there that the two exchanged their first kiss.

When Ms. Rapp arrived home, she glanced at her calendar and couldn’t help but notice the date that had marked the first real steps of her journey with him: 07-07-07.

“That’s the day our relationship really started,” she said. “It was my luckiest day for sure.”


