


The International Cycling Union imposed unusually severe sanctions Tuesday against Femke Van den Driessche, the first rider found to be enhancing her performance through the use of electric motors rather than drugs.

The disciplinary commission of the sport’s governing body fined Van den Driessche 20,000 Swiss francs, about $20,500, and ordered her to pay its legal costs and to return prize money dating to October 2015. Van den Driessche, a once-promising 19-year-old, was stripped of her title as the under-23 European champion and Belgian national champion for the same age group.

Van den Driessche has also been suspended for six years, an unusually long period for a first cycling offense. But that may have little significance. Shortly before the disciplinary hearing that led to the ruling,Van den Driessche said she would quit cycling and drop her claims that the doctored bike had belonged to a friend.

By contrast, in its most recent conventional doping conviction, Lloyd Mondory, a professional road racer from France, was suspended for four years for EPO use. He was fined an undisclosed amount based on his salary, which was redacted in the ruling.

Speculation had circulated for years of riders using small motors hidden in the frames or the wheels to provide short, extra boosts of power during races. In January, officials from the cycling union with a newly developed magnetic resonance scanner attached to a tablet computer found an anomaly in a bike used by Van den Driessche at the World Cyclocross Championships in her native Belgium.

A subsequent physical inspection discovered a motor and battery hidden inside the frame of the bike.

“This new method of testing has proved in trials to be extremely effective in locating hidden motors or other forms of technological fraud as it quickly detects motors, magnetic fields and solid objects concealed in a frame or components,” the cycling union said in a statement.

The cycling union said that Van den Driessche operated the device by using a switch hidden under her handlebar tape, which used a wireless Bluetooth connection to the motor.

During the cyclocross championship, Van den Driessche was riding as a member of the Belgian national team. Because she offered no defense, it is not known who modified her bicycle or how the conversion was funded.

Cyclocross, an ancestor of sorts of mountain biking, mixes pavement with sections on dirt, mud, sand and grass and can require riders to run short distances. During particularly muddy or sandy races, riders will exchange their bicycles for clean ones at a service pit and will thus bring two or more bikes to events. When she was still claiming innocence, Van den Driessche said that a mechanic had mistakenly added the doctored bicycle to her equipment. The doctored bike was discovered in the pit area.


