


PETERSFIELD, ENGLAND — The countryside between the outermost London suburbs and the English Channel is a patchwork of woodlands, farmers’ fields and hedgerows, and even the occasional vineyard — interspersed with pretty market towns and villages with venerable pubs at their centers — rising to the long ridge of low chalk hills known as the South Downs.

Since April 2011, this corner of England has been marked by a barely visible boundary: the perimeter of the 627 square miles of the South Downs National Park, the newest of Britain’s 15 such parks, straddling the counties of Hampshire, West Sussex and East Sussex.

But, in real estate terms, this is a perimeter that matters: Many buyers in Britain are prepared to dig deep into their pockets for the privilege of living in a national park, an official recognition of an attractive and distinctive natural environment worthy of protection. Restrictions on new construction in national parks mean that homes falling within the boundary have a scarcity premium, too.

According to research by the estate agency Savills, in 2015 detached houses within the boundary of the South Downs National Park cost an average of 57.6 percent more than the same type of property in the three counties it sits in. Of all Britain’s national parks, only in the Lake District did an address within the boundary come at a higher premium (64.8 percent more than the average value of like-for-like real estate elsewhere in the county of Cumbria).

A property currently on the market in the high end of what is now very much a sellers’ market is a former vicarage in East Meon, a village five miles from Petersfield, which — with around 15,000 residents — is the largest town within the South Downs National Park. Petersfield, in Hampshire, is a pleasant if largely unremarkable town with a handsome market square and train service to central London taking around 65 minutes.

This six-bedroom, three-bathroom home was built in the 19th century and has period features such as colorful floor tiles and original doors and door frames. The facade of the house, which has a total of 5,748 square feet of living space spread across three stories, is a mix of red brick and flint; the latter is a typical building material in South Downs.

The property also has an outdoor swimming pool and a tennis court on its three and a half acres of grounds. A coach house, adjacent to the main home, is used as a combined garage and stable. The asking price is 2.85 million pounds, or $4.1 million, through the Knight Frank agency.

The home, known locally as the Old Vicarage, has a servant call bell system made up of wires and pulleys. The call bell system no longer works but could be restored if a buyer wished, said George Clarendon, the Knight Frank agent handling the sale, adding that it “brought to mind ‘Downton Abbey,”’ the popular British television drama.

Whether the next owners will bring the servant bell back to life or rip it out of the walls is unknown, but their reasons for buying in this western section of South Downs are more predictable. “The main draws are the beautiful, unspoilt countryside, attractive villages, excellent schools and good access to London,” said Mr. Clarendon, who estimates that 40 percent to 60 percent of buyers of properties of £2.5 million and above — the high end of the real estate market in this western section of South Downs — are families relocating from the British capital.

The Petersfield area is also something of high school education hub: Some buyers are attracted to its clutch of prestigious “public” (meaning, in Britain, private and usually longstanding) schools such as Bedales, a 760-student establishment known for its progressive teaching methods and the school of choice of a number of celebrity parents, who are sometimes seen in local stores and pubs. Other public schools in South Downs have traditionally educated the children of officers serving overseas in the British armed forces.

In the village of Hambleton, nine miles from Petersfield and also within the boundary of the National Park, is Whitedale House, a mainly 18th-century detached home with nine bedrooms, seven bathrooms and a billiards room. The property has wine cellars described by the estate agency handling the sale as “extensive.” Its 21 acres of grounds contain a swimming pool, a tennis court, guest cottage, stables, herb garden and a lake suitable for swimming. Shuttered windows on the southeastern facade of the main dwelling give the house a slightly Gallic appearance.

Whitedale House — which has been given a Grade II listing through Historic England, which means that it may not be altered or extended without formal permission — has an asking price of £5.25 million, through Savills.

Middle-class families looking for homes in the £750,000 to £1.25 million price bracket in Petersfield and other settlements within commuting distance from London are having to fend off increasingly tough competition.

According to Tim Slaney, director of planning for the South Downs National Park Authority, although there is no formal ceiling on the total number of new dwellings, approval for building new dwellings is given “only in places where it is appropriate, for example close to current settlements and only at a scale and nature appropriate to each individual town or village.”

According to the data drawn up by Mr. Slaney’s office, in the year to the end of March 2015 a net total of 249 new homes were completed in the national park, 83 percent of which were built on previously developed land. It was the highest number of new homes delivered in the area now covered by the National Park in any year since 2008-9.

Not everyone is pleased at the prospect of earth movers arriving to disturb Petersfield’s leafy fringes. One group of residents has banded together to oppose an application to build a 200-home project, to be sited partly in a meadow.

Finding a balance between preserving the environment and finding space for a growing population is not, of course, a challenge unique to South Downs. The national park is just 45 miles from Trafalgar Square in London at its closest point. Pressure in the capital’s housing market has an effect in markets in other parts of southeast England, and the Petersfield area is no exception.

“We’re very different to many other national parks in the U.K.,” Mr. Slaney said. “We’re a vital green lung in the most populous part of the country.”


