


Brooklyn or SoHo? The choice “was a complete no-brainer,” said Tali Livni, who grabbed a one-bedroom co-op apartment in 2014 for $475,000 on Thompson Street in SoHo, though it was a sixth-floor walk-up. She had been renting in Brooklyn and was looking for apartments there, despite a long commute to work in the financial district, because she believed it would be easier to find a home within her budget.

Then she took a peek at listings in Lower Manhattan, “and this came up.” It is “close to every amenity,” said Ms. Livni, 36, who is now about a 15-minute subway ride away from her job as a product designer.

She knew that SoHo is a mostly high-priced area that draws hordes of tourists and other visitors to the stores that line many of its streets, she said, “but once you get to know the shop owners and neighbors, it has a real community feel. It’s like a village.” The owners of a French restaurant in her building know her by name, and workers at a local pet store know her dog, Lexi.

Ms. Livni is also intrigued by quirky older shops she has seen. “I feel I’ve only begun to scratch the surface of the quirk,” she said.

But SoHo isn’t nearly as eccentric as it used to be, said Lynne Kanter, who has lived in a fifth-floor walk-up studio there since 1973, in the era when artists and others had just started moving into former industrial buildings, some of them on cobblestone streets, and transforming them into loft spaces for working and living.

“There were dancers on fire escapes and performances in the street,” she said, along with myriad gallery openings and late nights at bars. “It’s been changing for years” from that early “rough-around-the-edges” time, said Ms. Kanter, 70, who first rented her apartment for $288 a month, then bought it for about $36,000 when her building became a co-op in 1989. She has worked in many fields, she said, including photography, acting, magazine editing and real estate.

Her street is not as frenetic as shopping meccas like Broadway or West Broadway, she said, “but I’m glad I have a place in the country for the warmer months.” In 2000, she bought a cabin in Bethel, N.Y., where she retreats on summer weekends, when the crowds on nearby streets can get “crazy,” she said.

Leaving town on weekends is also a priority for Peri Wolfman, a designer who owns a house in Southampton, N.Y., as well as a loft in SoHo with her husband, Charles Gold, a photographer and real estate manager. They opened one of the first chic stores in the area, Wolfman-Gold and Good Company, which sold home furnishings and accessories in the 1980s and 1990s until Ms. Wolfman, now 76, became a vice president of Williams-Sonoma. They didn’t move to SoHo until 1990, she said, after all four of their sons had left for college, because in those days, she said, she felt the area was not conducive to raising children. They bought their loft on Greene Street for well under a million dollars, she said.

“I fell in love with SoHo — the architecture, the arched doorways and windows,” she said. The building on Prince Street that is now an Apple Store was still a post office, and Dean & DeLuca, which had opened in 1977, was the only supermarket nearby.

Ms. Wolfman said her surroundings are still peaceful, and friendly, on weekdays. “You live in a bubble,” she said. “The old buildings have thick walls, there’s no crime and no problems. It’s a lovely place to live, really.”

What You’ll Find

SoHo extends from Houston Street on the north to Canal Street on the south, and roughly from Lafayette Street on the east to Avenue of the Americas on the west, though its eastern and western boundaries are sometimes defined differently.

Robin Goldberg, an agent with Halstead Property who has long worked in the area, said that besides the “beautiful huge lofts” for which the neighborhood is known, there are lower-priced areas, particularly west of West Broadway on streets like Thompson, Sullivan and Macdougal, outside the SoHo-Cast Iron Historic District designated in 1973 and extended in 2010.

Broadway, West Broadway, Prince and Spring are among the major shopping streets, and they are being overdeveloped, according to Sean Sweeney, the director of the SoHo Alliance, a civic association. “We don’t want to turn into Herald Square,” he said.

Even in the historic district, new buildings go up, said Mark Dicus, the executive director of the SoHo Broadway Initiative, which includes all buildings that touch on Broadway between Canal and Houston Streets. A new Nike store is being built at 529 Broadway, replacing two buildings that were “not contextual” with the area, he said.

What You’ll Pay

On April 25, the 83 properties on the market ranged from a studio offered at $389,000 to a penthouse listed at $22.5 million, according to information provided by Ms. Goldberg of Halstead.

She said median sales prices have generally gone up during the last five years, based on data from the company’s chief economist, Gregory Heym. The median loft price rose to $2,924,359 in 2015, a 34 percent increase over 2011; for one-bedrooms, the median was $755,000, a 22 percent rise; fortwo-bedrooms, $2.9 million, up 43 percent; for three-bedrooms, $5.305 million, a 28 percent increase. Because there were fewer studio sales, Ms. Goldberg said, the numbers are less reliable. Studios dipped about 2 percent, to $422,000.

As for rentals, Ms. Goldberg said studios and one-bedrooms in older buildings average about $2,100 to $2,600 a month, she said, while “in a new building with amenities, you’d be lucky to get a one-bedroom for $3,500.”

What to Do

Shopping opportunities range from Prada and Chanel boutiques and Bloomingdale’s to the nonprofit Housing Works Bookstore Cafe,which sells donated books and music.

Dining spots include Balthazar, the popular French bistro. The hip Crosby Street Hotel has a bar and restaurant — where afternoon tea is served all day — on the ground level, including a sunken terrace.

Vesuvio Playground has a basketball/handball court, a playground and a 3-foot-deep children’s pool.

The Judd Foundation runs a museum, 101 Spring Street, in the former home and studio of Donald Judd, one of the area’s pioneering artists. Other museums include the Drawing Center and the Center for Italian Modern Art.

The year-old SoHo Arts Network, encompassing 16 nonprofit enterprises, collaborates with the SoHo Memory Project, an exhibition that has been traveling among network members evoking the era from 1960 to 1980 with artifacts and photographs.

The Schools

Students who live east of Mercer Street are zoned for Public School 130 Hernando de Soto, which has prekindergarten through Grade 5. In 2014-15, 59 percent met state standards in English, compared with 30 percent citywide, and 80 percent did so in math, versus 39 percent citywide. Students west of Mercer are zoned for P.S. 003 Charrette School, which has prekindergarten through fifth grade. In the quality snapshot, 61 percent met state English standards and 74 percent met math standards.

For middle school, the boundary is Broadway. East of Broadway is zoned for Middle School 131, serving pupils in Grades 6 through 8. In the 2014-15 quality snapshot, 28 percent met state standards in English and 51 percent in math, compared with 30 percent and 31 percent citywide. West of Broadway is zoned for Junior High School 104, which covers Grades 6 through 8; 53 percent of students met state English students, and 61 percent met math standards.

The Commute

Subway lines with stops in SoHo include the C, D, E, A, F, N, R and 6, making for quick trips to Midtown or the financial district.

The History

In the 1600s, the SoHo-Cast Iron District was the site of the first free black settlement in Manhattan, though children of its residents were subject to being enslaved, according to the district’s designation report. The area retained a black population for more than 200 years, until the middle of the 19th century, when it changed from residential to commercial use.


