


Jaime DeLanghe, 29, is a senior product manager at Etsy in Brooklyn.

Q. What do you do as a product manager?

A. I lead a team responsible for coming up with the best ways for shoppers to find items on our site, and for sellers to advertise their items to potential buyers.

Did you start out in this position?

I was promoted. When I graduated from Wesleyan University in 2008 with an English degree, I thought I’d work in publishing or for a magazine. But it was a tough job market after the financial crisis. I worked at coffee shops, and in 2010 I got a job at Etsy in customer support answering emails from buyers and sellers about their accounts and taking part in live chats.

How did you move into your present position?

Hard work. Many jobs here deal with technology, and I didn’t know anything about that or the Internet culture. I’m not happy if I don’t understand something, so I read books and took online classes. I taught myself to program in Python on my own time, and Etsy’s engineers helped me learn about website development. I was promoted to a product development group and helped develop tools for managing buyers’ and sellers’ policy violations, and eventually I was promoted to this role. My official title is senior product manager of search and discovery and ads.

Do you also manage employees?

Yes, I manage product managers in charge of search and discovery and ads. I find it natural, but when you’re somebody’s boss, people seem to hear you differently and they take you more seriously. I wasn’t mentally prepared for that. I’m very aware of it and am still getting used to it.

How would you describe your career path at Etsy so far?

I feel lucky that I got into a company when it was relatively young. Etsy was founded in 2005, and I joined about six years ago. We had about 100 people then and now there are over 800. My role expanded as the company grew.

Do you feel your rise was fairly rapid compared with other employees?

No, things happen quickly in companies that focus on technology. I’ve worked hard, but I was presented with several opportunities. You have to take them and run with them.


