


Having passed on the 2016 presidential race, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. watches the fight for the Democratic nomination with a mixture of longing and restlessness.

He remains neutral in the battle between Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton, but not between their campaign styles. He’ll take Mr. Sanders’s aspirational approach over Mrs. Clinton’s caution any day.

“I like the idea of saying, ‘We can do much more,’ because we can,” Mr. Biden said in an interview on the Washington-to-Wilmington, Del., Amtrak train he has ridden throughout four decades in national politics.

“I don’t think any Democrat’s ever won saying, ‘We can’t think that big — we ought to really downsize here because it’s not realistic,’ ” he said in a mocking tone. “C’mon man, this is the Democratic Party! I’m not part of the party that says, ‘Well, we can’t do it.’ ”

That’s easy for the vice president to say now. He no longer needs to contemplate the burden, as Mrs. Clinton’s front-running campaign must, of defending ambitious goals in a race against Republican opposition.

President Obama, who has done that twice, recently explained the contrast in Democratic candidates by noting that Mr. Sanders enjoys “the luxury of being a complete long shot and just letting loose.”

But it’s also consistent with the soaring, if sometimes overexuberant, rhetorical style that Mr. Biden has preferred throughout a career in elected office that will draw to a close in January.

“The clarion call for our generation is not ‘it’s our turn,’ ” Mr. Biden said in announcing his first presidential bid, in 1987. Disdaining “smooth, antiseptic and passionless” leadership, he insisted then, “We must rekindle the fire of idealism in this country.”

He reflects on the extraordinary span of his career with satisfaction. Asked about the accomplishments of his political generation, he cites the end of the Vietnam War, the animating issue in his first Senate race in 1972; the healing of social and cultural wounds opened up by the 1960s; and measures to widen opportunities for women and increase Washington’s emphasis on improving education.

Yet his career also coincides with the stagnation in middle-class incomes, especially for Americans without college degrees, which both parties have failed to durably remedy.

“That is a failure,” Mr. Biden acknowledged.

Unsurprisingly, he does not fault the administration he has served the past seven years. He rejects suggestions by the Democratic left that Mr. Obama has aimed too low on Wall Street regulation, the minimum wage, tax policy and spending programs.

Pointing to the financial crisis, the Great Recession and fierce battles with Republicans over health care and government funding, Mr. Biden said, “We had about eight atom bombs dropped on our desk.”

Yet he likes the idea that Mr. Sanders is aiming high, regardless of whether the large steps he envisions to narrow income inequality and broaden economic opportunity become realized in the next presidential term. The philosophy Mr. Biden has advocated within the Obama White House: Push for a lot, and persevere over the long run.

“Presidents have always been told by really smart people: ‘Don’t push something that you can’t succeed in — it diminishes your power,’ ” he said. “I completely disagree with that proposition.

“Everything I’ve ever cared about — with the exception of the president’s brilliant passage of the Affordable Care Act — takes time,” he added. “The only way to get these big things done is talk about them.”

In his long climb up the political ladder, the big thing he never got done was winning the presidency. He considered making one more try this year, at age 73. Family concerns, after he lost his son Beau to brain cancer, foreclosed the possibility.

But he never lost his confidence.

“If you notice, I beat every Republican in every poll when they thought I was running,” Mr. Biden said. “You notice that my favorability was higher than anybody that’s running for office in either party.”


