


The sleepy town of White Mills in northeastern Pennsylvania relied for decades on one family, the Dorflingers. From the 1860s to the 1920s, hundreds of locals worked 11-hour shifts at the Dorflingers’ glass factory, where they shaped products with molds and acid and stoked furnaces, sending plumes of smoke from brick chimney stacks. With a train station and canal dock nearby, the company imported raw materials from overseas and shipped crystal vessels worldwide, and its employees and visitors provided a stream of customers for hotels, stores and even an opera house.

A handful of the company’s dozens of buildings remain, and James K. Asselstine, a glass collector and scholar, has spent nine years restoring two of them. Now filled with Dorflinger glass, they will open on July 2 as Mr. Asselstine’s new Dorflinger Factory Museum. Visitors may need to wear sunglasses for all of the sunlight being reflected off the cut-glass facets.

The company’s founder, Christian Dorflinger, born in 1828 in Alsace, France, worked at a glassworks as a child before moving with his family to the United States in the 1840s. He was sent to make bottles at a factory in Camden, N.J. By the 1850s he had set up his own workshops in Brooklyn. But after about a decade there, running the Long Island Flint Glass Works and the Greenpoint Flint Glass Works, he had become so exhausted that physicians advised him to retire to his hilltop farm in White Mills.

Though he made the move, Mr. Dorflinger didn’t quite retire: He created a factory compound at the base of his farm. He built cottages for his workers. His clients commissioned personalized etched patterns on their drinking vessels: Cuban officials wanted palm tree motifs, and robber barons asked for their monograms and the names of their yachts. White House staffs, beginning with the Lincoln administration, filled formal dining settings with all manner of Dorflinger goblets and decanters.

The glassworkers almost never signed their pieces. Mr. Asselstine said that it has taken years to distinguish some Dorflinger wares from products by competitors.

Immigrants from France, Germany, England, Ireland and Scandinavia took jobs at the White Mills site. Mr. Dorflinger also recruited at the nearby schoolhouse. He would walk into classrooms and tell the more muscular boys, as young as 10, “I expect to see you at the factory on Monday.”

In 1892, a major fire (probably arson) broke out on the property. Mr. Dorflinger had made enemies because he fired workers who expressed interest in joining labor unions.

After his death in 1915, his family kept the company going for only a few years. Most of its drawings and bookkeeping records were thrown away. Descendants did preserve glass pieces made as far back as the 1850s, when the operations were still in Brooklyn. Manufacturers of baseball bats, broom handles and baking equipment ended up using the buildings in White Mills. When Mr. Asselstine first visited, in 1988, the complex was largely used for storage.

He devoted himself to this project after he retired in 2013; he had worked in the fields of government nuclear regulation and investment banking. In calculating how much he and his wife, Bette Davis-Asselstine, have invested in the Dorflinger buildings and glass collection, Mr. Asselstine said that $3 million “is probably not a bad number.” He also is chairman of the Dorflinger-Suydam Wildlife Sanctuary in White Mills, which was set up in the 1980s on the family’s farm and features a display of Dorflinger glass.

Rare objects in the field can cost six figures. In 2014, at Goldin Auctions in Runnemede, N.J., Mr. Asselstine paid about $113,000 for a glass bat that the Dorflinger company made in 1913 as a gift for the baseball player Eddie Murphy, who had grown up in White Mills. Mr. Murphy played for the Philadelphia Athletics, winners of the 1913 World Series.

The bat will be on view at the new museum, as will snippets of a movie made at the factory in the 1910s that gives a sense of the dusty, noisy and hot working conditions. Some machinery and tools will be kept in working order for demonstrations. Keystone College in La Plume, Pa., will lend its portable glassworks furnace.

Ian Simmonds, a glass historian and dealer in Carlisle, Pa., said Mr. Asselstine is a rare example of a glass collector who focuses on one maker and manages to display the material on former factory grounds.

Dorflinger artifacts, including molds and tools that belonged to family members, have also ended up at institutions, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Corning Museum of Glass and the Brooklyn Museum. The Met owns a silver tea set given to Mr. Dorflinger in 1863, when he was supposedly retiring. The silver is sculpted with images of glassblowers and the Brooklyn factory.

Works by Dorflinger competitors are on display through July 15 at Hirschl & Adler gallery in Manhattan, and through December at the Museum of American Glass at WheatonArts in Millville, N.J. The WheatonArts show contains artifacts found during archaeological excavations by the engineering company Aecom in Philadelphia near demolished glassworks facilities and factory workers’ homes. (The digs are part of highway improvements along Interstate 95 by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the Federal Highway Administration.)

Mary Cheek Mills, the historic glass specialist at Aecom, said future exhibitions will focus on glassmaking practices in the region and the workers who almost never signed their wares.


