


David Wright arrived at Citi Field on Wednesday and told Manager Terry Collins that his back was feeling much better after he was scratched from Tuesday’s series opener because of discomfort related to his spinal stenosis.

The message was clear: Wright did not want to miss playing against the Washington Nationals, whom the Mets trailed by a half-game in the National League East.

Collins penciled Wright’s name into the lineup card. But there is a reason pencils have erasers. Wright would have to go through batting practice and infield drills and report back to Collins if he experienced any pain.

With Collins occasionally shadowing him, Wright passed his pregame test and returned to action, batting third. His quick return quelled a potential controversy, but there is a looming fear around the Mets that Wright’s health will seriously affect his abilities as the season progresses.

Wright went 0 for 4 Wednesday, striking out three times in the Mets’ 7-1 loss to the Nationals. “I feel like I can perform at a much higher level than I’m playing at right now,” Wright said after the game.

After Collins notified Wright of his decision to sit him down during batting practice Tuesday, the two appeared to have a verbal confrontation. On Wednesday, Collins dismissed the notion that there was any tension.

“Believe me, there was no argument; there was no tiff,” Collins said. “My star player wanted to play, and he was hurting, and the discussion was: I know you want to play, the situation, the big game, the big series, the captain. I get it. But I have a responsibility to David Wright, to the other 24 guys in the clubhouse and myself.”

Collins added: “He is extremely proud. He wants to play. He knows who he is and what he does for this organization, and he wants to be on the field. He thinks that’s the way for him to lead, and I understand that. I totally get that. But I will tell you, when you sit and talk to him, you’ll sense the frustration.”

Wright has drawn criticism and concern for his .221 batting average and his looping, submarine throws from third base. He looked spry enough before Wednesday’s game, fielding grounders and taking swings in the batting cage. At one point, he hit three straight towering home runs, two to left field and one to right. But in the sixth inning, with the Mets trailing, 3-1, and representing the tying run, Wright looked overmatched and struck out looking against Gio Gonzalez.

“We’ve got concerns about David, and he does, too,” Collins said after the game. “It’s something that’s brand new that not a lot of people have had to deal with. We don’t know day to day how it’s going to be. I can try to get him to hopefully stay a little positive that when it warms up; maybe it won’t be as bad.”


