


PARK RIDGE, N.J. — The walls in Kendra and Allan Daniel’s townhouse are crowded — very crowded. There are folk-art paintings. There is an original drawing from “Winnie-the-Pooh.” There is a watercolor by Humphrey Bogart’s mother.

Even the bathrooms are something to see. A first-floor one is filled with framed originals by an illustrator for children, Nura Woodson Ulreich. One on the second floor has a watercolor by Yves St. Laurent.

If there is such a thing as collectionitis, the Daniels have it. They have already reduced their holdings with what amounted to his-and-her sales — his at Christie’s in 2001, hers at Sotheby’s in 2011 — and with steady gifts to museums. Still the four levels of their townhouse are overflowing with objects. Twenty-six hundred square feet can hold only so many 19th-century weather vanes, old carousel giraffes and camels and display drawers with St. Laurent necklaces.

“It’s like living in a submarine,” Mr. Daniel said. “Very tight.”

And it is going to get tighter.

After the exhibition “Mystery and Benevolence” closes at the American Folk Art Museum in Manhattan on Sunday, 10 or so items will be sent back to the Daniels, who donated to the museum the 190 other objects that were part of the show — signs, plaques, banners, clock faces, carved picture frames, even a wooden grave marker.

This presents a challenge for Ms. Daniel, who does the arranging in the townhouse: where to put the items that have served as place holders? Because, months ago, when those things were taken down and sent to the museum in time for the January opening of “Mystery and Benevolence,” she filled the vacancies.

Mr. Daniel said he did not know how many objects they live with. “I’ve never done an inventory,” he said.

Whatever the count, it was enough to send a visitor, still on the first floor, into sensory overload. Anne-Imelda Radice, the executive director of the folk art museum, said she was “just blown away” the first time she visited the Daniels’ home.

“You don’t often see so many beautiful things in one place at one time,” she said. “Yes, it’s their home, and it’s a nice, warm place, but you have a sense that the art rules. It’s shown in a way that you really see each piece. That’s the kind of exhibiting that you see in a museum.”

The Daniels were art dealers when they met and married in the 1990s. He had concentrated on folk art, she on illustrations for children. Mr. Daniel, 82, said he stopped working as a dealer after he joined the board of the American Folk Art Museum in 2008.

They have vintage women’s shoe heels in a narrow cabinet on the second floor and dog figurines on shelves in the kitchen, a few feet from a weather vane of the angel Gabriel, made in 1840 for a church in Massachusetts. It was depicted on a postage stamp in 1965 and, more recently, shown at the National Gallery of Art.

It is just steps from what Ms. Daniel described as the “Mona Lisa” of their collection: “Portrait of a Young Girl and Her Cat,” by the artist Ammi Phillips, who crisscrossed New York and New England for decades before his death at age 77 in 1865.

“We bought it because it’s beautiful, because we really love it,” Mr. Daniel said. “It was kind of out of our price range, but sometimes you have to really step out to get something that is so dramatically beautiful. That’s the good part. The bad part is, it makes everything else pale by comparison.”

Ms. Daniel spoke up: “I don’t think it does.”

They acquired the canvas at an auction at Christie’s in 2007. The trade publication Antiques and the Arts Weekly reported that they paid $1.24 million for it.

And then they faced a familiar problem. “As soon as he bought it,” she said, “I ran in here and started clearing things.”

The folk art museum has its own Phillips of a girl in a red dress with a cat — a different girl with a different cat (and a dog, as a bonus). Ms. Hollander, the curator, said Phillips painted “maybe four or five children in red dresses” going back to 1830, when the one in the museum was painted.

The one belonging to the Daniels came later, about 1835, according to Ms. Hollander, who says theirs is more sensual, and the colors more lush. “Ammi Phillips, as an artist, changed with the times,” she said. “He had the ability to give his customers what they wanted, what was up-to-date, what was fashionable.”

Ms. Daniel was an artist, she said, before she began collecting American paintings, though from a period somewhat later than those Mr. Daniel favored. Before she came along, he had displayed works the way Andy Warhol had. “You know, where you put it on the floor against the wall,” Ms. Daniel said. “Warhol did an exhibition where things were where he left them. Allan was the same way.”

She is not. She arranges the objects in the townhouse in a way that is organized and precise rather than cluttered and busy.

To return the Odd Fellows serpent staff that the museum borrowed to its place, Ms. Daniel will take down a cane that carries the faces and names of the commanders in chief from George Washington to Grover Cleveland. It was probably carved during Cleveland’s first term, because Benjamin Harrison, whose presidency came and went between Cleveland’s two terms, is nowhere to be seen.

An Independent Order of Odd Fellows harp is also going back to its spot. Its place holder has been a barber pole. Ms. Daniel will find somewhere else to put that.

“I’ve been saying we need a bigger house,” Mr. Daniel said. “Kendra’s been saying we need less stuff.”


