


“What if everything we think is real is just an illusion?” began A. O. Scott’s review of the 1973 made-for-German-TV movie by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, “Welt Am Draht” (in English, “World on a Wire”). Now, the title of that sci-fi film has been repurposed by the collector Julia Stoschek for the inaugural show in her new Berlin space, which brings together a contingent of multimedia artists who are likewise reevaluating the meaning of reality — this time in the digital era. The works — which include videos, live simulations, performances and sculptures — range from satirical cultural commentaries to visualizations of future metropolises. Here, three of the creators, all born in the mid-’80s, explain their contributions.

Britta Thie

Thie rattles off a list of her different pieces in “Welt Am Draht” — there’s a three-channel video installation of infomercials that advertise freelance labor, the soundtrack to her recently produced web series “Translantics” and six banners made of polyester, mesh and synthetic satin displaying phrases plucked from the show’s narration — before segueing into her love of Netflix’s offerings. She notes “the weird, deep relationships that are formed between viewers and serial dramas. The longer we watch something, the more our lives take on elements from the lives represented.”

But, she adds, “being German and watching all these American television shows, sometimes I feel that when I speak English, I’m just copying and pasting dialogue — I call it the ‘Netflixication’ of life; I am adapting jokes or fictional personalities in private,” rendering her everyday experiences slightly inauthentic. She addresses this separation head-on, and also tackles the absurdity of commercials. “My peers and I are doing creative labor as freelancers and it is expected that we are just as pro as a ‘start-up bro,’ so we turn into brands — thus turning our lives into their own comedies, sometimes.”

Rachel Rose

The formally trained painter abandoned the medium after feeling “endlessly up against a wall,” she says. “I couldn’t figure out how to use painting as a tool for all of the topics that I thought were so urgent to explore” — so she switched to documentary filmmaking. However, in lieu of straightforward chronicling, the New York-based Rose compresses subjects and her own sentiments. Her post-Hurricane Sandy and global-warming-related anxieties sparked the making of “A Minute Ago,” featured in the Stoschek exhibition.

“I’d noticed how much of the buildings and architecture in the city is glass, such a permeable, fragile material that’s meant to make us feel protected, and that led me to be interested in where this came from which led me to the International Style and then from there to one of its symbols, Philip Johnson’s Glass House, and which I saw through the lens of my unease around weather catastrophe,” she says. The short, collagelike video focuses on the time ahead of, during and following a catastrophic, transitional ent. Rose shot her other entrant, “Palisades in Palisades,” in New Jersey’s Palisades Interstate Park, a location she picked in part because the small green space could fit in one frame. She soon learned it had been the site of the Battle of Fort Lee, and her resulting video travels through “the materiality of the things we know — bodies, skin, clothes, grass, park.”

Timur Si-Qin

Si-Qin’s “Welt Am Draht” pieces span three bodies of work (and five years) — and illustrate both his technique’s refinement and his continual fixation on symbols. Born in Berlin to a German mother and an Mongolian-Chinese father, and raised in Arizona when his mother married an Apache man, the artist directed his attention to “the regularities between cultures and how commercial imagery is often such a peculiar regularity,” he says. “I’m interested in moving away from a psychoanalytic paradigm of art interpretation, in which signs can often be arbitrarily associated with meanings — and any commercial image is interpreted as a signifier of capitalism — but images can be stripped of meaning, revealing their lack of essence.”

His “Selection Display: Ancestral Prayer” from 2011 comprises a cosmetics-campaign-like photo on panels and flanked by Buddhist prayer flags; and his latest tableaux depict fictional brands as ways to reach a spiritual state of awareness. “I really don’t expect people to get all of the stuff that I read into my work,” Si-Qin admits. “I’m also trying to make an aesthetic experience and I hope that bridges the gap — or encourages other to look into it more.”


