


There was a time not so long ago when young sports fans wrote actual letters to their heroes and sometimes received a photo or even a note or letter in return — not from an agent or public relations firm, but from the athlete himself. Sometimes the response came autographed, no invoice attached.

Which is why in 1971 I wrote, via a family friend, to Mets shortstop Bud Harrelson. My efforts were like those of extraterrestrial intelligence seekers, sending a signal into the darkness in the hope that something might be out there to respond. I wanted Harrelson’s home address so I could invite him to my bar mitzvah, which was coming up in two years. I would also invite President Richard M. Nixon and Don Adams, the actor who had starred on the sitcom “Get Smart.’’

Harrelson was gentleman enough to answer my letter. He wrote back on a piece of lined notebook paper that he had passed around the clubhouse for teammates and coaches to sign — and in 1971 those individuals included Tom Seaver, Nolan Ryan, Gil Hodges, Yogi Berra and others who, with Harrelson, were part of the 1969 Miracle Mets team that won the World Series and taught me that absolutely anything was possible.

Harrelson, it should be noted, was also the third-base coach on the 1986 championship Mets team being honored this weekend at Citi Field. He was the one giddily accompanying Ray Knight toward home plate after the ball went through Bill Buckner’s legs in Game 6.

But that was a different miracle. Back in 1971, he apologized for not being able to provide his home address but encouraged me to write back to him at Shea Stadium. He also advised me to stay in school, though I was 11 at the time and was not really thinking about quitting to try my luck in the bigs.

In our current era, when autographed sports memorabilia shows up on eBay for thousands of dollars, I am less interested in what this letter is now worth than what led me to choose Harrelson as my favorite player in the first place.

After all, he weighed all of 165 pounds and boasted a lifetime batting average of .236. He was alternately nicknamed Twiggy, and Mighty Mouse and Mini Hawk. On a team of extroverts he was subdued — though always irreverently funny, as when he said of his notorious brawl with Pete Rose in 1973, “I hit him in the fist with my eye.”

But Harrelson was also a tiny wizard with a fielder’s mitt, a humble alchemist at shortstop who could pluck a base hit from the space-time continuum and convert it to a double play. He finished his career with a .969 fielding percentage, won a Gold Glove in 1971 and played in two All-Star Games. He could also rise to an occasion, as when he hit one of his few career homers over the head of Rose on his first visit back to Cincinnati after their fight.

I see now that something in Harrelson reflected the way I viewed myself as a boy: That I possessed a subtle but inherent power, an unpolished brilliance that would reveal itself when it was most needed, like instinctively snagging a hot grounder out of the dirt and transforming it into glittering art with a pivot and a sidearm whip-crack to first. I would never be Rusty Staub, I knew back then, but surely there were other ways to excel.

When Harrelson brawled with Rose that October day in 1973, taking on one of the toughest players in the game (who also outweighed him by 40 pounds), I felt as if I had been recognized for my own hidden abilities — those qualities that would one day rise out of me like an apparent line-drive double that ascends to clear the fence. It was as though Harrelson knew this about me even before I did, and that was why he had written back at all.


