


Few people would want their body to lie unclaimed in a morgue after death, or to be buried anonymously in a potter’s field. For generations, the fear of such a fate has mainly haunted poor communities.

But while uncovering the paths that led people to the same anonymous end — a mass grave on Hart Island, which is New York City’s potter’s field — I discovered that they came from all walks of life.

A home, a career, caring friends and family, a court-appointed guardian, even a prepaid grave in a private cemetery — none of these prevented a Hart Island burial in some of the cases that I reconstructed from court files, city records and interviews.

An obvious question emerged: How can you guarantee that you — or your grandmother — will not end up like that?

“Sometimes I joke that the families really need to monitor next of kin,” Michael Mastellone, chairman of the mortuary science department at Nassau Community College, told me, recalling his exchanges with students disturbed to find themselves practicing on unclaimed bodies destined for Hart Island.

“Some students have said, ‘I don’t even understand that this situation even exists,’” Mr. Mastellone said. “I tell them: ‘If you have an elderly grandma, don’t just send them a card. Go visit, so they don’t wind up in a situation like this.’”

Frequent family visits aside, here are some measures that can be taken, especially by people living alone.

■ Name someone you trust, whether a relative or a friend, to make decisions about body disposition. In New York State, use this form: “Appointment of Agent to Control Disposition of Remains.”

■ Write up your wishes for a funeral, burial, cremation or body donation in a document separate from your will, and store it in a safe place that is known to your designated agent.

■ Keep the name and contact information of your designated agent up to date and display it in an area where it would be hard to miss, perhaps stuck on the refrigerator or taped to a bedside table.

That leaves the question of money. Even when it seems that enough has been set aside for a private grave, resources can be drained away quickly just before and after death. Or as Mr. Mastellone put it, “Getting old and dead is big business.”

Some financial help is available in most places, though it can be hard to obtain. Two useful resources in New York are “A Guide to Burial Assistance and Funeral Planning for New Yorkers in Need,” last updated in 2011, and “A Guide to Funeral and Burial Options in New York,” from the City Bar Justice Center and the Cancer Advocacy Project.


