


Dustin Pedroia had a grand slam and a solo home run, David Ortiz passed two Hall of Fame Red Sox on the extra-base hitting list, and host Boston beat the Atlanta Braves, 9-4, on Wednesday night.

Ortiz had three doubles, giving him 1,119 extra-base hits and passing Ted Williams and Jimmie Foxx on the career list. He is now tied with the Hall of Famer George Brett for 16th.

Freddie Freeman homered to end Atlanta’s 15-game home-run drought.

ORIOLES 3, RAYS 1 Joey Rickard hit a three-run home run and Chris Tillman gave up two hits in six and two-thirds innings to help Baltimore break a three-game losing streak with a win at Tampa Bay.

Rickard’s homer was only the third in eight games for the Orioles. Tillman (2-1) tied a career high with nine strikeouts.

PHILLIES 3, NATIONALS 0 Jeremy Hellickson allowed two hits over seven innings and Philadelphia won at Washington.

Hellickson (2-1) struck out eight and lowered his E.R.A. from 5.21 to 3.81. He gave up a ground-rule double in the second inning to Daniel Murphy, the N.L. batting leader, and Danny Espinosa’s 500th career hit on a bunt single in the fifth.

WHITE SOX 4, BLUE JAYS 0 Dioner Navarro hit a go-ahead triple in the seventh inning, and visiting Chicago beat Toronto for its sixth straight win.

Jose Quintana (3-1) struck out a season-high 10 for Chicago and lowered his E.R.A. to 1.47.

GIANTS 13, PADRES 9 Brandon Belt was a homer short of the cycle and drove in five runs and San Francisco completed a three-game sweep of visiting San Diego.

Jeff Samardzija (3-1) pitched five and two-thirds innings and broke a tie with a two-run single for the Giants, who won their fifth in six games.

TIGERS 9, ATHLETICS 4 Justin Verlander pitched impressively into the seventh inning, and host Detroit beat Oakland.

Detroit’s J. D. Martinez hit a three-run homer in the second inning, and Victor Martinez added a three-run homer of his own in the sixth.

Verlander (2-2) allowed three runs and five hits in six and a third innings, his third straight quality start since April 11.

NINTENDO CEDES CONTROL Nintendo of America plans to sell its controlling stake in the Seattle Mariners, the team chairman Howard Lincoln said. Nintendo will sell to a group of minority owners led by John Stanton.

The sale is subject to league approval.


