


In New York on Tuesday, Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump proved they are front-runners for good reason.

The state was always going to be friendly turf for them: Mrs. Clinton won two Senate races in New York, and Mr. Trump’s political sensibilities are acutely attuned to the state’s small and dwindling Republican minority.

But the scale of their victories reflects more than a home-field advantage, and it exposes some important limitations in their opponents’ campaigns. Some of the key takeaways:

Mrs. Clinton defeated Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont by crushing him in New York City and its suburbs, easily winning black and Hispanic voters and holding down his margins in friendlier upstate areas. Her political coalition simply looks more like the national Democratic base than his does. In a big state like New York that is more closely reflective of national demographics, that is a decisive advantage.

Even in upstate cities where Mr. Sanders might have been a more natural fit, like Syracuse and Buffalo, Mrs. Clinton won or fought him to an effective tie.

It may be that Mrs. Clinton’s position here was unassailable all along: In 2008, she handily defeated Barack Obama in New York’s Democratic primary, taking 57 percent of the vote. On Tuesday, she was on track to beat Mr. Sanders with almost the same level of support.

Mr. Sanders managed to hold on to the slice of voters who agree most strongly with his message of economic populism. Exit polls show that he won by double digits among voters who said Wall Street mainly hurts the economy and among those who want the next president to be more liberal than Mr. Obama, and that he won by a narrower margin with those who said foreign trade destroys jobs.

But in as urban and diverse a state as New York, that assemblage of voters goes only so far. Mr. Sanders got wiped out on issues of sharper local resonance: Mrs. Clinton made her more liberal record on gun control a major campaign theme and beat him on the issue by 22 percentage points.

He needed a big win to reverse nearly a month of setbacks in the delegate race and to quiet stories about disorder in his campaign. And New York delivered: Mr. Trump captured the state by his largest victory margin of the campaign and left Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, his closest rival in the delegate race, in a distant third place.

If Mr. Trump’s opponents hoped for even scattered signs of voters recoiling from his candidacy, there were none to be seen. He won voters of every age, race and income level, and he prevailed with two groups — college-educated voters and women — who have often rejected him. That adds up to a considerable show of strength for a candidate who still faces a narrow path to clinching the Republican nomination, even after a sweep or near sweep of his home state’s 95 delegates.

Mr. Cruz appeared to enter the Republican primary in New York with the wind at his back, having beaten Mr. Trump convincingly in Wisconsin and in a string of smaller contests. But he got demolished in New York, coming in third over all and failing to win a single county. He even placed behind Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio upstate, where Mr. Cruz had once hoped to generate interest among rural conservatives and peel away a few delegates.

Mr. Cruz plainly paid a price for his derisive comments in the past about “New York values,” and those remarks may have made the state a fool’s errand for him from the start.

But Mr. Cruz may have a deeper cultural problem: In the Northeastern and mid-Atlantic States that have voted so far, he has performed well only in Maine, where he won a surprise caucus victory. If his brand of religion-inflected Texas conservatism cannot connect with a blue-state Republican audience, next week’s primaries in Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island may be just as painful.

It has been more than a month since Mr. Kasich won Ohio, his home state and still his only victory. But on Tuesday, he claimed a modest symbolic prize, snatching Mr. Trump’s home borough, Manhattan, from beneath the front-runner’s nose.

Mr. Kasich, always the softest-edged candidate in the race, has positioned himself in increasingly explicit terms as the standard-bearer for Republican moderates. That is a diminishing group, but it was enough to win him the only county in the state that Mr. Trump lost, and it could help him collect delegates in the blue-state primaries on April 26.


