


The retrial of the man accused of killing Etan Patz, the 6-year-old boy who vanished in 1979, will begin after Labor Day, a judge ruled on Tuesday.

The man, Pedro Hernandez, 55, of Maple Shade, N.J., was tried in May 2015, but jurors deliberated for 18 days without reaching a decision. The trial ended with hung jury, with only one juror steadfastly voting against conviction.

Etan was walking alone for the first time from his family’s SoHo loft to a school bus stop when he disappeared. He was among the first children pictured on a milk carton, and his disappearance helped focus awareness on missing children. His case remained unsolved for decades, though reports periodically surfaced that the boy had been spotted in foreign countries or walking the streets of New York.

Mr. Hernandez was a teenager working in the bodega next to the bus stop when Etan disappeared. He was not arrested until 2012, when relatives told the authorities that he had implicated himself in the killing of a child.

In two detailed confessions videotaped after a day of interrogation, Mr. Hernandez told detectives and then prosecutors that he had lured the boy, strangled him, then stashed his body in the trash between buildings a block away.

Etan’s body was never found, and Mr. Hernandez’s lawyer, Harvey Fishbein, argued that his client has low intelligence and had invented the account of the murder because of a personality disorder that makes it difficult for him to distinguish between fantasy and reality.

Etan’s parents, Stan and Julie Patz, have said they are convinced that Mr. Hernandez is guilty.

The retrial was originally scheduled to begin in March, but the Manhattan district attorney’s office sought a delay to add a new lead prosecutor and new psychological experts to its team. Mr. Fishbein then requested a postponement because he was undergoing medical treatment on his back. Mr. Hernandez, who has been held at Rikers Island since his arrest, agreed to the delay so that Mr. Fishbein could continue as his lawyer.

The judge who set the new schedule for the trial, Maxwell Wiley of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, is to rule on a series of evidentiary issues in the case by July 11. Jury selection is now expected to begin Sept. 6 or 7.


