


For casual soccer fans, it may be difficult to fully understand the absurdity of Leicester City winning England’s Premier League title. To say it is an upset or a shock or a stunner seems wholly inadequate, particularly when one considers that those words are so often used to describe one-time results (the United States over the Soviet Union in the 1980 Olympic hockey tournament, for example) as opposed to the feat of endurance that is required for a relative minnow like Leicester to dominate the sharks of English soccer for a nine-month season.

One way to view Leicester City’s unlikely title is through gambling odds. Before this season began, British bookmakers listed Leicester — pronounced Less-ter — as a 5,000-to-1 shot to emerge as the Premier League champion. By comparison, the so-called Miracle Mets of 1969 were a 100-to-1 choice, and Buster Douglas was just a 42-to-1 underdog when he upset Mike Tyson in 1990 to win the heavyweight championship.

Being 5,000 to 1 really put Leicester City more in line with the odds one might see in the novelty category often offered by British bookies — bets on things that are so outlandish and unlikely as to be unimaginable — but even there, Leicester City was a long shot. The odds that Simon Cowell, the acid-tongued producer of “American Idol,” would become the next British prime minister were only 500 to 1, for example, while those that Hugh Hefner, who founded Playboy magazine, would reveal that he was a virgin were set at 1,000 to 1.

The difference with Leicester, of course, is that bettors backing the team got paid. But while one British bookmaker, William Hill, has said it is on the hook for about 2 million pounds (about $2.9 million) in payouts, some Leicester backers will not get a full return on their wagers. As the season went along, many oddsmakers offered buyout options for Leicester bettors who did not want to risk the possibility that the Foxes would not finish the job. One bettor, for example, cashed out in March for £72,000 — a tidy sum, to be sure, but less than a third of what he could have earned if he had let his £50 bet ride.

For a different context, consider this: Since the Premier League was founded in 1992, only five teams have been crowned champions. Four are financial juggernauts (Manchester United, Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester City), and the fifth, Blackburn Rovers, claimed its only title more than 20 years ago, in the Premier League’s third season. But in every instance, the title-winning team had finished no worse than third the year before; Leicester, on the other hand, has a middling payroll (roughly a quarter of Chelsea’s when it won the 2014-15 title) and finished 14th last season, an escape from relegation that is a story (and a soccer miracle) all its own.

For that reason, it is also the perfect place to begin. Here is the path that Leicester City took to what many are calling the most remarkable championship in professional soccer history.

APRIL 4, 2015 When the Foxes sit in last place with nine games to go, it seems certain that they will be relegated to the second tier of competition. Yet a week after King Richard III’s remains are reinterred in Leicester, the team defeats West Ham United on a goal by a player named King (Andy, in this case). It is a harbinger, fans now say, as Leicester goes on to win seven of its final nine games and ensure its return to the Premier League.

JULY 13, 2015 Claudio Ranieri is appointed as the manager of Leicester City. Ranieri, an Italian journeyman who had most recently been fired by Greece’s national team after a loss to the tiny Faeroe Islands, is a surprise choice by his new club’s Thai ownership group. Leicester City is Ranieri’s 16th coaching job in soccer, and shortly after being hired, he states that his goal for the club is to reach 40 points, which is generally regarded as the minimum total needed to avoid relegation.

A Good Start

AUG. 8, 2015 In the first game of the new season, Leicester beats Sunderland, 4-2, with two goals from Riyad Mahrez (who signed with the Foxes in 2014, when the club was in the second division) and one from Jamie Vardy (who was playing in the fifth division as recently as 2012). In hindsight, it is a performance — by those two players and by the team — emblematic of what is to come.

OCT. 24, 2015 The Foxes have enjoyed a strong start to the season (only one loss through the first nine games) but have shown inconsistent defense. Looking to motivate his players, Ranieri promises that if they can hold an opponent scoreless, he will buy them all pizza. When Leicester at last produces its first shutout in its 10th game — a 1-0 win over Crystal Palace — Ranieri makes good. To the players’ glee, he extends the proposition to cover future shutouts as well.

A Difficult Stretch Looms

NOV. 28, 2015 Vardy scores in his 11th straight Premier League game, setting a record, but Leicester ties, 1-1, with Manchester United and now sits in second place in the league. With games against Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester City approaching, many observers wonder whether Leicester’s joy ride will be over by New Year’s Day.

DEC. 29, 2015 After a win over Chelsea and a loss to Liverpool, there is another pizza party after Leicester holds Manchester City to a 0-0 tie. A year earlier, the Foxes were in last place; as 2015 closed, they find themselves level on points with Arsenal at the top of the Premier League.

JAN. 20, 2016 A 2-0 loss might not seem like a significant moment in a title run, but this defeat against Tottenham Hotspur comes in the F.A. Cup and ends Leicester’s involvement in any competition other than the Premier League. While its closest pursuers juggle league games with Cup matches and two-game series in the Champions League or Europa League, Leicester will have a singular focus — and, more important, plenty of rest — down the stretch. Fans begin to openly embrace the dream they once thought impossible.

FEB. 6, 2016 Several thousand Leicester fans, clearly emboldened, sing, “We’re going to win the league!” after the Foxes beat Manchester City on the road, 3-1, to build a 5-point lead atop the standings. Some had speculated that Ranieri might play conservatively in this match, hoping for a tie; instead, Leicester scores inside three minutes and never looks back.

APRIL 3, 2016 Despite looking slightly nervous, Leicester still gets a result — 1-0 over Southampton — to move to 7 points ahead of Spurs with only six games to go. Pizza has become a regular menu item, too, as Foxes goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel and his teammates record their fifth shutout in six games. A week later, Leicester makes it six clean sheets in seven matches with a 2-0 win at Sunderland.

APRIL 17, 2016 Leicester fans go from incensed at the referee Jon Moss to wholly relieved. The official first sends off Vardy early in the second half, but then he awards Leicester a stoppage-time penalty kick that allows the Foxes to salvage a 2-2 tie with West Ham. Vardy later receives an additional one-game suspension on top of the automatic one-game ban for his tirade aimed at Moss, who ruled Vardy guilty of diving.

APRIL 24, 2016 Playing without Vardy, the Foxes blast visiting Swansea City, 4-0, and then move to within a single victory of the title when Tottenham Hotspur can only tie West Bromwich Albion a day later. Vardy will miss the potential clincher as he serves his suspension, but he — and all of Leicester’s fans — will watch with expectation on Sunday, as the trophy can at last be assured with a victory over Manchester United at Old Trafford.

MAY 2, 2016 Leicester City missed a chance to clinch the title outright when it tied, 1-1, at Manchester United on May 1. But when Chelsea fought back to tie Tottenham, 2-2, just over 24 hours later, the deal was done. Leicester led Spurs in the standings by 7 points with two matches to go, meaning the Foxes could not be caught. Needless to say, Leicester City players and fans, celebrated vigorously.


