


Has Kansas State University given fraternity members a free pass when it comes to accusations of rape?

That is the question posed in two lawsuits filed Wednesday, which say the university refused to investigate accusations of rapes at Greek organizations because their houses are not on the university’s campus.

Two Kansas State students, Sara Weckhorst and Tessa Farmer, say they ran up against that policy after they reported having been raped at two separate fraternity houses in 2014 and 2015.

The women say they now fear running into the men they say raped them when they are on the Manhattan, Kan., campus because the university would not take action, according to the lawsuits, filed Wednesday in federal court in Kansas.

A lawyer for the two women, Cari Simon of Washington, D.C., said their cases were also under investigation by the United States Department of Education. Their lawsuits say the university violated Title IX, a civil rights statute prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sex, by failing to respond to their complaints of rape. Title IX generally governs gender equity in education.

The women are seeking both monetary damages and orders that the university investigate their accusations.

A Kansas State spokeswoman, Cindy Hollingsworth, said in an emailed statement, “Kansas State University does not discuss litigation matters in the media, nor do we publicly discuss individual reports of discrimination, including sexual violence.”

“The university has a strong policy prohibiting discrimination, including sexual violence, and provides a multitude of resources and assistance to students and employees,” the statement said. “The university’s anti-discrimination policy can be found at http://www.k-state.edu/policies/ppm/3000/3010.html. The policy addresses off-campus conduct in compliance with Title IX.”

It was the second case involving alleged sexual assault filed against a Kansas university in two days. On Tuesday, a member of the women’s rowing team at the University of Kansas, in Lawrence filed suit, saying the university had mishandled her complaint of sexual assault by a football player.

The Education Department has advised universities that they are required under Title IX to investigate accusations of off-campus rapes of students, specifically citing off-campus fraternity houses. Kansas State recognizes 25 fraternities; all their houses are off campus.

“The fact that the alleged misconduct took place off campus does not relieve the school of its obligation to investigate the complaint,” the department said in a document in 2014 that explains the responsibility of universities to investigate sexual violence. A similar directive was contained in a 2011 letter to universities.

Adele P. Kimmel, a lawyer with the public interest law group Public Justice, said the university’s decision not to investigate complaints of rape at off-campus fraternity houses appeared to directly contravene the Department of Education guidance and also sent a poor message to those off-campus fraternities. “It’s basically saying to fraternities, ‘Just make sure you commit rape at the fraternities and not on campus,’ ” Ms. Kimmel said.

A consultant who advises universities on Title IX issues, Steven J. Healy of Margolis Healy, said: “If the incident involves two students, it’s very likely to create a hostile environment on campus. Therefore the institution would be required to investigate if it knew or should have known.”

Neither Ms. Weckhorst nor Ms. Farmer would agree to be interviewed. In their legal complaints, they express frustration at the university’s unwillingness to investigate their accusations as well as fear of running into the men on campus. Police complaints were filed in both cases.

Ms. Weckhorst, 21, of Doylestown, Pa., said in her complaint that she became incapacitated from drinking too much alcohol at a fraternity party in April 2014, while a freshman at Kansas State. The fraternity was not named in the complaint, but The New York Times has learned it was allegedly Sigma Nu.

A fraternity member took her to his truck and raped her, the complaint says, while fellow students observed, taking video and photographs. He again assaulted Ms. Weckhorst in a fraternity “sleep room,” the complaint says.

Several hours later, Ms. Weckhorst’s complaint says, she awoke at the fraternity house while another man was raping her.

It was only then that she learned she had been raped earlier, the complaint says, when her second assailant informed her that she had been penetrated by two fraternity brothers on the same day.

An Oklahoma City-based lawyer for Sigma Nu, Arthur Hoge, said the fraternity’s own investigation found that “no member of Sigma Nu was the alleged assailant, and no off-campus chapter event or party occurred on the day of the event.”

Ms. Weckhorst sought medical treatment the following day and filed a complaint with the university. Meantime, references to the alleged rape circulated on Yik Yak and other social media sites.

According to the lawsuit, even as the university refused to investigate the accusation of rape, it sanctioned Sigma Nu for serving alcohol.

“How is it that a fraternity house is off campus but KSU can charge them with drinking violations but not raping me?” Ms. Weckhorst asked in a note to university officials.

Since the events, Ms. Weckhorst’s grades have suffered and she lost an academic scholarship, the complaint says. “This will continue to affect our daughter for the rest of her life,” Ms. Weckhorst’s mother wrote to the university.

Ms. Farmer, 21, of Overland Park, Kans., tells a similar story in her complaint. After drinking too much at a fraternity party, she says, she blacked out on a bed in the fraternity house. She awoke as an unknown man was raping her, her complaint says. The Times learned that the fraternity is Phi Delta Theta, but it was not named in the complaint.

After seeking medical treatment and undergoing a rape test, Ms. Farmer’s complaint says, she made her accusations to a university office. She says she was told the university would not investigate because its policy “specifies that it covers behaviors that happen on campus and at university-sponsored events; which does not cover fraternity houses.”

Fearful that the man she says raped her, whose identity she did not know, might be sitting beside her in class, Ms. Farmer became depressed and ultimately slit her wrist, her complaint says.

Sean S. Wagner, chief operating officer of Phi Delta Theta’s national office, said in a statement that his office became aware of the allegations in February of this year. “An investigation occurred determining it was an isolated incident and the person responsible was removed from membership,” Mr. Wagner said. From March 2015, when the rape is said to have occurred, and February 2016, neither the university, the local police nor the Department of Education notified the fraternity of the allegations, Mr. Wagner said.

A consultant hired by Kansas State to review the climate of its campus, Rankin and Associates Consulting, found last year that some students and staff members felt the university had been unresponsive to complaints after unwanted sexual conduct.

According to the consultant report, one student wrote, “K-State did absolutely nothing to help me.”


