


WASHINGTON — As the House and Senate return in full from a recess on Tuesday, Republican lawmakers may try to run — and some will — but they cannot hide from the question that is likely to dog them until Election Day: How do they solve a problem like Donald J. Trump?

Republican members of Congress, guided by a complicated soup of regional interests, constituent pressure and inner moral voices, will be hard pressed to avoid taking a position on Mr. Trump now that he is their presumptive presidential nominee.

While lawmakers were on recess last week, Mr. Trump seized control of the Republican Party after winning the Indiana primary and pushing his last rivals out of the race. But the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, has said he was “not ready” to endorse him, expressing concerns about his tone and values.

Mr. Trump, who is scheduled to meet with Mr. Ryan and other Republican leaders on Thursday, returned the volley by refusing to rule out blocking Mr. Ryan from his role as chairman of the Republican convention.

Mr. Trump’s failed Republican challengers represent a gamut of views, from stony-faced support to silence to outright rejection. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida reflected some of the hesitation about Mr. Trump, writing on Facebook on Monday: “I have never sought, will not seek and do not want to be considered for vice president. Instead, I will focus my attention on representing the people of Florida, retaining a conservative majority in the Senate and electing principled conservatives across the country.”

House Republican leaders are also fractured. While Mr. Ryan is withholding his support, the No. 2 House Republican, Kevin McCarthy of California, and the No. 3 Republican, Steve Scalise of Louisiana, have backed Mr. Trump.

In the Senate, many members have remained vague about where they stand, and there are divisions within states. In Nebraska, Senator Ben Sasse has repeatedly said he cannot support Mr. Trump and has called for a third-party candidate to step in. The senior senator from the state, Deb Fischer, said she would support Mr. Trump.

“I don’t agree with his strategy,” she said of Mr. Sasse. “I’m not going to hand this election to Hillary Clinton, and that’s what a third candidate would do.”

Representative Tom Cole of Oklahoma, a senior member of the House Republican conference, said he expected a majority of his fellow Republicans in Congress to eventually line up behind Mr. Trump with varying levels of enthusiasm, even though he might jeopardize the party’s chances in some Senate and House races.

“You play this game with the cards you’re dealt,” Mr. Cole said. “The G.O.P. primary electorate has dealt incumbents running for re-election Trump. In some districts, Trump will help. In some, he will hurt. In most, he will impact the margin rather than the outcome of the congressional race. Members know that and will react accordingly.”

He added: “Republican members are far better prepared for the volatility and uncertainty of this election than they were in 2006 and 2008,” when the Democrats seized control of Congress and the presidency. “They are better organized, funded and positioned than they were, because most of them saw this coming. And most of them are battle tested.”

That does not mean that some are not deeply disturbed. Senator James Lankford, Republican of Oklahoma, offered support of Mr. Trump on Monday with the enthusiasm of someone receiving a tetanus shot — it is necessary, in his view, but not pleasant.

“There are a lot of people in my state who have been asking me, ‘Is this who we are?’ ” Mr. Lankford said. “I say yes.”


