


CANNES, France — Critics have called “Julieta,” the latest by the Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar in competition at the Cannes Film Festival, his most subdued film yet. But what has not been subdued is the reaction in Spain to the director’s appearance in the Panama Papers, leaked documents from a law firm that managed offshore accounts.

In an interview here on Wednesday, Mr. Almodóvar said that his brother and business manager, Augustín, had been advised to set up an offshore company to facilitate international movie deals and co-productions at a time before the euro made that easier. (His brother released a statement in April affirming this.) The move was not intended to avoid taxes, he said.

“To say that I didn’t know about it is not any sort of excuse,” Mr. Almodóvar said of the company, which operated in the British Virgin Islands from 1991 to 1994. “So if there is any sort of responsibility to assume, then I assume it completely, given that caveat.”

“It was a tool for negotiation that we didn’t actually need,” he said.

“And also my brother already had his doubts about it even from the very beginning,” he added. “It disappeared on its own for a lack of transactions because we didn’t use it.”

Mr. Almodóvar, who has not been accused of a crime, said the Spanish media had cast him as the “the most popular face” of the affair, when he was a minor character. “There are ministers who are in power right now in the country and they’re also involved in the Panama Papers,” he said.

“Me and my brother, we do not represent the entire country, we merely represent ourselves,” he said, adding that the scandal had unfolded like “a six-week-long reality show” in which drips of information trickled out in the news media for maximum effect. “What I’ve actually become is the victim of a marketing of information,” said the director, who canceled some Spanish promotional efforts for his film when news of the Panama Papers first broke.

Mr. Almodóvar came to prominence in the 1980s, at the same time as the birth of Spanish democracy after the end of the Franco dictatorship, and his films have often been seen as capturing the history of the country.

“Julieta” is no exception. It traces the life of its protagonist, Julieta, from her youth in the energized 1980s, when she’s played by the Spanish actress Adriana Ugarte, to her sadness in the present day, with Spain in the grips of an economic crisis, when she’s played by the Spanish actress Emma Suárez.

“I don’t want to make a parallel or a parallelism between the movie and Spain; that can’t be done,” the director said, explaining that he missed the ’80s and his youth. “When I talk about my ’80s, I’m talking about democracy, but when I’m talking about now, Spanish people are very disappointed,” he said.

The film is based on three short stories from the collection “Runaway” by the Canadian writer Alice Munro — an unexpected choice for a director whose sensibility is as over the top as Ms. Munro’s is spare.

Mr. Almodóvar said he was struck by the way Ms. Munro captured family dynamics; he pointed to “a sense of strangeness” in her work, and the mystery beneath the surface of ordinary life. Reaching the end of her stories, “I got the feeling that I know less than at the beginning,” he said.

He first asked for the rights to film the stories because of a scene that takes place on a train. “Everything is on that train: The experience of death, of discovery, physical pleasure, and also the conception of a new life,” he said. He’d wanted to make his first movie in English, he said, but didn’t feel comfortable enough in the language, and filmed it in Spanish, in Spain.

Some critics have seen “Julieta” as an unsuccessful departure from the director’s earlier work. Mr. Almodóvar said the departure was deliberate. “I would like the audience not to be afraid that this movie is not full of humor,” Mr. Almodóvar said. “This is a complete different genre than my former movies. I feel very satisfied with that.”


