


In New York City real estate, one of the rarest amenities is a lawn to stretch out on. That’s why a growing number of luxury buildings are adding elaborate park-like settings — think birch trees, grassy expanses and landscaped walkways — to the list of residents-only perks intended to attract buyers and renters. Call it Gramercy Park for the high-rise set. Below, a look at some of the outdoor spaces opening this spring.

Address 200 East 94th Street

Developer Related Companies

This 31-story condominium has a half-acre private park with an outdoor playground. There is also a paved outdoor terrace for lounging and sunbathing connected to the building’s three-lane indoor swimming pool.

Address 10 City Point, Brooklyn

Developer The Brodsky Organization

A 10,000-square-foot terrace on the 18th floor of this 439-unit rental in Downtown Brooklyn will have flowering trees, a central lawn framed by raised planters and a pergola with flowering vines. Designed by Weintraub Diaz Landscape Architecture, the outdoor space will also have ornamental and native grasses and a vegetable-and-herb garden.

Address 40-26 College Point Boulevard, Queens

Developer Onex Real Estate Partners

Six acres of landscaped park atop the Shops at Skyview Center in Flushing, Queens, will feature a basketball court, running track, tennis courts, playground, dog run, putting green and more than 100 trees. And from the fountains to the paving, it was all designed with feng shui principles in mind, to promote positive energy. The outside space is shared with residents of Sky View Parc.

Address 155 West 11th Street

Developer The Rudin family and Global Holdings

At the center of this nearly block-long condominium complex at the site of the former St. Vincent’s Hospital campus in Greenwich Village is a 14,000-square-foot garden designed by Rick Parisi, of M. Paul Friedberg & Partners, in the style of an English estate. Features include a formal garden with a reflecting pool, a birch allée with limestone benches and a sheltered area with a trellised pavilion.

Address 8 Vanderbilt Avenue, Brooklyn

Developer Dunn Development Corporation and L&M Development Partners

This collection of 23 townhouses and 98 condominiums across from the Brooklyn Navy Yard is situated around a 30,000-square-foot central outdoor space with a large lawn, a playground, gardens and seating areas.

Address 160 Madison Avenue

Developer J.D. Carlisle Development Corporation, with DLJ Real Estate Capital Partners and Mitsui Fudosan America

A $2 million elevated park with trees and flower beds wraps around the fourth floor of this 319-unit rental, ducking under a cantilevered section of the building.

Address 421 Hudson Street

Developer Myles J. Horn with Belvedere Capital Management and Angelo, Gordon & Co.

The landscaped mews at this West Village condominium conversion and townhouse development runs the length of the block, from Leroy to Clarkson Streets. Designed by Gunn Landscape Architecture, it includes planting beds, green walls and Japanese pagoda trees.

Address 212 Warren Street, Battery Park City

Developer Centurion Real Estate Partners and Five Mile Capital Partners

River birch, honey locust and crepe myrtle trees surround roughly 1,000 square feet of sod on the 18th-floor roof terrace of this 168-unit condominium. The green space overlooks the Hudson River and is equipped with cabanas and gas grills.


