


Forensic scientists have long used dead pigs and other animals as stand-ins for humans to better understand how the body decomposes after death.

Their research on decomposing animals has informed the views of forensic experts in police investigations. Expert witnesses have cited studies in court testimony, and the research has enjoyed star turns on television shows like “C.S.I.”

But recent work by a team of scientists at the University of Tennessee suggests that for anyone trying to draw conclusions about a person’s time of death or the way that decomposition progresses, pigs may be a poor substitute for humans.

The study, conducted at the university’s famed Forensic Anthropology Center, widely known as the Body Farm, compared the decomposition rates of pigs, rabbits and humans during different seasons. The speed at which the three species decomposed differed significantly, the researchers found, and the human bodies varied more in how rapidly they decomposed than the other animals.

“What we’re saying is that to estimate the time since death for human forensic cases, our results indicate that human subjects are best, because the pigs and the rabbits do not capture the variation we saw in the humans,” said Dawnie Wolfe Steadman, director of the center, who led the research.

She added that pigs or other mammals might be suitable for some types of forensic research, like determining the types of insects or scavengers in a particular region.

The study, financed by the National Institute of Justice, a federal Justice Department agency, was presented at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences earlier this year.

For forensic scientists, estimating the time of death from human remains has always been a somewhat iffy business.

In 1981, William M. Bass, a forensic anthropologist, founded the Body Farm, the first outdoor research facility of its kind in the nation, because some of his estimates had been off by decades or even longer.

In one case, Dr. Bass was called to look at well-preserved remains that had been dug up during the renovation of a house in Nashville in 1976. He estimated that the man had been dead for a few months. But the remains turned out to be those of a Civil War colonel, killed in battle in 1864.

Eric Bartelink, a professor of anthropology at California State University, Chico, and the president of the American Board of Forensic Anthropology, said pigs were often chosen for decomposition studies because they had little body hair and their fat ratios were similar to those of humans.

“The assumption was that it can’t be that different,” Dr. Bartelink said, referring to the decomposition rate of pigs.

A 2007 study conducted at the Tennessee facility appeared to support that view, finding that a range of insects, choosing between dead pigs and dead humans, showed “negligible preference,” suggesting that pigs were not much different from humans in the way they decomposed.

The results “confirmed the claim that pig carcasses can substitute for human corpses in research and training programs,” concluded the authors, led by an entomologist, Dr. Kenneth G. Schoenly, who is now at California State University, Stanislaus.

But that study included only one human and two pigs — a very limited sample, as Dr. Schoenly and his colleagues noted.

In contrast, Dr. Steadman’s research tested decomposition in 15 pigs, 15 rabbits and 15 human bodies that had been donated to science that were divided into three trials of five subjects of each species left to decompose in spring, summer or winter.

The remains were placed outdoors on the ground at least 10 feet apart at the research facility. The researchers monitored temperature and humidity, and cameras documented scavenging by raccoons or other animals. Insect activity and the degree of decomposition were recorded twice a day.

But Dr. Steadman and her colleagues found that estimates based on a formula often used to calculate time since death correlated weakly with the actual time that the pigs, rabbits and humans in the study had spent decomposing, and that decomposition rates differed sharply among the species and from season to season.

In spring and summer, the peak seasons for insects like blowflies that are attracted to carrion, the pigs decomposed more rapidly than the human subjects. But in winter, humans decomposed faster, largely as a result of scavengers like raccoons, which seemed to prefer the human remains.

“All of the areas of interest for the pigs are in the trunk,” Dr. Steadman said, “where with humans it’s all in the limbs, and that affects the scavenging.”

Dr. Steadman said one of the most striking findings was how much the decomposition patterns of one human body differed from another. “All of us have various diets, our body composition varies widely, and it’s not just weight,” she said. “Individuals who have a lot of fat decompose faster than lean individuals.”

She added that chemotherapy drugs and other medications could also affect how quickly a body decomposes.

Dr. Bartelink said studies like Dr. Steadman’s were “extremely important” and showed that “we need to be doing studies on humans, not animals.”

Daniel J. Wescott, director of the Forensic Anthropology Center at Texas State University, also praised the new research. But he added that the findings needed to be replicated by other studies and that scientists still had much to learn about what happens to a body after death.

“It’s kind of strange,” Dr. Wescott said. “Things have been decomposing since the beginning of time, and it’s remarkable how little we know about how things decompose and why they decompose.”


