


When your on-campus audience is more likely to look at the phone between classes than pick up a newspaper, what’s a student publication to do?

For a steadily increasing number of student-led papers, the answer has been doing away with print.

The Cornell Daily Sun, one of the country’s leading student newspapers, announced on Monday that it would decrease its print production to three days a week from five, joining a growing list of college and professional newspapers forced to adapt to financial challenges and the changing habits of readers.

In an email to alumni, Sun editors acknowledged that rocky finances contributed to the decision. The newspaper had operated at a loss for seven years and was dipping into its “rainy day” fund, the editors said.

But on the newspaper’s website, editors described the cutback as a chance to focus more on digital journalism.

“By freeing ourselves from the constraints of a daily print model, we are pushing ourselves further to pursue top-quality, around-the-clock journalism,” the editors wrote.

In a telephone interview, Sofia Hu, the newspaper’s editor, said the time saved from not having to produce a print edition would be invested in developing multimedia stories and investigations, and in training writers. To produce the newspaper’s design and layout, two news editors, along with several other staffers, would work daily from 6 p.m. to at least midnight, she said.

The staff, meanwhile, would race to post articles online as fast as possible during the day — and oh, by the way, also attend class and find time for their homework.

“Our editors and writers are basically putting out two papers a day,” she said.

For all that effort, print circulation declined to 3,000 a day from 5,100 in 2011, Ms. Hu said. But the paper edition remains important, she said; the less-frequent publications will focus more on in-depth articles, investigations and long magazine-style articles.

The Cornell Daily Sun is far from alone in its decision. In the professional ranks, newspapers in New Orleans, Syracuse and Harrisburg, Pa., are among those that no longer print daily editions. The list of college newspapers that have reduced their print editions or moved online only is long, including those at Ohio University, the University of Georgia, the University of Missouri and Columbia University.

Student newspapers operate under a variety of financial arrangements. While some, like The Cornell Daily Sun, are fully independent of the universities they cover, others are fully or partly financed by the colleges.

Some newspapers are spurred to reduce print editions as a cost-cutting measure, but others are motivated by a belief that ditching print will produce a better digital product, said Kelley Lash, the president of the College Media Association, an educational organization for student journalists and their advisers.

“Most of the time, even if it was driven by finances, it forces innovation, and that’s not a bad thing,” she said, adding that she predicted more schools were likely to cut back or drop print altogether.

In case you’re wondering: The Cornell Daily Sun will keep the word “Daily” in its name.

“We’re probably going to be more daily than ever,” Ms. Hu said.


