


On Thursday, G-Star will open its new Fifth Avenue store across from the New York Public Library. Inside the expansive space — the first to open since Pharrell Williams became an owner of the denim label in February — you’ll find a number of 3-D floating legs and a central mezzanine display that showcases unconventional styles, like the men’s Staq jeans ($260) tacked at intervals to produce the namesake “stacking” effect and women’s Pouch jeans ($170) with a large central pocket meant to take the place of a handbag. At 475 Fifth Avenue.

Finally master the Bird of Paradise: Athleta is presenting Bryant Park Yoga, free outdoor classes every Thursday evening at 6 and Tuesday morning at 10 all summer long. The classes are taught by instructors chosen by Yoga Journal.

Get in the spirit for the French Open finals with the Lacoste Roland Garros capsule collection, which includes a “Silence s’il vous plait” graphic sweatshirt ($125) and a piqué mini polo featuring the tournament trophy alongside the label’s signature crocodile ($125). At 541 Broadway.

The We Wore What blogger Danielle Bernstein has teamed up with the luxury resortwear label Onia on two swim styles available exclusively at Intermix: a maillot ($195) and a high-waist two-piece ($175) that feature sexy lace-up details. At 812 Washington Street.

The Brazilian plastic footwear brand Melissa Shoes has created an “Alice Through the Looking Glass” capsule collection that includes Mary Jane flats with a sweet Cheshire cat motif ($75) to celebrate the release of the Disney movie. At Saks Fifth Avenue.

The MoMA Design Store is closing for renovations and has a clearance sale on through June 10, offering discounts of up to 70 percent on select products, floor samples and one-of-a-kind pieces. Included are an MM6 Maison Martin Margiela triangle tote ($99.95, originally $185) and a scarf printed with a NASA image of Manhattan and the message “Hello from Above” by the art director and designer James Victore, who is featured in the museum’s collection ($79.95, originally $200). At 44 West 53rd Street.

Charlotte Sun platform sandals, named for the midcentury-modern master Charlotte Perriand ($312.50, originally $625), are among the styles marked down up to 50 percent at the Pierre Hardy seasonal sale. At 30 Jane Street.


