


“I’m not that interested in the murders or the innocence and guilt question,” said Ezra Edelman, the director of “O. J.: Made in America.” “That’s been done.”

Two years ago, when Mr. Edelman was asked by Connor Schell of ESPN to make a film about O. J. Simpson, what inspired him was the proposed five hours he’d get to cover his subject.

“It was the canvas that made me feel better about doing it,” Mr. Edelman said. “I was intrigued by the formal challenge of making a five-hour movie because I was interested in the 30 years before the murders, the city, race and identity, and the juxtaposition with O. J.’s story. This is a big American studies paper. This touches on everything in our culture. I wanted to tell that.”

“O. J.: Made in America” grew to 7 hours 43 minutes and, starting on Friday, May 20, is playing in two theaters in Los Angeles and New York, making it eligible for Academy Award consideration. It will then be broadcast on television in five parts, beginning June 11 on ABC and moving to ESPN the following week. (The film will be shown in theaters with two breaks, said Jay Jay Nesheim, an ESPN spokeswoman. She also confirmed that though Oscar rules require that documentaries play four times a day in theaters, the academy has agreed that the release plan — showing on two screens per theater each day — would be acceptable.)

At the beginning of production, Mr. Edelman had few contemporary reference points for going long other than the signature, sweeping documentaries of Ken Burns and “The Staircase,” a 2004 French series about a North Carolina novelist accused of killing his wife that is considered to be the primary precursor to the current iteration of doc series. It ran over six hours.

Now, Mr. Edelman finds himself, if not in a crowd, certainly not alone. Despite a culture of short attention spans, long-story nonfiction filmmaking has become the rage after the critical and commercial successes of HBO’s six-part, 4-hour-45-minute “The Jinx,” about Robert Durst, a wealthy scion accused of killing a friend (among others); and Netflix’s 10-part, 10-hour-7-minute “Making a Murderer,” about Steven Avery, a Wisconsin man accused of a murder after serving 18 years in prison for a wrongful sexual assault conviction.

Both series were released in 2015 after the equally exalted first season of “Serial” in 2014, the nonfiction multi-episodic podcast about the murder of a Maryland high school student.

There has since been a “deluge” of single-story, immersive projects being pitched, said Josh Braun, a co-president of Submarine, a film sales and production company. But Mr. Braun, who is shepherding three documentaries that began as features and have been reconceived as series, cautions that most projects “don’t actually have the requisite material that would sustain a four- or six- or 10-part nonfiction series,” he says. “Not everything works.”

The six-part “Missing Dial,” about a young American adventurer who disappeared in Costa Rica in 2014, is to begin on the National Geographic Channel on May 22. A documentary series on the 1996 killing of the 6-year-old JonBenet Ramsey, to run on CBS, was recently announced. Coming to Netflix this year will be “Captive,” an eight-part series about hostage negotiators.

HBO doesn’t have another documentary series on its slate, but “one or two” films being produced might turn into series depending on the facts under examination, said Sheila Nevins, the president of HBO Documentary Films. “The story tells you the length,” she said, adding that feature-length documentaries are still the standard.

Although Lisa Nishimura, the vice president for original documentary programming at Netflix, hasn’t been flooded by series pitches, she conceded that her industry can be “trend oriented” and estimated that about half of her filmmaker meetings include discussions about the possibility of going to a multi-episodic format. Because Netflix is a streaming company, “we do not have parameters of X number of program hours or traditional restrictions around what needs to fall at a particular time,” she said. “We can be completely liberated, and we can pass that to our creatives.”

Ms. Nishimura said that her confidence in the power of multi-episodic documentaries dated to the success of the 13-episode, binge-ready release of Netflix’s fictional drama series “House of Cards,” in 2013. “There was no reason to think that wouldn’t hold true for nonfiction as well,” she said.

True-crime stories lend themselves to the episodic format because they contain a wealth of minutiae, much of it in case files that filmmakers can pick over, filling hours and providing fodder for audience D.I.Y. detective work that the Internet culture fosters. Trial twists and turns, as well as characters in dire predicaments, can propel dramatic narratives toward a verdict.

What distinguishes “O. J.: Made in America” from the recent FX dramatization, “The People v. O. J. Simpson,” as well as the recent crop of true-crime docuseries, is that it redirects audience attention away from the 1994 murders of Ronald L. Goldman and Nicole Brown and the subsequent trial, in which Mr. Simpson was acquitted. The new film doesn’t ignore them but adds perspective through frank interviews with, among others, two jurors and Mark Fuhrman, the former police detective whose record of racist remarks proved damaging to the prosecution’s case. And a possible explanation is proffered for why those infamous gloves didn’t fit. Still, the murders and trial are largely confined to Episodes 3 and 4.

What “O. J.: Made in America” does first is plumb the depths of racial tensions in both athletics and Los Angeles during Mr. Simpson’s lifetime while examining his childhood in San Francisco and evolving racial identity. Mr. Simpson’s skills on the football field are also amply displayed. Mr. Edelman said that ESPN and Mr. Schell were consistently supportive of his longitudinal, “slightly elevated” take on the material.

“We approached this the same way we have approached the ‘30 for 30’ series,” Mr. Schell said, referring to the channel’s award-winning series. “How can we cover this in a way that isn’t obvious?”

As the ground shifts, even the nomenclature isn’t set. Should “O. J.: Made in America” be called a multi-episodic or docuseries or long-form nonfiction? There is no agreed-upon terminology.

“I call it a long movie,” Mr. Edelman says.


