


Now, bewilderingly, Mayor Bill de Blasio and his crew are said to be in an exotic pile of legal trouble faced by virtually no other politicians who have done just about the same thing.

In 2014, the mayor and allies raised millions of dollars in hopes of giving control of the State Senate to the Democrats. By law, there was a limit of $10,300 that an individual could give that year to a campaign. But the same person could give about $100,000 to larger political organizations, like state and county party committees.

Those committees can spend away on behalf of the candidates, but everyone has to pretend not to coordinate efforts to get around the limits.

A scorching report by Risa S. Sugarman, chief enforcement officer for the State Board of Elections, said the de Blasio team had committed “willful and flagrant” violations of the laws by using those committees. She sent it on to the Manhattan district attorney.

Her document is remarkably assiduous in places, and filled with flagrant, or at least gaping, holes in others.

For instance, Ms. Sugarman managed not to notice that the State Democratic Committee received $766,000 in 12 days in October 2014, much of it from organizations and people linked to Mr. de Blasio, and promptly spent it on a number of the same vendors and on behalf of the same candidates, according to reports filed with the elections board. Not a word appears in her report about the money that passed through that committee. As it happens, that committee is effectively controlled by the governor, Andrew M. Cuomo, who nominated her for her job.

Why was the state committee left out of such a meticulous report?

“I don’t comment on confidential memos,” Ms. Sugarman said.

If we are going to criminalize politics, why spare one committee from the opprobrium heaped on others?

“All my investigations and anything that goes on within my division is confidential,” Ms. Sugarman said.

For other committees, she diagrams a web of money that moved from donors associated with Mr. de Blasio into party committees in several counties, and then was spent on, or by, the candidates’ campaigns.

The report detects a level of coordination that, in her view, achieved its purpose: to frustrate both disclosure requirements and contribution limits. She cites an email from the campaign manager for a Senate candidate in Ulster County to the treasurer of the county Democratic committee. “Has the check for $60K cleared?” the campaign manager asked. “Below is our banking info, we need the 60 transferred over ASAP please.”

This email shows that they “previously had discussions about this matter,” Ms. Sugarman wrote, adding, “This pattern of activity indicates that the committees already had committed to these expenditures prior to receiving the funds.” Thus, the everyday plaintive wails of political operatives trying to win elections — I need that check ASAP! — was rendered as an act in a nearly sinister conspiracy.

Others might see this as tactical spending and fund-raising; to Ms. Sugarman, it amounts to an evasion forbidden by law. It certainly has a long history. Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor as mayor, Michael R. Bloomberg, sent $75,000 to the New York State Senate Republican Campaign Committee during the last days before a special election on Long Island in 2007. The check was delivered on Jan. 26, for an election held 11 days later. The money supported a single Republican candidate, in one campaign, with a donation many times the limit Mr. Bloomberg would have been permitted if he had given the money directly to the campaign.

Mr. Bloomberg spent heavily in similar fashion during his time as mayor to prop up the Republican Senate majority, using his own money. Mr. de Blasio has spent heavily in hopes of attaining a Democratic majority, though he has taken the precaution of using other people’s money.

If it seems strange that Mr. de Blasio is now on the griddle when so many others could just as easily have provided fixings for the same meal, it’s important to remember that the corrupting force of campaign money was part of the work of the Moreland Commission in 2013 and 2014.

The city, unlike the state, has a reasonably strong and effective public financing law. Elsewhere, money in politics finds its own level. It is not a heartening sight, said Bill Cunningham, a former executive director of the state Democratic committee.

“That level,” he said, “is somewhere between a bog and a swamp.”


