


Pitcher Julio Urias is set to make his major league debut for the Los Angeles Dodgers on Friday night in New York against the Mets.

The 19-year-old left-hander is 4-1 with a 1.10 E.R.A. at Class AAA Oklahoma City, where he has a 27-inning scoreless streak and 44 strikeouts in 41 innings.

The Dodgers announced Thursday that Urias would replace the left-hander Alex Wood, who was out with soreness in his left triceps.

“I don’t think you can say for sure how someone is going to handle the emotions of fulfilling a lifelong dream,” Andrew Friedman, the team’s president of baseball operations, said of Urias’s scheduled debut. “All of our guys who have worked with Julio rave about his mound presence and his ability to control his emotions.”

Urias will be the first 19-year-old to pitch for the Dodgers since Fernando Valenzuela, who was 19 when he made his debut in September 1980. The following year, “Fernandomania” was born as Valenzuela won the National League Rookie of the Year and Cy Young Awards.

The Dodgers have carefully managed Urias, a Mexican pitcher who is one of the majors’ top prospects, since signing him shortly after his 16th birthday. They discovered him on the same 2012 scouting trip to Mexico during which they signed the Cuban outfielder Yasiel Puig.

Moustakas Has Torn A.C.L. The Kansas City Royals placed third baseman Mike Moustakas on the 15-day disabled list with a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee.

Such injuries usually sideline a player for a long period, but Moustakas, a 2015 All-Star, said he would seek a second opinion.

Moustakas and left fielder Alex Gordon collided Sunday while chasing a fly ball. Gordon went on the disabled list with a wrist fracture.

Around the Majors Jackie Bradley Jr.’s 29-game hitting streak was ended by the visiting Colorado Rockies during an 8-2 win over the Boston Red Sox. Bradley went 0 for 4 while batting leadoff for the first time this season. Jose Fernandez struck out 12 in seven innings and won his sixth straight start for the visiting Miami Marlins, who defeated the Tampa Bay Rays, 9-1. Fernandez struck out every hitter in the Rays’ lineup at least once. Bryce Harper ended a 4-for-33 skid with a no-doubt-about-it shot into the upper deck, and Danny Espinosa hit the winning homer in the Washington Nationals’ 2-1 victory over the visiting St. Louis Cardinals. Atlanta Braves outfielder Hector Olivera accepted an 82-game suspension without pay, through Aug. 1 and retroactive to April 30, for violating Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy. Olivera was arrested April 13 and charged with assault and battery after an altercation with a woman at a hotel outside Washington. The Boston Red Sox retired No. 26 in honor of Wade Boggs, who produced eight All-Star appearances and five batting titles for the franchise.

New Orleans Pelicans forward Anthony Davis is out about $24 million after not being named to the All-N.B.A. first, second or third team.

A provision in the collective bargaining agreement, called the Rose rule, allows a player signing a maximum extension to his rookie contracts to receive additional pay if he has met certain criteria by the end of his fourth season. To qualify, a player must meet one of the following conditions: be named most valuable player once, be named to an All-N.B.A. team twice or be voted an All-Star starter twice.

Davis, who averaged 24.3 points, 10.3 rebounds and two blocks this season, was relying on a second career All-N.B.A. selection. By failing to make one of the teams, his five-year extension is worth $121 million instead of $145 million.

The players named to the All-N.B.A. first team were Golden State’s Stephen Curry, Cleveland’s LeBron James, Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook, San Antonio’s Kawhi Leonard and the Clippers’ DeAndre Jordan.

N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell reaffirmed the league’s commitment to concussion research in a letter to the team owners.

In the wake of a congressional study that concluded that N.F.L. officials had tried to steer the National Institutes of Health away from a researcher the league feared was biased, Goodell called for “continued and robust support of independent medical research.”

Goodell told the owners that the league had never considered not honoring a $30 million commitment to the N.I.H. “in its entirety.” He also said that the league would provide additional money for projects relating to safety equipment and treatment of athletes who have had concussions and a study relating to the prevalence of long-term health consequences.

The Masters champion Danny Willett got off to a fast start on the European Tour, shooting a six-under-par 66 to sit a stroke behind a three-way tie for the lead at the BMW PGA Championship in Virginia Water, England. Y. E. Yang, Scott Hend and Joost Luiten shared the lead.

The Scripps National Spelling Bee ended in a tie for a third consecutive year, with Jairam Hathwar and Nihar Janga declared co-champions after a roller-coaster finish.

Scripps made the bee tougher, forcing the last two spellers to get through three times as many words as in years past. Jairam misspelled two words, but both times, Nihar followed up with a miss and the bee continued.

The agent for ESPN’s Chris Berman denied a report by the Big Lead website that the announcer will retire after the coming N.F.L. season and will not seek to join another network.

“Chris is not retiring,” Lou Oppenheim, the chief executive of Headline Media Management, said in an email. “Loves what he’s doing too much and is too young to hang ‘em up. Perhaps people with an agenda put it out there.”

ESPN declined to comment.

According to The Big Lead, ESPN has “lavish plans for a send-off” for Berman that “might be akin to the way the Lakers sent Kobe Bryant into retirement.”

Berman has been with ESPN almost since its inception in 1979 and for many years was one of the faces of the network. But in recent years, he has been criticized over matters including his bombastic calls of the All-Star Game’s Home Run Derby.

RICHARD SANDOMIR


