


LOUISVILLE, Ky. — All week — all prep season, really — more doubts were heaped onto Nyquist than mint onto juleps: He is not dominant enough; he will not be able to handle the mile-and-a-quarter Kentucky Derby distance; he is not American Pharoah.

On Saturday at Churchill Downs, Nyquist went into the starting gate carrying all that criticism on his shoulders, then blew past his competition to win the Derby by one and a quarter lengths over a fast-closing Exaggerator and extend his record to 8-0.

“If anybody watches Nyquist’s races, you will see that he will not allow any other horse past him,” his jubilant jockey, Mario Gutierrez, said after the race. “He’s the kind of horse that always has something left for whatever comes to him late.”

Nyquist, the 2-year-old champion, has now won the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile, the Florida Derby and the Kentucky Derby, pushing his earnings to $4.95 million. He still has a long way to go before he can be anointed another American Pharoah, who last year captured the first Triple Crown in 37 years, but he is certainly carving out an imposing path.

Nyquist came out of the race well and will be shipped to Baltimore on Monday to prepare for the second leg of the Triple Crown, the Preakness Stakes on May 21.

“He’s doing great,” his trainer, Doug O’Neill, said outside Barn 41 on Sunday morning. “He had his head out over the webbing, looking bright-eyed. He ate it all up last night. Couldn’t be doing better. He’s just such a special horse.”

Among the challengers expected to take another shot at Nyquist in the Preakness is Lani, the Japan-based U.A.E. Derby winner who made a name for himself in Kentucky with his erratic behavior, and Exaggerator, the Santa Anita Derby winner who catapulted from far back in the pack to take aim at Nyquist down the stretch.

Exaggerator’s trainer, Keith Desormeaux, and rider, Kent Desormeaux, both indicated after the race that they would like a rematch.

Asked about facing Exaggerator and the Desormeaux brothers in the Preakness, Nyquist’s owner, J. Paul Reddam, said jokingly, “I would have thought he was sick of us by now.”

Turning serious, he added: “No, his horse, obviously, ran great. And he was the closest threat. And if I were him, I would want a rematch, too.”

Laoban and Cherry Wine, who were on the also-eligible list for the Derby, are also expected to run in the Preakness, as are the newcomers Stradivari, Collected, Uncle Lino and Awesome Speed.

Gun Runner, who finished third in the Derby, and Suddenbreakingnews, who finished fifth, came out of the race well and could end up heading to Baltimore as well.

An announced crowd of 167,227 was on hand to witness the Kentucky Derby. It was the second-highest attendance in Derby history behind the 170,513 in 2015, when American Pharoah began his quest.

The overnight TV rating for the Derby on NBC was a 9.4, a decrease from last year’s rating of 10.8.

Now all eyes will be on Nyquist as he looks to ace his next test. His connections, who won the Derby and the Preakness with I’ll Have Another in 2012, only to be forced to scratch him a day before the Belmont Stakes with a tendon injury, are being cautiously optimistic.

“It doesn’t seem like we have ever really gotten to the bottom of him,” O’Neill said. “That’s very exciting about the future. And, again, like every other athlete, you just got to stay injury free.”


