


OAKLAND, Calif. — Postseason life without Stephen Curry resumed for the Golden State Warriors on Tuesday morning, and it was impossible for them not to sense his absence.

At the end of practice, at the basket that Curry usually occupies with the assistant coach Bruce Fraser, Anderson Varejao filled the void by stepping in to take some jumpers of his own. Varejao, a reserve center, has had a fine career, but somehow it was not quite the same.

At an adjacent basket, a player of greater significance to the team’s postseason aspirations worked on his shooting mechanics. Shaun Livingston, one of the most steady-handed backup point guards in the N.B.A., is expected to start for the Warriors on Wednesday night when they play the Houston Rockets in Game 5 of their first-round playoff series.

It will not be a new experience for Livingston, who was pushed into a starting role when Curry missed Games 2 and 3 with an ankle injury. But with Curry probably sidelined at least two weeks with a sprained right knee, Livingston will shoulder even more responsibility as the Warriors, with a 3-1 series lead, look to advance without their best player.

“We’ve got to cut harder, we’ve got to play harder, and we have to defend harder,” Livingston said. “Every little thing. He covers a lot of mistakes, a lot of holes.”

If nothing else, the Warriors have used the series to become more accustomed to playing without Curry — and with some solid results. There was no bigger confidence builder for the Curry-free Warriors than the second half of Sunday’s Game 4 victory. After Curry went to the locker room, the Warriors broke open a tie game and won, 121-94, at Houston.

“I think this year we’ve gotten better at playing without Steph,” the versatile forward Draymond Green said. “We’ve figured it out. I think part of that is just knowing the offense better. But when he’s out, everybody’s got to be moving, and everybody’s got to be cutting. We need to get those easy baskets.”

The Warriors are not the only team to be hindered by injuries this postseason. Consider the plight of the Los Angeles Clippers, who announced Tuesday that Blake Griffin (left quadriceps) would miss the remainder of the playoffs and that Chris Paul would be sidelined indefinitely. Paul broke a bone in his right hand on Monday against the Portland Trail Blazers.

Green said that Coach Steve Kerr used the Clippers’ bad luck as a teaching moment at Tuesday’s practice: Nothing is promised, so take advantage of your opportunities.

Few players in the N.B.A. have a greater empathy for the injured than Livingston, whose promising career nearly unraveled in 2007 when he sustained cataclysmic damage to his left knee while playing for the Clippers. It took years for him to work his way back to being a productive player.

With his own experiences in mind, Livingston said he was relieved to learn Monday that Curry had sustained only a Grade 1 sprain — a mild injury, all things considered.

“Seeing what happened and how he fell, it could have been real ugly,” Livingston said. “I think he got the best possible news.”

In two seasons with the Warriors, Livingston, 30, has cemented himself as one of the team’s most reliable players off the bench — no small feat, given the team’s depth. During the regular season, he averaged 6.3 points and 3 assists as an anchor of Kerr’s second unit, and he shot 53.6 percent from the field. He tends to make few mistakes.

At 6 feet 7, Livingston also has the length to create problems for opposing players. His sweeping floater is virtually unblockable, and he describes his midrange game as his “bread and butter.”

In other words, Livingston and Curry are completely different players. Curry creates space by operating along the 3-point line and searching for seams. Livingston often tries to initiate offense by finding his way to the post and exploiting mismatches against smaller defenders.

“It’s a different game, playing inside-out,” Livingston said, adding that with Curry sidelined, “I’ve got to be more aggressive just because of the production that’s out.”

Livingston went on: “I don’t expect to make all of that up — that’s a guy who leads the league in scoring, and he’s the most valuable player. But it’s really important to make sure we all remain aggressive and confident.”

Kerr helped preserve Livingston during the regular season by playing him just 19.5 minutes a game, but Livingston said he was prepared to push himself more in Curry’s absence. In Games 2 and 3, Livingston averaged 16 points and 4.5 assists while shooting 59.1 percent. He played 29 minutes in Game 2 and 30 in Game 3.

“We’re trying to make a run for a few more weeks, so I don’t think he wants to overexpose me or my body to 40 minutes a night of something like that,” Livingston said of Kerr, who was named the N.B.A.’s coach of the year on Tuesday. “But I feel good — trying to remain healthy.”

Livingston said he was open to the idea of channeling his inner Curry by trying an occasional 3-pointer, which would be an unusual practice for him. During the regular season, he had just 12 3-point attempts, compared with Curry’s 886. But if shooting from long-range helps extend defenses, then Livingston would be willing to mix it up.

“I think it just depends on the moment in the game,” he said.

For now, if not forever, Livingston will have more moments to weigh the possibilities that he could only have imagined just weeks ago.


