


Anybody raised reading comic books has probably wished for two things: the immediate arrival of the next issue and serious flesh-and-blood movies of favorite titles.

The first was impossible. The other didn’t happen, for me, until “X-Men” opened in 2000, after I’d become an adult. Halle Berry was playing Storm, who hails from African sorceresses and whose mutant powers include controlling the weather. And that should have hit the spot.

But I left concerned. What did Halle Berry’s Halle Berryness have to do with Storm? It was more like Ms. Berry had to fulfill Storm’s terrestrial sensuality. I know, I know: That’s acting. And act she did. But after 16 years, and at least four dozen movies, I’m starting to think it’s something else. These conflicts have deepened into a personal crisis: My love of comic books is conflicting with my need for movie stars.

The truth about Ms. Berry in that movie — and James Marsden, Anna Paquin and Famke Janssen, too — became the truth about many actors in most of these movies: There are too many people in them for any one actor (who isn’t Hugh Jackman) to be put to completely satisfying use.

Right now, stars are beating one another silly in “Captain America: Civil War”: It’s Robert Downey Jr. versus Chris Evans versus Scarlett Johansson versus Paul Rudd versus Jeremy Renner versus Don Cheadle. So it went in the “Avengers” movies, a bunch of X-Men films (including “Apocalypse,” opening Friday, May 27), and “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.”

And I can’t say that any of the actors look happy. The entire point of “Civil War” is that infighting sucks. All the long-faced stoicism suggests that this is miserable work. And those stars have a lot of company: Ben Affleck, Michael Fassbender and Jennifer Lawrence all play comic-book combatants the way Bruce Willis moped all over “The Sixth Sense.” At least he had an excuse. The comic-book franchise is where traditional movie stardom is going to die.

As good as comic-book movies have been for making it rain money for the studios — mainly Disney, Warner Bros. and Fox — and as much fun as I’ve had at some of them, the genre has perverted what it means to watch certain actors in movies. When the character is more famous than the actor playing it, how does anybody develop the trademarks of a star? The prerogatives of the comic book are warping the properties of movie stardom. One feels at permanent odds with the other.

Mr. Evans’s stardom, for example, is almost entirely bound up in superhero work. In two lousy “Fantastic Four” films (from 2005 and 2007), he played Johnny Storm, a.k.a. the Human Torch, as if he were a quarterback who just won the Heisman. He could see beyond the source material and managed to give the part a personality. You watched him in those movies and junk like “Cellular,” from 2004, and thought, he’s got something.

His prize was Captain America, a guy whose moral rectitude makes him the punch line of jokes that Johnny Storm would have made. Mr. Evans’s primary weapon used to be cocky self-surprise: He couldn’t believe he was him. But there’s increasingly little room for that sort of lightness in the Avengers galaxy. The darker the superhero movies get — and they’re invariably aimed at doomsday; that new X-Men movie is subtitled “Apocalypse,” which identifies a character but suggests a state of mind — the less necessary a recurring star’s magic becomes. Mr. Evans can’t upend anymore. He has to uphold. The brand comes first. Marvel is the star.

Mr. Evans’s early approach to the movie superhero made a nifty template for fun that Mr. Downey shattered, in 2008, playing Tony Stark in what grew into three “Iron Man” movies. He made Tony a bitchy frontman for a band that didn’t yet exist. He was making Robert Downey Jr. movies. But an unintended consequence of his exuberant snark is that he was no longer himself. Besides the pile of Tony Stark appearances and two stints as Sherlock Holmes, he’s barely been able to do much else. And yet, by the time he did stinkers like “Due Date” and “The Judge,” his carbonated sarcasm had curdled into smugness.

Almost 20 years ago, George Clooney had to fight off the stink of having been Batman. The part so terribly tortured Michael Keaton that for an exorcism he played an actor haunted by his star-making superhero role in “Birdman.” Now Batman is the place to be. Batman also doesn’t care who plays him. Christian Bale? Ben Affleck? Doesn’t matter. Whatever. To paraphrase Mr. Keaton’s incarnation: He’s still Batman.

Everybody else — or their handlers — wants in, too. This fall, Benedict Cumberbatch stars in “Doctor Strange,” with Chiwetel Ejiofor and Tilda Swinton. In August, Will Smith joins “Suicide Squad,” with Jared Leto and Viola Davis, among others. “Batman v Superman” used up not only Mr. Affleck but also, for starters, Amy Adams, Jesse Eisenberg and Laurence Fishburne. You’re not watching a movie anymore. You’re watching a 24-pack of bottled water from Costco.

The genre’s success has changed the entire American movie business. Even movies derived from Grimm’s fairy tales feel like comic-book films. How else are we to receive “The Huntsman: Winter’s War,” a gnarly, poorly attended sequel to a 2012 hit that brings back Charlize Theron and Chris Hemsworth, ropes in Jessica Chastain and poor Emily Blunt, and requires them to swing stuff at one another, joylessly. Well, Ms. Theron camps it up, but she’s missing for more than half the movie.

Instead of developing new properties to cannibalize for the next 30 years, studios are juicing the life out their pre-existing intellectual property — “Jurassic Park” and “Star Wars.” Some of the chapters in these franchises I’ve really liked. Some of them I can’t wait to see. But I don’t need a new “Ghostbusters.” A new “Ghostbusters” feels like Halloween. We’re in a perpetual state of anti-originalism now, in which taste is dictated by a totalitarian recommendation algorithm. If you liked “Star Wars,” great. You’ll be getting it for, like, ever!

This is different from the old Jerry Bruckheimer era, when a bunch of dudes would stand around and drive, or jailbreak, in, say, “Con Air” or “The Rock.” The fun came from the onslaught of the casting — it rained famous men. Casting was the point, too, of Steven Soderbergh’s “Ocean’s” movies: Mr. Clooney, Brad Pitt and Matt Damon assessed their star pecking order, and Julia Roberts’s fame became a hilarious heist tool. The bliss of the “Fast and Furious” series is that it’s an organic descendant of Bruckheimer and a peer to the “Ocean’s” movies, organized around the beachiness of Paul Walker, the slabby charisma of Vin Diesel and the appeal of anyone else invited to play in the club. If you’re in these movies, you’re a star.

The endless expansion of these prefab universes has its boons. One scene in “Civil War” features three black men — Mr. Cheadle, Anthony Mackie and Chadwick Boseman — almost talking to one another, and not about white people. Mr. Boseman has even been promised his own spinoff, as the Black Panther. After “Empire,” what else in Hollywood is doing this much for black actors?

But is that enough? The superhero movie feels like dead-end brand expansion. Every good young actor vacuumed up by a superhero franchise or a megahit movie series costs us a fresh star persona.

The world recently found out that Alden Ehrenreich is set to become a young Han Solo. His cornpone cowboy-movie star was nearly the best thing in the Coen brothers’ “Hail Caesar!,” and he managed to keep up with Cate Blanchett in “Blue Jasmine.” He’s what they call promising. And for now, all that promise is about to get locked up in the franchise reincarnation business. This isn’t to say that Mr. Ehrenreich won’t be able do anything else. Jennifer Lawrence has managed to balance four movies as Katniss Everdeen, her “X-Men” duties and her work for David O. Russell. But she’s an exception. Mark Ruffalo, who as the Hulk time-shares his part with a visual-effects department, is another. And Mr. Hemsworth, too. But even when he’s racing cars or sailing ships for Ron Howard, code-hacking for Michael Mann or being man-meat in “Vacation,” I hate to say it: All I see is Thor.

Mr. Ehrenreich might have no trouble matching or surpassing Mr. Ford’s charisma. But at the end of the day, Mr. Ford’s shoes are the ones that the studio has decided to resole. Chris Pratt basically did the best of Harrison Ford in ”Guardians of the Galaxy” and “Jurassic World.” Mr. Pratt knows what he’s doing. But can he succeed outside of recycled sci-fi? His sexy-aggrieved-chauvinist shtick is funny. It’s also someone else’s. He’s a karaoke movie star.

Secreted away in almost every movie was once a chapter in the myth of its star. Now the pleasures of evolving chapters are migrating away from the movies. Perhaps you stopped on a Saturday night in February, or another in April, to watch Beyoncé successively drown herself on a police cruiser in the video for “Formation,” or lead us through the vicissitudes of her marriage in “Lemonade.” The hijacking of my evenings seemed obnoxious. But these were triumphant interruptions. And where else might I have been at that hour? Oh, right: the movies.

The exciting thing about pop music is that the secrets are open. In the last year, major artists have been taking risks while giving us what we want. Beyoncé’s exploring empowerment and scorn; Rihanna’s vulnerability and weedy chill; Kanye West’s kaleidoscopic excess; Adele’s thunderous voice; Gwen Stefani’s giddiness, hurt and command of “whoa” and “hey.”

Last month, the singing rapper Drake released “Views,” a bucket of slow jams that gives his contrition and paranoia an entertaining workout. “Views” doesn’t achieve artistic greatness. But it doesn’t have to. It’s as important a record in the scheme of Drake’s ego as a “Mission: Impossible” movie is in the scheme of Tom Cruise’s: Burnish that brand, baby.

The difference is that these are young singers who can appear unmediated. They have figured out a way to thrive in a changing industry, going right where their audience lives — on the Internet. And with the advent of the sneak-attack album, they can give you a happy shock doing it. Like Mr. Cruise and the great movie stars, Drake, Beyoncé and their peers understand that stardom is maintained through a tension between remoteness, reliability, risk. Drake raps about himself a lot. He’s conspicuously self-consumed. But who is Drake? I’m buying these records to find out.

If you’re at the new film “Money Monster,” there’s nothing to find out. George Clooney and Julia Roberts are reliably, utterly in their comfort zone. He plays the oily host of an investment show. She’s his producer. When a disgruntled viewer takes the show hostage and things gets tense, I actually found myself exhaling at the sound of Ms. Roberts’s voice in Mr. Clooney’s ear.

She has been at this since the late 1980s — smiling, cracking up, dressing people down and never (ever) being wrong in films in which the women she plays tend to be mixed up with money. She’s an automatic version of herself at the movies, and, unlike Mr. Downey now, rarely seems bored with herself. “Money Monster,” which Jodie Foster directed, makes “automatic” look quaint. The movie shouldn’t be poignant. And yet, even accidentally, it feels like a postcard from the twilight of what movie stardom once was. “Money Monster” concedes that the culture is drifting away from movies like this. The characters played by Mr. Clooney and Ms. Roberts aren’t doing romantic comedy. They’re making cable TV.


