


Olma Caviar Boutique & Lounge This company, which runs a plush little nook in the Plaza Food Hall, has added this dressy Upper West Side bar and restaurant. In front, a display case is chockablock with tins of caviar and serving accessories. Plates of fish roe start at $5 for salmon and climb from there. Salads, sandwiches, foie gras, fresh seafood and smoked fish are served with a nice choice of bubblies, still wines and cocktails: 420 Amsterdam Avenue (80th Street), 212-390-0708, olmacaviar.com.

Barano On the Brooklyn waterfront, steps from the Williamsburg Bridge, Albert Di Meglio, who has worked at Le Cirque, Osteria del Circo and Rubirosa, is set to turn out robust Italian fare, including wood-fired pizzas, meatballs, bucatini with rabbit ragù and spit-roasted lamb. There’s an open kitchen. Mozzarella is made in several styles at a station in the dining room. The chef named the place for his grandmother’s village on Ischia: 26 Broadway (Kent Avenue), South Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-987-4500, baranobk.com.

Emmy Squared Emily and Matt Hyland, who serve Neapolitan-style pizzas at Emily, offer Detroit-inspired square pizzas here, red or white, and some small-plate starters and sandwiches. (Opens Wednesday): 364 Grand Street (Marcy Avenue), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-360-4535, pizzalovesemily.com.

Midnights With the chef Marcellus Coleman in charge, the restaurant goes beyond its slightly Asian-accented dinner fare to provide an appealing late-night menu with items like spring pea fritters, crab-stuffed beignets, and dirty fried rice: 149 North Sixth Street (Bedford Avenue), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-384-6961, midnightsbk.com.

Mekong Restaurant and Bar This popular Vietnamese spot will close next week because of a rent increase, ending food service after dinner on Monday, then serving drinks only through April 28: 16-18 King Street (Avenue of the Americas), 212-343-8169, mekongbar.com.

Wylie Dufresne, who had planned to open a restaurant in the AKA Wall Street hotel in the financial district, will not go ahead with the project. It was a mutual decision between the chef and the hotel, a publicist for Mr. Dufresne said.

Michael Madrigale, the head sommelier at Bar Boulud, Boulud Sud and Épicerie Boulud, is leaving at the end of the week. He started at Bar Boulud eight years ago and is known for pouring wines by the glass from oversize bottles. He plans to become associated with a wine company that sells directly to consumers.

Masanobu Matsushiro is now at Kosaka in the West Village, preparing the cooked-food courses on the tasting menu that precede the sushi course.

Empellón Alex Stupak is planning a Midtown flagship for his restaurant group, which includes Empellón Cocina, Empellón Taqueria and Empellón Al Pastor. The location is in a sleek glass office tower, a 5,000-square-foot space with a mezzanine that was to have been the French chef Anne-Sophie Pic’s New York outpost. Mr. Stupak said that unlike his other restaurants in places that had previous restaurant tenants, here he will be dealing with raw space. “I’ll be able to do what I want and have to make fewer compromises,” he said. The food will be “Mexican inspired,” he said. As for the move to Midtown, by the end of the year, he said, he couldn’t find a space like this downtown and felt he was ready for a new audience. That’s exactly what Marc Forgione said about his uptown version of American Cut, which opened recently: 510 Madison Avenue (53rd Street).

Grey Lady There will be sightings of lionfish, a predatory invasive species from the Caribbean, this summer in Montauk, N.Y. Ryan Chadwick will serve it at this seafood restaurant to open Memorial Day weekend. He owns the flagship on Delancey Street in Manhattan and branches in Aspen, Colo., and Nantucket, Mass. He also distributes lionfish as part of a campaign to get rid of it by consuming it: 440 West Lake Drive, Montauk, N.Y., 631-210-6249, greyladymtk.com.


