


Exploitation cinema is a sleazy United Nations. Its membership includes blaxploitation (“Foxy Brown”), Ozploitation (“Dead End Drive-In” from Australia), European nunsploitation (“Killer Nun”) and other internationally NSFW categories unpalatable for family reading.

But sex is the mother of all “ploitations.” Sexploitation has been around since men (and yes, it’s mostly men) first learned how to turn on a camera and watch women (and yes, it’s mostly women) get naked and do something ridiculous (or violent). A genre rooted in nudie reels of the silent era, sexploitation had its golden age in the 1960s as the sexual revolution pushed the boundaries of cinematic depictions of nudity. Around 1970, the birth of hard-core pornography made sexploitation mainstream, prompting its demise.

“Theaters then that were showing sexploitation closed or had to make the jump to hard-core, and that’s where the bubble burst,” Frank Henenlotter, a director and exploitation film historian, said in a phone interview. “Sexploitation is about tease and how much we are almost going to see something. The moment you show it, the sexploitation game is over.”

The genre is the subject of a documentary, “That’s Sexploitation!,” which arrived recently on video from Severin Films. The film covers a wide and sometimes shockingly bizarre range of sex-centered independent filmmaking. It’s told almost entirely through footage from the archives of Something Weird Video, a Seattle-based distributor of exploitation genres, and directed and narrated by Mr. Henenlotter. Interspersed are interviews with the old-school showman producer David F. Friedman before his death in 2011.

Sexploitation production took place in Los Angeles and New York, with Florida and Texas also churning out pictures. By the 1960s, there were so many films that the genre had its own distribution circuit and exhibitors. A hotbed of highbrow it wasn’t.

These films were “made by businessmen, not artists,” Mr. Henenlotter said. “The point was if you have a camera and you can get some naked girls in front of the camera, you would make some dollars.”

What else is new? Without sexploitation, there would be no “Spring Breakers,” “Showgirls” or other films that skirt the boundaries of sex and taste, with producers in search of box-office gravy. Today, many sexploitation films are largely forgotten. Here are four subgenres worth noting.

Before “King Kong,” there was “Ingagi.” A scandalous sensation in 1930 (that other ape wouldn’t hit New York until 1933), “Ingagi” purported to be a documentary about an expedition in the Belgian Congo, ending with a gorilla abducting a female member of an African tribe for sex.

Promoted in theater lobbies with jungle-themed decorations, the film probably earned about $4 million, according to the cinema historian Andrew Erish. After an investigation prompted by complaints to the Better Business Bureau, the film was found to have been shot in California with actors, including a man in a gorilla suit and a baby adorned with patches of glued-on fur.

“Ingagi” spawned “Forbidden Adventure” and a handful of other “gorilla-and-the-maiden films,” as Mr. Friedman calls them in “That’s Sexploitation!,”, that perpetuated racist and colonialist notions of Africa. “They don’t show sex scenes as we know them, but they show the gorillas carrying the women away,” Mr. Henenlotter said. “In most cases, the women don’t complain about that.”

“Somebody goes to a nudist camp, and they like it” is how Mr. Henenlotter summed up this subgenre’s plots, promoted as ostensible docudramas about the lifestyles of sun-kissed sun worshipers. Taking a cue from European nudist camp films of the 1930s, these pictures featured men and women enjoying sports, swimming and sunbathing. There was no sex, but breasts were everywhere.

With titles like “My Bare Lady” and “Garden of Eden,” the films were shot at nudist campgrounds, skirting laws against onscreen nudity. “If you showed a naked woman inside a nudist camp, the court said that’s acceptable,” Mr. Henenlotter said. “If you showed her walking down the street, they would say that’s an obscenity.”

Nudist-camp films aren’t to be confused with “nudie cuties,” ’60s sexploitation films in which “breasts were the plot,” he said.

A brutal side of sexploitation emerged in these white slavery films, directed by Joseph P. Mawra and featuring a villainously sadistic character named Olga, played by Audrey Campbell. Olga was introduced in “White Slaves of Chinatown,” in which she procures women to become prostitutes, using drugs and torture to beat her captives into submission. “It’s an hour spent in as dark and gloomy a gutter as you can imagine,” Mr. Henenlotter said.

The Russian-sounding name of the titular villainess reflected the era’s Cold War anxieties. “What clean-cut American would do that kind of stuff?” Mr. Henenlotter asked.

This hatched “Olga’s Girls” and “Olga’s House of Shame,” also starring Ms. Campbell. She was replaced in two subsequent films, “Olga’s Massage Parlor” and “Olga’s Dance Hall Girls.” Mr. Henenlotter said these disturbing films tapped into male sexual resentments in post-Eisenhower America.

“These were made for frustrated lonely old men,” he said. “In some ways, they enjoyed getting their frustrations played out onscreen. It’s an ugly thing. You’re not going to see an Olga film because you’re in a good mood.”

Sexploitation looked to lesbians for titillation and shock. But in this purported documentary, their relationships were treated as real and valuable. Made four years before the Stonewall riots by the same producers responsible for the “Olga” series, “Chained Girls” explores butch-femme pairings and features a lesbian wedding when such a thing was unthinkable. (“A subject that only a short time ago was talked about in low whispers,” as the narrator explains.) Not that the filmmakers’ aspirations were political.

“These were films about lesbians made by guys who didn’t care about lesbians,” Mr. Henenlotter said. “They cared about showing two girls doing it rather than one girl and a guy.”


