


Just as he was hitting his stride as a television writer in 2002, Joshua Safran had to move to Los Angeles to work on a network show that was all about his hometown, New York City. Now, he is moving a different hit show with a New York theme to New York.

Mr. Safran, the executive producer of “Quantico” on ABC, said the show’s relocation for its second season was the latest evidence that Hollywood is no longer the irresistible magnet it had long been for the entertainment industry’s talent. New York is playing an increasingly important role as a home base for television shows at a time when the demand for video content is soaring.

“There’s a resurgence here,” Mr. Safran said from his office in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn. “More production brings more jobs, brings more money, brings more happiness.”

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced on Friday that “Quantico,” which had been written and produced in Brooklyn but shot on location in Montreal, will cross the border and bring more than 200 jobs with it. When it begins filming in New York in July, “Quantico” will be able to take full advantage of the tax credit that the state offers to film and TV productions.

“New York State knows no creative bounds, and provides an unrivaled opportunity to work with the very best in the industry,” he said.

Mr. Safran said the credit of up to 30 percent of many of the costs incurred in production, including salaries paid to crew members, was not the deciding factor in the decision to relocate. The reason was largely creative. But he said the move would help to offset the higher cost of shooting in New York.

Officials said 46 episodic shows were now being produced in the city, up from 29 just over a year ago. But they are not all on traditional networks. Shows in the Marvel Defenders series that can be viewed on Netflix are being produced in Brooklyn. The Netflix sitcom “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” and Amazon’s “Mozart in the Jungle” series, which won a Golden Globe, are also filmed in the city.

Julie Menin, commissioner of the Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment, said the growth of TV production in the city had been “explosive” and had created thousands of high-paying jobs that support small businesses.

As an example, she cited Café Grumpy, a coffeehouse across the street from the Broadway Stages studios in Greenpoint, which has added five locations. Ms. Menin, in her second month as commissioner, said she had been encouraging producers to shoot in more locations in boroughs other than Manhattan and to patronize local businesses when they do.

In all, Ms. Menin said, film and TV production contributes nearly $9 billion annually to the city’s economy and accounts for about 104,000 full-time jobs, up from 94,000 in 2011. Those numbers came from a study conducted last year for the mayor’s office by Boston Consulting Group.

“You can actually be a person who works in the film community in New York and not have to take a waiting job,” said Tim Nolan, a partner at the consulting firm, who oversaw the study. “That’s different today than it was 16 years ago.”

Mr. Nolan said he had no doubt that the state tax credit paid for itself in jobs and spending. But some economic analysts would disagree.

Donald J. Boyd, a senior fellow at the Rockefeller Institute of Government, co-wrote a report in 2013 that concluded the credit amounted to an overly generous subsidy to entertainment producers.

“It’s hard to justify distorting a tax system so that it favors one industry over another,” Mr. Boyd said. “You don’t know what you’re not getting when you do that.”

Whether or not the tax credit is good policy, there is no dispute about its popularity. Since Mr. Cuomo became governor, the state has received nearly 1,200 applications for credits for production and postproduction spending. (Postproduction includes the editing and scoring of a film or video after it is recorded.) The state projects that the applications will yield almost $2.8 billion in credits.

The credit for postproduction costs had been just 10 percent, but in 2012, it was raised to match the production credit of 30 percent. For postproduction work done upstate, the credit is higher, at 35 percent.

The credits are intended to apply only to local spending and wages. They exclude the salaries of many of the highest paid members of a production team, including actors, directors and writers.

“The program’s consistent growth has brought substantial benefits to local economies in both spending and employment,” said Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat. “Given the impact it is having, I am proud to be part of the industry’s resurgence in New York.”

Defending the wisdom of the credits, state and city officials point to the expansion of the city’s studios. Steiner Studios has added to its presence in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. Silvercup Studios said last summer that it would build a new studio in the Bronx, and Broadway Stages said it would add a location on Staten Island.

“We want neighborhoods that have not seen a lot of production to benefit economically from this industry as well,” Ms. Menin said.

She added that Warner Brothers spent $45 million filming the movie “The Intern” across 17 neighborhoods in Brooklyn and that she would encourage other production companies to follow a less-beaten path.

Ms. Menin also noted the shift from the days when companies saved money by shooting films and shows in other cities even though they were set in New York. These days, she said, several shows, including “The Good Wife,” “Madam Secretary” and “The Americans” are being produced in New York even though they are set elsewhere.

When it came to the second season of “Quantico,” Mr. Safran said, he did not want to take that tack. The first season depicted a group of fledgling agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation with sites in Montreal passing for Virginia.

But the next set of episodes will focus much more on New York, and Mr. Safran, who grew up in Manhattan and attended film school at New York University, said, “We didn’t need to fake New York.”

He recalled that when he was hired as a writer and consulting producer on “Gossip Girl” — a show about Manhattan society — he had to relocate to Los Angeles, where the producers were based. Now, he said, he would not leave New York again.

He said the pilot for “Quantico” revolved around a terrorist attack at Grand Central Terminal. “In Season 1, we sort of destroyed New York locations,” he said. “Season 2 is going to be very much more a New York story.”


