


BARCELONA, Spain — Max Verstappen drove a mature, controlled Spanish Grand Prix on Sunday to become the first teenager to win a Formula One race.

In what was also his first race for the Red Bull team, Verstappen, 18, showed why he had been promoted from his Toro Rosso team last week, grabbing the chance to profit from a first-lap collision between the dominant Mercedes drivers, Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton, and benefiting from a bad weekend for the second-strongest team, Ferrari.

For the final 20 laps of the race, Verstappen had to hold off the pressing moves of the oldest driver now racing in the series, Kimi Raikkonen of Ferrari, who at 36 is twice Verstappen’s age.

Raikkonen finished 0.6 seconds behind, while Sebastian Vettel, the other Ferrari driver, finished in third, 5.5 seconds back. Vettel had held the previous record as the youngest race winner, at 21.

“This race felt like an endurance race for me, especially the last 10 laps,” said Verstappen, who also became the first Dutch driver to win a Formula One race. “It feels amazing. I can’t believe it. It was a great race. Thank you to the team for giving me such a great car to win straight away in the first race.”

Raikkonen said that despite having a faster car than Verstappen’s, he was unable to pass the cool-headed teenager because the circuit is too difficult for overtaking.

“I raced against his father,” added Raikkonen, after complimenting Verstappen.

Verstappen is the son of Jos Verstappen, who raced in Formula One from 1994 to 2003, and who finished on the podium twice, but never won. Max’s mother, Sophie Kumpen, a Belgian, was a top go-kart racer.

“He’s only 18 and the way he raced, it was unbelievable,” said Jos Verstappen, who attends all of his son’s Formula One races. “I don’t know what to say.”

Max Verstappen started racing in Formula One last season at the Red Bull-owned Toro Rosso team as the youngest driver in the series, at 17. He disproved his critics with natural speed and a maturity beyond his years. His response to a journalist’s question after the race, about whether the victory was a response to naysayers, proved that again.

“I’m not here for that,” said Verstappen. “I’m just enjoying it, I’m trying to do my best, and today that was first.”

Still, the victory was the result of a combination of circumstances that neither Verstappen nor his Red Bull team are likely to see again this season: a perfect mixture of poor results by the two teams ahead of Red Bull in the championship — Mercedes and Ferrari — as well as the race having taken place on one of the most difficult circuits for drivers to pass each other.

The first circumstance was hand-delivered by Rosberg and Hamilton at the third corner at the start of the race. After Hamilton started from pole, Rosberg, who won the first four races of the season, passed him at the first corner. Hamilton then attacked Rosberg on the inside of the entry to the third corner. Rosberg did not move aside, and the two collided and shot off the track and out of the race.

“Completely unnecessary I would say, and for me the disaster of both Mercedes being out after two corners is completely unacceptable,” said Niki Lauda, the Mercedes team’s non-executive chairman and a three-time world champion. “Lewis was too aggressive to pass him and why should Nico give him room? It was a miscalculation for Lewis, but for the team it is completely unacceptable.”

That accident, however, at a track at which 20 of the previous 25 races were won from pole position, gave Formula One fans a chance to see what the series might look like without the domination of Mercedes.

The Red Bull drivers had qualified in third and fourth, with Verstappen starting in fourth behind his teammate, Daniel Ricciardo. The two Ferraris followed in fifth and sixth on the grid, with Raikkonen leading Vettel.

After the Mercedes accident, Ricciardo shot into the lead, ahead of Verstappen, with Carlos Sainz Jr., Verstappen’s former teammate at Toro Rosso, having moved up from eighth to third. By lap 10, when Sainz made his first pit stop, the two Ferraris, with Vettel ahead of Raikkonen, moved to third and fourth.

The race became a game of strategy, with Red Bull and Ferrari using the pit stops to hedge their bets. Verstappen and Raikkonen made two pit stops for tire changes, while Vettel and Ricciardo each made three.

The two-pit stop strategy proved to be the winning one. Vettel and Ricciardo were disappointed that their teams’ choice left them behind. Especially Ricciardo, who saw what he thought would be his victory pass to his new, younger teammate.

“I don’t understand why I was the guy,” said Ricciardo. “Normally the guy in the lead gets the better strategy, and it didn’t happen that way.”

Verstappen’s promotion during the season to the Red Bull team had been greeted in the paddock with surprise. After a slow start, Daniil Kvyat was demoted to the weaker Toro Rosso team, where he started his Formula One career two years ago.

But Red Bull’s choice now looks inspired. Not only did Verstappen take an immediate victory, with Ricciardo finishing in fourth — and blowing a tire with one lap to go — but at Toro Rosso, Sainz finished in sixth position, while Kvyat could only manage to finish in 10th, taking a single point. Still, Kvyat set the fastest lap of the race on Lap 53, as if to make a point.

But Verstappen’s cool-headed, mature performance was clear even to skeptical analysts.

“What an extraordinary level of maturity when he doesn’t have anything to draw on,” said Martin Brundle, a former driver and now a commentator on British television, referring to how Verstappen has raced in only 24 Formula One races — compared with 234 for Raikkonen — and had very little experience in the lower categories as well.

“Clearly, this is a young kid that has a huge, huge future in this sport,” said Damon Hill, the 1996 world champion.

When asked about how it felt to lose his record as the youngest race winner, Vettel said that records are there to be broken. “About his age, it doesn’t matter,” Vettel added. “If you are quick enough, you belong here.”

But Red Bull has chosen Verstappen not just for his speed, but also for his clear-headed approach to racing.

“The last laps I was getting very excited. I couldn’t believe it. I was looking up at the big board and saw my name,” said Verstappen. “Then I said, ‘Don’t look at the board anymore, just focus on the tires and bring it home.’ A great feeling; I absolutely wasn’t expecting this.”


