


Like most people who pass through the rustic parlor door of Neir’s Tavern, Tracey Gallagher has a history here.

She remembers the familiar faces, some living, some not, slipping in for a quick drink, but ending up staying a while. She recalls the birthdays and weddings celebrated in the quaint back room of the bar in Woodhaven, Queens.

As time goes on, though, the occasions have changed: “When my close friends passed away,” Ms. Gallagher, 54, said, “we had their memorials here.”

Ed Wendell, who runs a neighborhood historical society, remembers going to the bar as a young boy, when his father would collect union dues for Pan Am airline. And later, as families moved in and out, Mr. Wendell became a regular. “The world around Neir’s kept changing, our neighborhood kept changing,” he said. “But Neir’s remained that one constant.”

For most of its history, Neir’s notoriety was largely limited to the working class of Woodhaven. It is a friendly den of chatter, where neighbors are regulars, and camaraderie is enjoyed over cold pints of beer. On the outside, nestled on a quiet corner of a residential neighborhood, the place looks more like an aging two-floor townhouse than a tavern.

But longtime patrons say that Neir’s does not get the recognition it deserves. Now they are campaigning for the tavern to be declared a New York City landmark because, they note, some historians believe that it is, in fact, the city’s oldest bar.

Neir’s, its patrons say, deserves the historical status of McSorley’s Old Ale House, which, its manager argues, is the oldest in operation, having served customers since 1854, and Fraunces Tavern, from 1762, which burned down and was rebuilt several times.

“We’re tired of Queens not being represented properly,” Loycent Gordon, Neir’s owner, said. “Queens matters. Woodhaven matters. And we’re a part of the fabric and history of this city.”

In 1829, when Queens was mostly farmland — and livestock, not the J train, rumbled down what became Jamaica Avenue — the manager of a racetrack called the Union Course opened a nearby tavern, the Blue Pump Room. It offered a drink to bettors before and after the races, years before McSorley’s served its first light or dark ale in Manhattan.

Over time, the Blue Pump Room went by different names — The Old Abbey, The Union Course Tavern, and finally, Neir’s Tavern — and had different owners, including the Neir family, who had immigrated to Woodhaven from Germany, the current owners say. The family bought the bar after the racetrack closed in 1898, and added a one-lane bowling alley, a ballroom and a hotel over the tavern. It was renamed “Neir’s Social Hall,” and a sign with that name is on display by a stage in the back room.

That is where Mae West, who was born in Bushwick, Brooklyn, was rumored to get her start, singing her sultry tunes. And it’s also where Fred Trump, the father of the Republican presidential candidate, was said to pull up a red, vinyl stool at the bar, as he expanded his Queens real estate empire. He grew up in Woodhaven.

Several scenes from “Goodfellas,” Martin Scorsese’s mob movie, were filmed in the bar — remember the “shine box” episode, or Jimmy Burke’s Christmas party after the Lufthansa heist at John F. Kennedy International Airport? In fact, some of the real-life gangsters portrayed in the film were known to drink at Neir’s, the owners claim.

By 2009, however, Neir’s was struggling. The bar, which had been sold by the Neir family, was in disrepair. That year, Mr. Gordon, a 36-year-old lieutenant in the Fire Department, and some friends bought the business, restoring the 150-year-old mahogany bar and the “Neir’s Tavern’’ name.

“I really believe Queens is the last true holdout of real New York City,” he explained, “and I think Neir’s is a microcosm of that.”

But much to his lament, the bar has been unable to shed its unofficial title: “The Most Famous Bar You’ve Never Heard Of.”

So, on a recent Saturday, a rally was held to try to win landmark designation for Neir’s. Standing in front of a cutout of Mae West, Mr. Gordon urged patrons to fill out postcards he had addressed to the city’s Landmarks Preservation Commission. The commission rejected the bar’s application last year.

“We’ll go down to the L.P.C. ourselves, two hundred of us and let them know we will keep trying, until they make this right,” Mr. Gordon said in an interview.

When Mr. Gordon applied for the designation last August, he cited Neir’s history and interior decorations, including its artifacts and antiquated ice-coil tap system. The tavern needed protection, he said, even if the commission could not prevent someone from buying it.

But the commission, a spokeswoman said, did not believe the bar rose “to the level of an interior landmark” because it “contains standard commercial finishes,’’ making it difficult, without proper documentation, to prove the tavern’s age.

Applicants, however, can resubmit their paperwork with new evidence, which Mr. Gordon plans to compile with the help of the Queens Historical Society and the Historic Districts Council, a citywide nonprofit that advocates preservation.

At the rally, dozens of supporters wore suspenders, mimicking photographs of the bar’s patrons over the years, and clothes bearing the bar’s logo of a jockey astride a horse.

Another form of activism was storytelling.

There was the tale of William Burlingame, a World War II veteran who married his wife, Peggy, in the upstairs hall nearly 70 years ago. “Ham & cheese sandwiches, barrel of beer, coffee, the cake real simple in those days, music was the radio or record player,” he wrote in a letter to Mr. Gordon, which hangs on a wall. In 2015, after watching a television segment about Neir’s history, Mr. Burlingame’s three daughters took him back to the bar, which he thought had closed ages ago.

Ms. Gallagher, who wore a “Straight Outta Woodhaven” shirt, said she hoped her grandchildren would share their stories here one day, just like she had. Because, to her, Neir’s is more than a neighborhood bar — it is a neighborhood, protected from time.

“It’s where everyone goes,” she said.


