


When the Attacca Quartet’s six-year survey of all 68 of Haydn’s string quartets ends on Thursday, the ensemble will have played, by its reckoning, roughly 32,000 measures of Haydn, lasting close to 24 hours.

For this lively young quartet, formed in 2003 at the Juilliard School, it has been a very deep dive into the wellspring of its chosen genre. Haydn is often called the father of the string quartet, and even if some musicologists have cast doubt on his paternity by pointing to antecedents, his importance in creating the form cannot be overstated.

“He might not be the biological father, but he was the one who was there for us, at all our birthdays,” Andrew Yee, the group’s cellist, said with a laugh before a rehearsal for the concert at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in Manhattan. Nathan Schram, the group’s violist, agreed: “His DNA is on just about every string quartet.”

It was Mr. Yee who came up with the idea of the marathon. He had taken to multitasking while walking his dog, Chopper, using the down time to familiarize himself with all the Haydn quartets he did not know. That was how he happened upon the slow movement of Op. 20, No. 3.

“Just in the middle of the walk, I broke down and started crying, there on the sidewalk,” he recalled. “I was like, ‘Why don’t I know all of these?’ So I called the quartet and asked if they wanted to play all of them.”

They did. And while other quartets have done their own cycles — there are recorded sets by ensembles including the Angeles String Quartet, the Kodaly Quartet and the Aeolian String Quartet, among others — it was a still a bold move for a young group.

In a sense, said Amy Schroeder, the Attacca’s first violinist, the ensemble was overcoming its fears. “As a young quartet, playing super-classical repertoire can sometimes be really daunting, just based on the amount of tradition, the amount of expectation,” she said, recalling how early on, the group was alternately criticized for being “too harsh” or “too Romantic” in its approach to certain pieces.

Attacca, which has been making a name for itself with recordings and high-profile engagements, including as the quartet in residence last season at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, called the project simply “The 68.” It has performed the Haydn works over the course of more than 20 concerts at Holy Trinity, on the Upper West Side, with free tickets for students and a $20 suggested donation for others. The group played them in Canada, too, at the K-W Chamber Music Society in Waterloo, Ontario, where it wrapped up that cycle in March.

One of the quartets on the program for the final concert on Thursday, Op. 76, No. 5, is among the few that was in the Attacca’s repertoire before it began the journey, Mr. Yee said. Now, he added, it feels almost like a different piece.

“It was so amazing to play that opening bar — it couldn’t have been more different than it was when we were much younger,” he said. “It was just like 100 pounds were lifted off my shoulders.”

As they rehearsed their final concert at the apartment of two supporters, Michael and Ann Loeb — playing chamber music in an actual chamber — the members seemed to have reached the place where words were almost extraneous. When they would occasionally pause to shape a phrase, confer on bowings or toss out thoughts, they seemed receptive to one another’s ideas and fast to incorporate them into their playing.

After sixty-eight quartets, Mr. Yee reported, Haydn fatigue has yet to set in.

“You immediately just like him as a person when you’re playing it,” he said. “And that element of the quartets never goes away. All the way through the late quartets, you still feel like afterward you’d go out and have a beer with him.”

Ms. Schroeder was moved by another aspect. “Who is more funny than Haydn?” she asked.

Mr. Schram, who joined the quartet later in the project, said that Haydn had been an ideal entree into the group. “You can’t — I’m trying so hard not to use ‘hide’ as a verb — but you have to be yourself when you play the music,” he said. “For me, it was a great way to get to know the players.”

Keiko Tokunaga, the second violinist, said that the lessons of Haydn would remain. “We’ve learned pretty much every single color that exists on Haydn’s palette,” she said. “It’s really made us think about what we want to do with other composers as well.”

For its next project, Attacca will leap ahead several centuries to the present, as it embarks on a series called “Recently Added” at National Sawdust in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where it will play the complete works for string quartet by living composers, beginning with John Adams, Caroline Shaw and Michael Ippolito.

Mr. Yee said that the group, its Haydn bona fides aside, was drawn to the new. “The sort of lazy, obvious next step would have been Mozart, or Beethoven — which people would have loved, and we would have loved, of course,” he said. “But there’s just so much good music happening right now.”


