


Comic books are gaining two new villains on Wednesday, though they are both familiar faces.

Over at Marvel, the first issue of Steve Rogers: Captain America sheds new light on the hero’s past that has a great effect on his present. This issue, written by Nick Spencer and drawn by Jesus Saiz, reveals that Rogers’s mother was recruited by Hydra, one of Marvel’s terrorist groups. Flash forward to today and Captain America is suddenly doing some terrible things: pushing an ally out of a plane and, on the last page, proclaiming, “Hail Hydra.”

The countdown begins now as to how long Captain America will remain evil. For those keeping score at home, he died in 2007 and returned in 2009. He was also rapidly aged and lost his abilities in 2014, but was returned to pristine glory in March.

“While there’s a cynical feeling that everything goes back to normal in the end, if you look across all the stories we’ve published over the years, that’s not necessarily the case,” Tom Brevoort, Marvel’s executive editor and senior vice president of publishing, said. “Like any kind of ongoing soap opera, the trick is to put our characters through new and interesting vises and see what happens and what grows out of that. Only time will tell where this all shakes out.”

Over in the DC universe, the 80-page special Rebirth reveals Dr. Manhattan, one of the heroes in Watchmen, by Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons, as the puppet master behind some recent troubles. Rebirth is written by Geoff Johns and drawn by a cadre of the DC’s top artists (Phil Jimenez and Ivan Reis among them). The story addresses some of the shortcomings of the company’s 2011 reboot, which made some characters younger, erased others and has generally made fans unhappy.

“I hope to inspire passion, create connection and see the DC universe and its readers and fans embrace hope and optimism like its heroes do,” Mr. Johns said. “The world needs it more than ever.”

The issue brings back one hero, hints at the return of others, re-establishes some relationships and lays the time and memory high jinks on Dr. Manhattan. This comes after the company published, in 2012, Before Watchmen, a series of prequels to the seminal work.

At that time, Mr. Moore called the comics “completely shameless” and said, “As far as I know, there weren’t that many prequels or sequels to ‘Moby-Dick.’”


