


Though I hadn’t eaten it yet, I was almost sure that the pizza at Aumm Aumm Pizzeria and Wine Bar in North Bergen would be a winner. My dining party was sitting at a table near the entrance and perusing the menu when a family of four walked in speaking Italian. We ended up engaging in small talk, and I found out that they were tourists from Bari, a seaside city in Italy’s Puglia region. They had been to the restaurant two days before, they told us, and had enjoyed the pizza so much that they’d come back for more.

If the pizza was a hit with the Italians, it would most certainly be with us too. Oh, and how it was.

Arriving first was the Ortolana, which had a light layer of tomato sauce made from San Marzano tomatoes, bite-sized pieces of eggplant, zucchini rounds and red and yellow pepper strips, all of which had been perfectly roasted, fresh basil and house-made mozzarella. With its lightly charred, paper-thin yet fluffy crust, made with flour from Le 5 Stagioni, an established company in Parma, Italy, and its abundance of high-quality toppings, finding fault wasn’t an option.

A white pizza of mozzarella and mascarpone cheeses, diced eggplant and quartered cherry tomatoes was scarfed down just as fast. The margherita with tomato sauce, basil, mozzarella and Grana Padano, a hard cheese similar to Parmesan, released a medley of flavors that belied its simple ingredients.

Pizza tends to be a crowd pleaser, and Aumm Aumm’s superb Neapolitan-style pies, made with mostly fresh or imported ingredients and baked for just 90 seconds in a wood-burning oven, have kept the crowds coming ever since Massimo Delle Donne, a longtime food importer, encouraged his wife, Paula, to open the restaurant last November with their friend Davide Profeti.

“I was born in Naples, and our idea was to serve genuine Neapolitan cuisine with a modern twist,” Mr. Delle Donne said in a telephone interview after my visits. “Aumm Aumm in the Neapolitan dialect means hush hush, and we named it that because we want the secret out about what our food is like.”

Many of the ingredients for the dishes, including some of the cheeses, oils and canned tomatoes for the sauces, are imported from Italy, said Mr. Delle Donne. The help is, too. The executive chef, Antonio Savino, and the pizza maker, Raffaele Marzello, moved from Naples to New Jersey for the venture in 2013 and 2014, respectively.

Aumm Aumm offers 130 wines by the bottle, mainly from Italy, and more than 50 by-the-glass options. Since the knowledgeable staff happily provide samples, you should find at least one to your liking. In my case that was a 2014 Tenuta di Frassineto, a crisp white from Tuscany of vermentino grapes, and a smooth and fruity 2013 Azienda Agricola Fabiana, a red from Puglia made of primitivo grapes.

Wine and pizza aside, other enjoyable dishes included a heaping pile of baby clams and Prince Edward Island mussels, a starter, in a white wine sauce, which had a nice garlicky finish. Salads burst with fresh, flavorful produce. The Aumm Aumm of baby arugula, endive, radicchio, roasted artichokes, eggplant marinated in extra-virgin olive oil and cubes of tangy caciocavallo cheese, tossed in a balsamic vinaigrette, was delightful and big enough to share. So was the citrus and avocado salad with juicy orange and grapefruit segments, halved red grapes, thin fennel slices and avocado, tossed in a mint dressing.

There is the option to add grilled shrimp, steak or chicken to these salads for a more substantial meal, but then diners would miss out on entrees like the beautifully grilled plate of shrimp, calamari, scallops, clams and mussels that reminded me of seafood feasts on Italy’s Amalfi Coast. Equally tasty was the thinly pounded chicken breast hiding underneath halved cherry tomatoes, mozzarella balls and basil leaves, all drizzled with a thick balsamic vinegar.

Only the special of a rosemary-crusted grilled tuna steak, with its dry texture, didn’t have us cheering.

The Della Donne’s son, Joshua, is in charge of the desserts. You cannot go wrong with his flourless chocolate cake, and his tiramisù and ricotta cheesecake had an airy texture and, as you would find in Italy, weren’t sugar bombs.

Authenticity reigned right until the end.


