


Belgium’s interior minister, who nearly resigned after the Brussels bombings by Islamic State militants more than two months ago, met with New York police officials and counterterrorism specialists on Thursday in what he described as a useful visit.

The minister, Jan Jambon, who is also a deputy prime minister and overseer of Belgium’s police forces, expressed admiration for the New York Police Department’s intelligence-gathering, its technology and the bomb-sniffing dogs in its counterterrorism unit.

Mr. Jambon and John J. Miller, the deputy police commissioner for intelligence and counterterrorism, said at a news conference that the minister’s visit was part of a growing collaboration.

“In difficult times, one knows their friends,” Mr. Jambon said, drawing parallels between the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, in the United States and the March 22 bombings at the Brussels airport and subway.

The Brussels attacks left 35 people dead, including three assailants, and traumatized a city that for many represents the heart of Europe. The bombs used in the assault had been assembled in Brussels.

Mr. Jambon and other senior Belgian officials have been criticized for intelligence lapses that preceded the bombings, which have reinforced their country’s reputation as an incubator for Islamic State militant recruitment and attack plots in Europe.

Some of the suspects in the Brussels bombings have been linked to the Paris attacks last November.

Mr. Jambon and Belgium’s justice minister, Koen Geens, offered to resign after the Brussels bombings, but Prime Minister Charles Michel asked them to stay.

Mr. Jambon told reporters on Thursday that improvements in intelligence-gathering and police information-sharing in Belgium, which had been in the works before the attacks, were accelerated afterward. “The attacks came too early,” he said.

Mr. Jambon added, “I think we have made a lot of progress.”

Belgium remains on a high level of alert for further attacks, Mr. Jambon said, but he had no specific information about any particular plots.

He also said that 200 people from Belgium were believed to be fighting with the Islamic State militant group in Syria and that about 130 had returned. While many of the returnees have expressed disillusionment with the Islamic State, Mr. Jambon said, “others come back with a mission.”

After the news conference, Mr. Miller escorted Mr. Jambon outside to inspect some of the department’s counterterrorism police vehicles. The minister took special interest in the 50-pound bulletproof vests worn by officers.

He was also intrigued by one of the bomb-sniffing dogs, a two-year-old black Labrador retriever named Kevin. Mr. Miller said Kevin was capable of detecting vapors emitted by TATP, an explosive believed to have been used in the Brussels and Paris attacks.

Vapor Wake Labradors, as the dogs are known, can detect and track traces of explosives — their “vapor wake” — up to 10 minutes after the explosives have been moved from an area. Mr. Miller said, “We deploy these dogs at all major events.”


