


J. R. Smith made seven 3-pointers, and the Cleveland Cavaliers hit an N.B.A.-record 25 3s in a 123-98 runaway win over the Atlanta Hawks on Wednesday in Game 2 of their second-round series.

The Cavaliers made 18 3-pointers in the first half and added seven more after halftime to embarrass the visiting Hawks, who have lost 10 straight postseason games to Cleveland.

Cleveland’s 25 3-pointers were the most by an N.B.A. team in any game — regular season or postseason.

LeBron James made four 3-pointers and scored 27 points for the Cavaliers, the defending Eastern Conference champions, who were 25 of 45 from beyond the arc.

Even their furry mascot, Moondog, got in on the act by making an over-the-head, backward fling from half court on his first try in the final minutes.

The reserve Dahntay Jones made the record-breaking 24th 3-pointer with 2 minutes 24 seconds left, bettering the mark of 23 previously held by Orlando (2009) and Houston (2013). Mo Williams added another 3-pointer for good measure.

Ten Cleveland players made at least one 3-pointer each.

Smith made six 3-pointers in the first half — the Cavaliers knocked down seven straight during one dizzying stretch — as Cleveland built a 38-point lead over the stunned Hawks, who will head home for Friday’s Game 3 down, two games to none, in the series and utterly demoralized.NO RETURN FOR BOSH Chris Bosh’s season is over, regardless of how far the Miami Heat advance in this postseason.

The Heat and Bosh made the announcement after the team practiced in Toronto, ending rampant speculation in recent days that Bosh would try to return to the court during the playoffs.

Bosh has not played since the All-Star break after a blood clot was discovered in his left leg. It is the second consecutive year that Bosh’s season ended at the break because of problems with clotting, and the joint statement came one day after the National Basketball Players Association urged Bosh and the team to resolve any concerns they had about his immediate future.

Bosh is expected to remain with the team throughout the playoffs. It is unknown whether he has dealt with other clots or remains on blood thinners.


