


WAITSFIELD, VT.

WHAT: A farmhouse with three bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $1,150,000

SIZE: 3,447 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $334

SETTING: Waitsfield is a town of about 1,700 people in the Mad River Valley, between the Green and Northfield Mountains. A rural area carved by country roads, the valley is renowned for its skiing; both Mad River Glen and Sugarbush Resort are within a 20-minute drive of this property. This house is one of a group of historic houses moved to the area from around the state, then reassembled and restored by a group of architects and designers called the Weather Hill Company. The surrounding properties are around 15 to 25 acres.

INDOORS: The two-story house was built in 1825 and last updated in 2003. The interior is a mix of original woodwork and salvage, including wide-plank pine floors, exposed ceiling beams and wood-paneled walls, as well as wainscoting and custom cabinetry throughout.

Common areas include formal living and dining rooms, and a sunny breakfast room. Both the living and dining rooms have original fireplaces, numbered brick by brick when the house was moved to the property in 1999. The dining room faces west, taking in the sunset.

The kitchen is part of an addition incorporating old floorboards and beams, designed to blend with the original section of the house. The shelving here is either original or faithfully copied by Weather Hill. The kitchen island is antique, too — a table whose legs have been hollowed out to make room for electrical wiring. The room has southern exposure, and the breakfast room opens to the outdoors.

The master suite is on the first floor, with an original fireplace and access to a stone terrace. The other two bedrooms are upstairs, as are a family room and an office, over the attached three-car garage. The basement has an exercise room, two EuroCave wine coolers, a workshop and storage. The property also has a barn with additional workshop space.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is 23.4 acres, about 12 of which are wooded. Landscaping includes terraced gardens for perennials and vegetables, blueberry bushes and more than 25 fruit trees.

TAXES: About $16,000 a year

CONTACT: Jane Austin, Roth Real Estate, (802) 496-3865; roth-realestate.com

•

MESA, COLO.

WHAT: A contemporary with three bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms, plus a farmhouse with three bedrooms and one bath, on 38 acres

HOW MUCH: $1,200,000

SIZE: 4,343 square feet in the main house and 1,259 square feet in the guesthouse

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $214

SETTING: Mesa is an unincorporated community on the Grand Mesa, which rises nearly two miles above sea level and occupies about 500 square miles across western Colorado. Most of the area is surrounded by state and national parkland, with a landscape that ranges from sandstone bluffs to dense spruce forest and about 300 lakes.

This property is about 38 acres, with panoramic views of the Mesa. The alpine city of Grand Junction, popular for fishing, hiking and camping, is within a 40-minute drive, while the ski slopes of Aspen and Vail are within about two hours. The Powderhorn Mountain Ski Resort is 15 minutes away.

INDOORS: The two-story contemporary was built in the late 1990s. Its exterior is a clean gray HardiePlank, with sharp-angled sides and gently sloping roofs. It was designed by Glenn Rappaport of Black Shack Architects in Basalt, Colo., and received an Honor Award from the state chapter of the American Institute of Architects.

Designed for indoor-outdoor living and 360-degree views of the Mesa, it has walls of windows throughout, as well as a glass garage-style door in the entryway that rolls into the ceiling, creating a seamless transition between house and landscape. The owners wanted something light and spacious, but without an open floor plan, so as to have different atmospheres in different spaces. Ceilings pitch up to 20 feet, while the walls that aren’t glass are painted white, to accommodate art.

Floors are a light-colored maple, as is some wall paneling; lighting includes brightly colored pendants in the living room and horizontal neon fixtures in the library loft, custom designed as a homage to the artist Dan Flavin. The living room has a fireplace. The family room has acoustic tile around its perimeter near the roofline, to offset the resonance of the high ceiling. The kitchen cabinets are maple.

The master suite is on the entry level, behind a rolling barn door. It has a walk-in closet, as well as a dressing room and a private office. Its bathroom opens to a small deck and a hot tub. The other two bedrooms are upstairs, as is another office.

The farmhouse is on a country road at the lower end of the property. It was built in 1899. The property also has a 1,500-square-foot metal barn.

OUTDOOR SPACE: A deck surrounds three sides of the house. The landscaping includes mature trees and beds of lavender and perennials. There are a pond and a creek, which can be heard from the farmhouse.

TAXES: $1,885 a year

CONTACT: Angela Taylor, United Country Real Estate, RealQuest Realty, (970) 314-1104; taylormaderealestate.com

•

HOMEWOOD, ALA.

WHAT: A house with three bedrooms and four bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $1,150,000

SIZE: Approximately 3,150 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $365

SETTING: Homewood is a suburb of Birmingham, just a few miles from the city’s downtown. This house is on nearly two acres on a wooded road running along a ridge, edged with Italian cypress trees. Area education is well regarded; Homewood High School is considered among the top five in the state and top 1,000 in the country, according to U.S. News and World Report. There are a couple of shopping blocks within about a mile.

INDOORS: The single-story house was built around 1950 and updated within the last few years. The exterior is brick with a weathered wash, making it look like old stone; the roof is metal but designed to resemble cedar shake.

Common areas are anchored by a large living room with walls of windows and French doors, and a vaulted ceiling rising nearly 20 feet. The fireplace has an arched limestone surround; one of the windows is a porthole. Exposure is toward the southeast, with French doors opening to a stone patio and terraced gardens. The dining area is in a former sun porch, enclosed during renovations, with French doors leading outside. Renovations were done by Bruce McLeod, an architect in Birmingham.

The kitchen has stainless-steel appliances and some open stainless-steel shelves, contrasting with white cabinets and a subway-tile backsplash. The countertops are Corian. The microwave is built in. There is a butler’s pantry with plenty of extra storage. An attached potting shed, with a sink, heating and cooling, is used as a sewing room.

The master bedroom has a high vaulted ceiling and French doors opening to a private terrace. Its bathroom has two vanities, a soaking tub and a separate shower. There is a walk-in closet. The other bedrooms have good closet space, too. The attic is used for storage. At the edge of the property, there’s a simple rustic structure, with electricity, that could be used as an office.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is a terraced 1.78 acres, landscaped with an herb garden, perennials, and pear, fig and plum trees, as well as blueberry bushes.

TAXES: $6,880 a year

CONTACT: Barbara Wheeler, LAH Real Estate, (205) 266-0259; lahrealestate.com


