


Balletomania, a form of madness to be found in many cities round the world, traditionally reaches an annual peak of jubilant clamor in June, when American Ballet Theater performs “Swan Lake” and “Romeo and Juliet” at the Metropolitan Opera House. Love in each ballet leads to the deaths of both heroine and hero. You may be sure that the fans greet each star partnership as if the dancers had truly sacrificed themselves.

In all four of its main scenes, the full-evening “Swan Lake” is a formally poetic dance drama. Watching three performances this week — Gillian Murphy and Marcelo Gomes (Monday), Misty Copeland and Daniil Simkin (Wednesday matinee), Veronika Part and James Whiteside (Wednesday evening) — I was struck all over again by how completely the drama can change, depending on the lead couple. “Romeo,” by contrast, which returns to repertory next week in Kenneth MacMillan’s three-act version, is largely about vivid acting in terms of intense dance prose. (There’s virtually no poetry — and not much noteworthy dancing — after the first act.)

A further dimension of “Swan Lake” lies in the ballerina’s double role. How alike or unalike does each ballerina make Odette, the enchanted queen of the swan-maidens, and Odile, her alluring counterpart?

Although Misty Copeland has become the most renowned person in American dance, her offstage story is much more discussed than her onstage dancing, and the difference between the two is large. The Ms. Copeland we read about and see in publicity is an inspiring heroine who has struggled bravely against adversity, but the Ms. Copeland we see in the theater tends to be sparky, humorous, a good colleague, with flashes of naughtiness. Last week, in “The Golden Cockerel,” she was the funniest of four interpreters of the Queen of Shemakhan; this week, as Odile, a lively minx with nice timing. I didn’t count her fouetté turns; still, she certainly did several more than at her debut last year and crowned them with an exultant grand jeté.

[ Alastair Macaulay explains the fouettés in “Swan Lake,” the most notorious step in the ballet repertory ]

Her Swan Queen, danced at funereal tempos, had beautiful moments but tedious minutes. Some quick, large arabesques taken with the support of the prince’s arm were piercing; the rapid quivers of one foot at the end of the main duet were softly enchanting. But neither characterization nor storytelling made much of an impression, and though, in her Odile, they did, Ms. Copeland remains a pleasant but immature executant of that double role.

Mr. Simkin partners her efficiently, but no great stage chemistry is apparent between them (though their bows together show appealing camaraderie). Despite his virtuosity, his dancing has nothing adult about it: it’s lightweight and flashy.

Ms. Murphy and Ms. Part both bring considerable experience to “Swan Lake.” One of the world’s foremost technicians, Ms. Murphy has often revised aspects of both heroines over the years, with results both good and bad. On Monday she was a noble Odette, a powerful Odile; to both roles she brought extraordinary moments of sudden stillness (like those Bette Davis employed in “Jezebel”), as if allowing feelings of shock, recognition and danger to register before movement could continue. Mr. Gomes is appealing, authoritative, an unsurpassed partner; his dancing, admirably musical, combines panache and stylishness.

This was an exalted “Swan Lake,” but not a gripping one. Ms. Murphy’s way of playing Odile as if to say, “I’m bad, and you like it” tends to make Siegfried, who thinks Odile is Odette, look none too bright. And the marvelous instants of the performance didn’t convert into cohesive drama.

I’ve seen Ms. Part’s Odette-Odile before without being excited. This time, however, her interpretation had urgency, and the naturally heroic scale of her dancing became suspenseful. Her Odette was doom-laden without melodrama, poignant without heaviness; her Odile, coolly joyous, had mystery and allure. There are brash aspects to Mr. Whiteside’s playing of Prince Siegfried, but at every moment, he shows you a mind at work. The sheer enthusiasm of his dancing is winning, and his partnering is valiant and ardent.

For the sake of these dancers and the entire company, I wish Ballet Theater’s “Swan Lake” production, staged by the artistic director Kevin McKenzie and new in 2000, were 10 times better. The first scene, clumsily concocted from disparate sections of music, is limp in the way it lets Siegfried depart for the lake when nobody is noticing, and then carries on pointlessly after he’s gone. Lev Ivanov’s choreography for Odette has been smudged, adjusted, diluted.

Little of Marius Petipa’s choreography for Odile is left except for those accursed fouettés. Soviet clichés abound. The final scene — wholly of Mr. McKenzie’s making — is just a string of dull effects focused on Odette’s intention to die.

Zack Brown’s designs, however, are handsome; Duane Schuler’s moonlit effects in the first lakeside scene are lovely. Ballet Theater’s dancing in this classic tends to be lucid, clear, lovely but bland; what’s missing, principally, is dynamic contrast. On Wednesday evening, the end of the first Odette scene was glorious: The corps of swan-maidens, conducted by Ormsby Wilkins, seemed to catch fire from Odette’s new hope.

And the company seems more full of talented individuals than ever before. Has there been a performance this season (now in its sixth week) in which Gabe Stone Shayer has not taken part? Sometimes the program hasn’t named him, and sometimes he’s danced corps and principal roles in the same evening, but that vivid engagement and large, bright face are always unmistakable.


