


Mike Myers, 50, is an independent special effects coordinator in Brooklyn.

Q. What do you do as a special effects coordinator?

A. I research special effects, test them and carry them out. For example, when a TV show wants to show a car blowing up, I have to find the best and safest way to accomplish that. On some projects I mostly consult and then coordinate the work of others. Right now, I’m working full time on the “Gotham” TV series. On this show, we’re a small team of up to eight workers a day, so I’m also hands-on.

How did you get started in this field?

I studied advertising design at Syracuse University and then worked at a New York advertising agency for two years. I moved to Los Angeles and worked on independent films and TV commercials, and after that, I worked in Spain. Eventually, I returned to New York and worked for a special effects company for seven years. I started my own company, Nyspfx, in 2013.

Have you blown up cars for the “Gotham” series?

We’ve crashed or blown up about 15 vehicles. I have a license for pyrotechnics. We use carefully measured amounts of black powder, flammable liquids, gases and pyrotechnic gels. The slow-burn combinations are important to prevent the resulting fireballs from being snuffed out from lack of oxygen. When we work in a safe environment like the Brooklyn Navy Yard, now an industrial space, we can do larger explosions because there are fewer windows and residential buildings within a close proximity. The fireballs are rippingly large.

How do you plan your work?

I read the script and then meet with the directors and producers to determine what’s possible within the budget and time constraints. At the same time I’m working on the current episode, I’m finishing the last episode and getting ready for the next one.

Does your wife ever get nervous about you working in this field?

Only when I allow my 10-year-old daughter, Lydia, to visit my company’s work studio. However, she has her own safety equipment and knows safety procedures. I brought her to a job once when she was 4, when we blew up a basketball backboard for a Snickers commercial. Even though she held her ears, and I put my hands over hers, it was thunderously loud. She said, “I think we can go home now.”


