


This past week, in a move that was long expected, if no less mourned among those who nervously keep record of the disappearing New York of Woody Allen and Nora Ephron, Fairway’s parent company, Fairway Group Holdings, filed for bankruptcy. This shouldn’t necessarily occasion a eulogy; the grocery chain will continue its operations as it restructures and reduces its debt load. At the same time, it is hard to feel optimistic about the future of the endearingly chaotic, unpolished New York retail style that Fairway has embodied.

As business reporters have duly noted, Fairway’s difficulties have stemmed in large part from the greed of private-equity investment, which has fueled an aggressive and miscalculated expansion. Despite its image of urbanity, Fairway now includes among its 15 locations a branch set a few paces from a Sears in a mall in Rockland County. A few years ago, another outpost opened in Chelsea, one block from a Whole Foods that had been in operation for more than a decade. Simultaneously, of course, came the guerrilla incursions from FreshDirect and Blue Apron and the countless other three-steps-to-vegetarian-cassoulet meal-delivery services that the Internet economy has facilitated.

Arguably, though, Fairway has also fallen victim to a culture of increasingly tiered consumer experiences, for which it remains almost too quaintly ecumenical. Beginning in the 1990s, with the growth of stores like Target, cultural commentators spoke often of the democratization of design — the phrase was trotted out to the point of linguistic abuse — a reference to the notion that clothes, teapots, place mats and so on, created to the standards of elite tastes, were now available to a mass audience. If you had money and you were hip, you expressed your renegade affluence by positioning a West Elm vase on top of a $20,000 Biedermeier chest. In some sense, however, rising inequality has pushed the trend toward a reversal. In a city where $4 million apartments are so common that they begin to seem modest, shopping down risks an affliction of heightened status anxiety.

Recently a friend sent me a photograph of an empty aisle at a Fairway on the Upper East Side, taken on a weekday evening at 5:30, when the store should have been flooded with shoppers waiting in line to buy wild Alaskan salmon on their way home to watch “The Night Manager.” A large “Big Sale” sign loomed ominously. I held this image in my mind against the one I have of the Dean & DeLuca on Madison Avenue in the 80s, which I have never seen short of full — full of uniformed private-school children getting cookies in the afternoon, full of grown men and women in Barbour coats and Burberry and Hermès nearly at every other time.

Both Fairway and Whole Foods have seen sales weaken over the past year, and part of the reason certainly may be that, in this new world order, they no longer register as rarefied, even though they service the kind of customer who could probably tell the difference between butter from Piedmont and butter from somewhere else. Fairway will give you a break on the price of excellent coffee, it will sell you lots of limes for $2, but in many ways it represents an older, bohemian New York, a time when the Upper West Side was at the gravitational center and people eagerly answered their phones during PBS pledge drives.

We’ve arrived at a point where food is another luxury experience, demanding a luxury context. According to a study published two months ago in the Journal of Food Products Marketing, retail sales of costlier organic foods have been increasing faster than those of any other category, reaching $37 billion in 2015. Fairway sells organic produce, for instance, but not exclusively, or even centrally. (The study, which looked at more than 1,250 food stores in Manhattan, found that 60 percent had what researchers calculated was an “Organic Food Products Index” of zero. In other words, despite the apparent omnipresence of pesticide-free Lacinato kale, we are really still vastly undersupplied and there really is entrepreneurial opportunity.)

Around the country, and perhaps most notably at the new Hudson Yards, the enormous residential and commercial development going up on the Far West Side where Fairway once hoped to take up residence, food halls with lavish restaurants, beer gardens and chic grocers — complexes in the style of Eataly, of which Mario Batali is an owner — are reviving former manufacturing districts in big and small cities. In Austin, Tex., in Baltimore, in Dallas and Denver and Birmingham, Ala., the culinary revolution is entering its next phase, one in which the process of shopping for food will begin to feel more and more like the experience of staying in a boutique hotel. In New York there are also plans for a food hall on Pier 57, which will come with the Anthony Bourdain brand.

Architects and urban planners say that, around the world, retail space will eventually be colonized by food vendors, because no matter how many rolls of toilet paper or value packs of LED light bulbs or 10-ply cashmere sweaters we can buy on Amazon, we, as human beings, will always crave the tactile pleasure of buying food when we are in front of it.

Fairway catered to that instinct well. What the “market like no other” underestimated was the growing desire to feel as if you are living in the pages of Elle Decor when you are buying dried fruit.


