


The designer Telfar Clemens creates clothes that are difficult to define. In the 11 years that have passed since he presented his first collection, his designs have been interpretations of basic, gender-neutral garments — an aesthetic Clemens describes on his website as “neither conceptual nor accessible — but both in extremis.” Or, as the designer along with the brand’s creative director, Babak Radboy, have termed it: “Extremely Normal.”

“I really don’t like fabric,” the Liberian-American designer admits. “I’d rather just have a rough Hanes T-shirt and denim and I can make you anything out of that.” Whether it’s a crewneck T-shirt transformed into an off-the-shoulder top, a pair of street-ready cotton boxer shorts with utility pockets or a white button-up with armpit holes, Telfar clothes are forward-thinking takes on straightforward styles. “I know people aren’t going to get the concept I’m doing, but I think it is ‘get-able,’” he says. “I have always wanted to be mass-market.”

Despite his list of high-fashion stockists including Opening Ceremony and Dover Street Market (which will pick up his line for the first time this fall), Clemens has consistently taken inspiration from big-box retailers such as Sears and J.C. Penney. Since the brand’s beginnings, Telfar has been on the forefront of several contemporary trends, such as oversize sportswear (his first collection consisted of baggy hoodies and T-shirts) and normcore. Over the years, the brand has won fans including the artists Josh Kline and Xavier Cha and the musicians Fatima Al Qadiri and Dev Hynes.

Telfar further plays on the tenets of mass fashion by acting as the face of his own collections in seasonal art and video collaborations with artists including Lizzie Fitch and Ryan Trecartin. Each season, Clemens and Radboy evolve the line’s fictional figurehead — a smiling, clapping, hyper-happy version of Clemens himself — that permeates the brand’s website, film projects and fashion-show visuals. “It’s funny, people expect me to be really nice,” the designer jokes, referring to his cheerful alter ego.

That artistic persona serves as the basis for Telfar’s exhibition at the new Berlin Biennale, which was curated by the New York-based art collective DIS Magazine and is themed around the idea of the “postcontemporary.” Inside, Clemens has assembled a collection of 13 of his most popular shirt styles that will act, in Radboy’s words, as a “retrospective of a designer who has been called ‘emerging’ for the past four years.” In addition, Clemens has designed uniforms for the Biennale staff, and collaborated with the sculptor Frank Benson and the European mannequin studio Penther Forms to create life-size mannequins to wear the collection. (All resemble Clemens with startling accuracy.)

The art photographer Asger Carlsen, who is well-known for his jarring photo manipulations, has also created images of the designer and 20 relatives modeling the shirts, some of which are subtly Photoshopped to heighten the family resemblance. The choice to include Clemens’s kin was a conscious effort to be more explicit about the designer’s identity. As Radboy puts it: “You can’t separate the biology of who he is from the brand.”


