


ALBANY — Mayor Bill de Blasio went to the State Senate on Wednesday to argue for a seven-year extension of mayoral control of New York City’s schools, a year after the Senate and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo humiliated him by extending it for only one year.

For the most part, the senators who attended the hearing in Albany did not question Mr. de Blasio aggressively on his education policies, but one Republican, Terrence P. Murphy, who spoke last, invoked the many investigations swirling around the de Blasio administration to ask why he should trust the mayor with control of the city’s schools.

Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, cited the increase in the city’s graduation rate under mayoral control to over 70 percent, his successful expansion of prekindergarten and after-school programs, and improved test scores.

“Those prove real achievement, and that alone would be a reason I think to support a renewal of mayoral control,” he said. The mayor added, with reference to the investigations: “In a democracy, we don’t judge by allegations. We judge by facts and through due process.”

Mr. Murphy had a personal reason to bring up the investigations: His opponent in 2014 benefited from large donations, solicited in part by the mayor and his fund-raising apparatus, that poured into the Democratic committee in Putnam County as part of a major effort by the mayor to help the Democrats regain control of the Senate. Local Republican officials complained, prompting an investigation by the State Board of Elections, which in turn led to a criminal investigation into the fund-raising by federal and state authorities. Prosecutors are examining whether the mayor and his aides used the committees to illegally redistribute large contributions to Democratic Senate candidates.

Before Mr. Murphy spoke, the nearly four-hour hearing was mostly peaceful, with some senators taking the opportunity to press Mr. de Blasio about specific concerns in their districts, like overcrowding or schools facing colocations. Simcha Felder, a Democrat from Brooklyn, accused Mr. de Blasio of having shirked a commitment to parents of children with disabilities. Mr. de Blasio had said he would allow the parents to seek money from the city to send their children to private schools every three years instead of every year. Mr. de Blasio said the city would move to three-year settlements in many cases soon.

It was not clear, however, whether the Senate was inclined to grant Mr. de Blasio the seven years he was asking for. Even some of the Democrats expressed concern about such a long extension, with some saying they might not like the next mayor’s education policies.

Mr. de Blasio’s schools chancellor, Carmen Fariña, who testified with Mr. de Blasio, appeared to risk offending her audience when she said that having to plead for mayoral control in Albany was “a diversion” from the real work of running the city’s schools.

A few minutes later, the chairman of the Senate Education Committee, Carl L. Marcellino, a Long Island Republican, said in a tone of slight irritation that the state spent some $9 billion on the city’s schools and that the state’s taxpayers expected the Legislature to perform some oversight.


