


Jaime Garcia watched in wonder as his teammate Brandon Moss launched a moonshot at Busch Stadium.

Garcia then pitched seven sharp innings Thursday as the St. Louis Cardinals blanked the Philadelphia Phillies, 4-0.

“It was a bomb,” Garcia said of Moss’s 462-foot drive. “He hit it a long way.” It was the longest home run by a left-handed hitter in the history of the new Busch Stadium, which opened in 2006.

Garcia, a left-hander, was also impressive. He improved to 2-2 while giving up two hits, walking none and striking out five.

Moss unloaded off Jerad Eickhoff for the long solo homer in the first inning.

“I feel like I hit it really well,” Moss said. “I’m still searching for consistency, but I’ll take that one. Any homer is a good homer.”

St. Louis scored three times in the seventh. Ruben Tejada hit a sacrifice fly, and Stephen Piscotty added a bases-loaded double.

INDIANS 9, TIGERS 4 Michael Brantley was 4 for 5, and Mike Napoli hit a three-run homer as host Cleveland topped Detroit.

Brantley, who missed most of April after off-season surgery on his right shoulder, entered the game batting .167. He had a run-scoring single in the first and a two-run double in the eighth, raising his average to .276.

Brantley also ended a potential Detroit rally in the sixth with a catch on the warning track after a long run.

BLUE JAYS 12, RANGERS 2 Edwin Encarnacion homered, doubled twice and drove in six runs, lifting host Toronto over Texas.

Toronto, which was the top-scoring team in the majors last year, set season highs for runs (12) and hits (15).

Kevin Pillar doubled twice, singled and had two R.B.I. for Toronto. J. A. Happ is 4-0 after giving up one run in seven innings.

MARLINS 4, DIAMONDBACKS 0 Adam Conley pitched shutout ball for his second start in a row, and host Miami won for the 10th time in the past 11 games.

Christian Yelich hit a two-run homer, and Derek Dietrich and Chris Johnson had two-out run-scoring hits. Giancarlo Stanton went 2 for 3 with a double and scored a run.

REDS 9, BREWERS 5 Jay Bruce hit a three-run homer off Chase Anderson during a five-run first inning for host Cincinnati.

Alfredo Simon made it easy on the major leagues’ worst bullpen, becoming only the second Reds starter to last seven innings. He allowed three runs in seven and two-thirds innings, including Alex Presley’s two-run homer. The Reds turned three double plays behind him.

PUERTO RICO GAMES DEBATED Commissioner Rob Manfred said a decision was imminent on whether two games between the Pittsburgh Pirates and the Miami Marlins would be played in Puerto Rico this month amid concerns about the Zika virus.

The teams are scheduled to play in San Juan on May 30 and 31 to celebrate Roberto Clemente Day, a leaguewide tribute honoring the Pirates Hall of Famer and Puerto Rico native. But Manfred said the games might be moved to Miami.

WHITE SOX DEMOTE DANKS The Chicago White Sox designated the left-hander John Danks for assignment and recalled the right-hander Erik Johnson from Class AAA Charlotte.

Danks is 0-4 with a 7.25 E.R.A. in his 10th season with Chicago.


