


AMSTERDAM — Anyone familiar with the movies of Wim Wenders, Jim Jarmusch or Lars von Trier knows Robby Müller’s work, even if they can’t immediately say why. As director of photography, Mr. Müller, a Dutch cinematographer, created an enduring visual palette for such independent classics as Mr. Wenders’s “Paris, Texas,” Mr. Jarmusch’s “Down By Law” and Mr. von Trier’s “Breaking the Waves.”

Now, after decades of behind-the-scenes influence, Mr. Müller is the subject of a retrospective, “Master of Light — Robby Müller,” that opened Saturday and runs until Sept. 4 at the Eye film museum here. Directors and fellow cinematographers revere him for what they describe as an intuitive sense of rhythm and framing, the lyricism of his camera movements — he always operated his own camera — and his ability to use available light to extraordinary effect.

“There’s a certain kind of magic or poetry to whatever he shoots, but he’s much more grounded than that,” said the Amsterdam-based filmmaker and artist Steve McQueen, who worked with Mr. Müller on “Caribs’ Leap,” part of a film installation he created for the Documenta exhibition in Germany in 2002. “I compare him to a blues musician in a way. He plays just a few chords and he conveys what he needs to convey. He’s a purist.”

For Mr. McQueen, Mr. Müller developed a visual language to capture what appear to be men falling to their deaths in slow motion — a reference to the 1651 suicides of Carib Indians who leapt off a cliff rather than submit to their French colonizers on the island of Grenada, where Mr. McQueen’s parents were born. “Caribs’ Leap’’ is included in the exhibition.

“Robby Müller is one of the few Dutch figures in film with an international career who is highly estimated by the entire world,” said Jaap Guldemond, the director of exhibitions at Eye and the curator of the show. “But he is a D.P., a cameraman, and it was a challenge for us to see if we could make an exhibition that’s on and about a D.P., rather than a film director.”

Mr. Müller, 76, is suffering from vascular dementia, a degenerative disease that has prevented him from speaking and walking, although he is still responsive and understands what is going on, said his wife, Andrea, who opened his archives for the exhibition. “It was a good moment to do it now and not later,” said Mrs. Müller, a photo editor for a Dutch art magazine who married Mr. Müller in 1993.

The exhibition includes excerpts from Mr. Müller’s Hi8 video diaries, about 150 of some 2,000 Polaroids he shot while traveling to locations for film shoots, video interviews with directors, letters and other papers, and clips and screenings of his films, including the “Caribs’ Leap’’ installation.

In one display, scenes from “Down by Law” (1986) show the three jail escapees, played by Tom Waits, John Lurie and Roberto Benigni, paddling a skiff through the bayou as Mr. Müller’s camera slowly navigates through thickets of trees that both reveal and conceal the men.

Born in Curacao in 1940, then a Dutch colony, Mr. Müller moved to the Netherlands at age 13. After shooting experimental films, he began his professional life working with Wim Wenders in the 1960s, and they went on to make more than 40 movies together.

Mr. Guldemond credits them with pioneering the road-trip movie in the 1960s and 70s, with low-budget, black-and-white films like “Alabama” (1969) “The Wrong Move” (1975) and “Kings of the Road” (1976). The partnership culminated in “Paris, Texas,” (1984), which won the Palme d’Or at Cannes that year.

Mr. Müller went on to work with Mr. Jarmusch in a similar vein on “Down By Law,” but he always chose his work based on the project and the story, Mr. Guldemond said, rather than genre. “He was really looking for soul mates, as he calls them himself,” he said. “All the different directors he worked with were people with whom he felt at ease, people he liked, and with him he could do what he wanted to do.”

Directors describe Mr. Müller as not just an important collaborator, but also something of a personal guru.

Mr. Jarmusch said in an interview for the exhibition with Claire Pijman, a Dutch cinematographer, that Mr. Müller thought of himself more as a painter than a photographer.

“Generally, we tried to keep thinking on our feet, so anything was changeable,” Mr. Jarmusch said of their collaborations. “He taught me later a lot about color, as well, and how it relates to your emotions, or how the sky at magic hour changes every ten seconds and becomes a different shade.”

“Robby would teach me things like, it says in the script that it’s a sunny day, but then on the day of the shoot it would be cloudy and about to rain,” Mr. Jarmusch said. ”Most people would just say, O.K., let’s not shoot today. Robby would always say, let’s think, maybe the clouds and the rain is better, let’s not be closed off, let’s be open to what we might do.”

Mr. Wenders described Mr. Müller’s working method in another interview with Ms. Pijman: “We would dream it up a little bit, the atmosphere of the film, and then I would leave it completely to Robby to find the light,” he said.

“ ‘American Friend’ became a whole new school” for directors of photography, Mr. Wenders said of their 1977 film starring Dennis Hopper as an unscrupulous art dealer, “and it laid a new standard for how to deal with color and light.”

Mr. Guldemond described Mr. Müller as soft-spoken and selective with his words. “Nowadays, you’d say he’s a little bit Zen,” he said. “He knows exactly what he wants and he trusts his intuition. There are a lot of dos and don’ts in moviemaking, and a lot of the dos are all about preparing, and being in control. He was often about being not on the spot and not in control.”

Mr. Müller worked on only a few Hollywood productions, including William Friedkin’s “To Live and Die in L.A.” (1985) and “Mad Dog and Glory” (1993) with Robert De Niro, but he was always disappointed with the process in the end, Mr. Guldemond said.

“It was the system he hated,” he said, “because he felt it destroyed all possibility to be creative, to work intuitively and to improvise.”


