


What in the World offers you glimpses of what our journalists are observing around the globe. Let us know what you think:whatintheworld@nytimes.com

The roster of the Cuban national baseball team is weighted curiously toward the end of the alphabet. There are Yordanis, Yurisbel, Yunior, Yeniet and Yorbis: more than one-quarter of the 41 players considered for this spring’s historic game against the Tampa Bay Rays in Havana had first names starting with Y.

It reflects a national trend informally known as Generación Y, in which thousands of people born toward the end of the Cold War have uncommon first names that share that initial. Perhaps the best-known example: Yoenis Cespedes, the power-hitting outfielder for the New York Mets, who was born in Cuba in 1985.

The seeds for this unconventional nomenclature may have been planted by the Cuban revolution, which pulled parents away from biblical names. The influence of the Soviet Union, with its Yevgenis and Yuris, is also seen as a significant factor.

Experts differ on whether the pattern is a sign of tribute or rebellion. The dissolution of the Soviet Union was disastrous for Cuba, the start of the so-called Special Period, an extended economic crisis and recession in the early 1990s.

Lillian Guerra of the University of Florida sees Generación Y as part of a broader tradition of creative naming in Cuba, one she called a sign of cultural resistance. She pointed to unusual monikers like Milaidys, a phoneticization of “My lady” in Spanish; Dianisleysis, inspired by Princess Diana; and, get ready for this, Onedollar, Usnavy, Usmail, Usarmy and Usa, all inspired by Cubans’ increased contact with Americans travelers and culture during the 1990s.

“The names were deliberate,” Professor Guerra said. “You don’t name your kid without thinking about it.”

There are signs that Cuban names have been returning to more conventional patterns in the last couple of decades, according to Professor Guerra, who has written about Generación Y. Yoani Sánchez, a famous Cuban dissident who runs a popular blog called Generación Y, wrote in 2010 that “calmer winds have been blowing when it comes time to name a child.” She expressed relief that a friend named her baby Juan Carlos.

After decades in which “Cubans named their children with a freedom they could not experience in other spheres in life,” Ms. Sanchez wrote, “sanity has returned to the act of naming children.”


