


LENS, France — The forward danced. The fans sang. The goalkeeper ran a hundred yards to leap on the dog pile in the corner.

When England finally broke through on Thursday — or, put another way, when Wales finally broke — the combination of relief and release looked like pandemonium. Daniel Sturridge, who swept home the winning goal two minutes into the three allotted for stoppage time, shook his hips. The players on the England bench poured out onto the field like giddy children. Grown men in the stands, of varying ages (and weights), stripped off their shirts and waved them around and around and around.

The Welsh contingent wept. England 2, Wales 1 in this European Championship group stage match was not decisive for either team, inasmuch as the fates for both in the round of 16 still depend on what happens in their next matches. But there was, all the same, a feeling that the result could be defining. Late-round knockouts tend to linger.

England is hoping to carry forward what happened here at the Stade Bollaert-Delelis. And why not? Frustrated after allowing a late goal in a draw with Russia in their first game, the Three Lions dominated possession against Wales but fell behind after a sharp free kick from Gareth Bale eluded a fumbling Joe Hart.

Unbowed, England was inspired by Roy Hodgson’s two halftime substitutions — both of whom scored — and came back to record its first victory in a major tournament in a game in which it trailed at the interval.

Jamie Vardy provided the first of those goals; Sturridge then offered the coda.

“It is a brilliant feeling,” Sturridge said.

It surely is — just not for Wales, which will hope desperately to move on from this nightmare, a defeat that was both sudden and cruel.

Playing in its first major tournament, Wales pulled off a surprising victory over Slovakia in its opener and appeared to be on course to earn at least a point against England, if not all three. A victory would have assured passage to the next round; a draw would have put Wales on the cusp.

Instead, the team left this town in northern France with uncertainty and, more pointedly, the sort of gash that never quite heals.

“We’re gutted after today, absolutely devastated,” Chris Coleman, the Wales manager, said. “For the dying seconds to lose it there — I can’t say I’ve felt as disappointed too many times in my career as I did when that goal went in.”

England’s victory capped a heated buildup to the match, which was only the fifth between the countries in soccer since 1984. In addition to the basic intra-Britain antipathy, there was increased scrutiny of the behavior of fans after violence earlier in the tournament; heightened anxiety about England’s chances for advancement after Slovakia handled Russia, 2-1, on Wednesday; and, most enjoyably, a rousing discussion about the relative passions (and abilities) of both teams after Bale stoked the embers by opining that no one from the England team would be fit to play for Wales.

If that seemed ridiculous — Wales, after all, has several players employed by second-division clubs — Bale clarified (sort of) that the sum of his team’s parts was such that no one would ever want to upset Wales’s mix. This seemed stinging all the same, particularly since Bale also suggested that Wales’s players were more patriotic than England’s, perhaps underlining the notion that he was fully aware of the mental games he was playing.

In the end, the banter made little difference: The English seemed focused, the Welsh were not cowed, and the atmosphere was electric, yet sporting. The Wales fans, who were largely contained to half of one end of the stadium, were outnumbered but remarkably vocal, particularly during their national anthem — which the England fans gamely applauded — and then, of course, when Bale scored the opener just before halftime.

To that point, the match had been dull. England was pushing the ball around but did little with it as Wales remained compact.

On one of the few surges forward for Wales, however, Wayne Rooney fouled Bale in the middle of the field about 35 yards from the goal. After taking his typical power stance — legs splayed, arms tensed — Bale sent a dipping, if not altogether fierce, shot over the England wall that deflected off Hart’s outstretched hand into the corner of the net.

Hart, understandably, looked mortified. Bale, understandably, did not care, sprinting to the side of the field as his teammates surrounded him. The red end of the stadium was in histrionics; the white portions stood still.

Faced with a deficit (and ever-increasing irritability from the fans), Hodgson — who acknowledged that changes had been “pushed on to me maybe a bit earlier” because of the goal — made an aggressive double substitution at halftime by inserting Vardy and Sturridge into the attack. He was rewarded almost immediately.

England looked livelier from the restart and, 10 minutes in, a scramble in front of Wales’s goal ended with the ball falling to Vardy, who lashed it past goalkeeper Wayne Hennessey. The Wales players screamed for offside — Vardy was, indeed, in an offside position — but the German assistant referee smartly kept his flag down as the final touch before Vardy’s had come from a Welsh head, not an English one, meaning Vardy was free to play the ball.

That goal was followed by 35 minutes of England pressing for more and Wales digging in. All the statistics showed England’s dominance — England had 432 completed passes to Wales’s 145, 21 shots to 7, 64 percent of possession to 36 — but there was no payoff. Sturridge blasted high. A shot by Rooney was blocked. Gary Cahill headed over.

It seemed Wales would hold.

But then Sturridge ran through the penalty area, slipped past a defender, who tumbled backward, and slipped the ball inside Hennessey at the near post.

Hodgson nearly cracked his head on the roof of the England dugout as he jumped up to celebrate. Rooney leapt in the air. Hart took off, sprinting from his end of the field to join the celebration.

He had been saved. The game had been saved. England had been saved.

“Why do you want to talk to me?” Hart asked reporters afterward. “I’m the villain. Go talk to the heroes.”


