


PARIS — In discussing her work, the theater director Yael Farber often invokes the concept of a “reckoning” — a potent word from someone who was raised in apartheid South Africa and whose latest production, a reworking of Lorraine Hansberry’s unfinished play “Les Blancs,” dramatizes the effects of African colonialism.

“Les Blancs,” which had a brief run on Broadway in 1970 but had languished since then, opened last month at the National Theater in London to impressive reviews, with The Guardian calling it “a near-perfect production of an imperfect play.”

“Lorraine Hansberry speaks about colonialism and how that system has never had its day of reckoning,” Ms. Farber said over coffee on a recent spring morning in Paris at a bistro near the Théâtre des Bouffes du Nord, where “Mies Julie,” her 2012 adaptation of Strindberg’s “Miss Julie,” was enjoying a two-week run. “She brings everything together in this tiny little mission station and questions everything about how the rape of a continent has occurred. It’s extraordinary.”

Hansberry, whose “Raisin in the Sun” was a sensation when it appeared in 1959, had completed several drafts of “Les Blancs” when she died of pancreatic cancer in 1965 at age 34.

“I felt that I was given something that was like a child being born at the moment of its mother’s death,” Ms. Farber said.

“Hansberry felt that ‘Raisin in the Sun’ was an exercise with herself,” she said. “She was desperate to explore a much more radical thread. You see in ‘Les Blancs’ that she is reaching for something more expressionistic, something that engages with something that perhaps Europe was having a reckoning with in its theater at the time.”

The National Theater approached Ms. Farber to direct “Les Blancs” last year after the success of her production of “The Crucible” at the Old Vic in 2014, and after “Nirbhaya,” a testimonial piece she wrote about the fatal gang rape of a young Indian woman on a bus in 2012 that generated international outrage.

Ms. Farber said she was excited to work with an ensemble cast and with the resources available at the National Theater, but she felt that “Les Blancs” needed work. In the play, a black intellectual returns to a fictional African country from Europe for the funeral of his father, who had founded a resistance movement.

“I had an immediate and very visceral reaction to the text,” she said. “But I also saw that there were many dramaturgical issues.”

Hansberry’s estate gave Ms. Farber and the dramaturge Drew Lichtenberg access to her manuscripts, as well as those from her widower, Robert Nemiroff, who adapted the 1970 production.

Over the course of several days in Montreal, where Ms. Farber lives to be near her 8-year-old daughter, she, Mr. Lichtenberg and Joi Gresham, Mr. Nemiroff’s daughter from a subsequent marriage, reworked “Les Blancs,” deleting some long passages of dialogue, restoring some of Hansberry’s original material and adding live African music.

“I just felt that the material needed to have a deep understanding of what it’s like to grow up in a society that is racially obsessed,” Ms. Farber said. “I wanted to make sure that the play was represented in a way with all the incredible nuances that move beneath a society like that.”

Ben Power, the deputy artistic director at the National Theater, said of the resulting work, “What she captures in the production is the fact that it feels like two plays: a great naturalistic American drama of the mid-20th century, but at the same time there is this huge political sweep.”

Ms. Farber said the issues of colonialism and racism that “Les Blancs” explores felt as urgent today as when Hansberry began writing the play more than 50 years ago.

“‘Les Blancs’ is on its surface about colonialism and its reckoning with the Middle Passage,” she said, “but here we are at the National Theater, where you can’t take your bags in because of the terrorist attacks in Europe, and then there is the word ‘terrorist’ spoken onstage.”

“There is no simplifying the stories of where armed struggle and violence come from,” she said. “For us not to engage in the dialogue beyond ‘We must eradicate that evil’ — being terrorism — and not to engage in the very deep dialogue of where everything originates from is to continue to perpetrate an idea of the simplistic good-bad binary” that can make matters worse.

For Ms. Farber, 45, who grew up in Johannesburg and studied dramatic art at the University of Witwatersrand there, exposure to such weighty issues started early.

She recalled seeing a musical at age 5 or 6, and coming out of the theater and seeing smoke on the horizon, which turned out to be the Soweto uprising of 1976.

“Then as a teenager, nobody was telling the truth,” she said. “All the news was state controlled. That stayed with me not as a romantic idea of what theater can be but an urgent mandate of what it should be.”

That background informs her decision to stage such classics as “The Crucible” and “Miss Julie.”

“Mies Julie” began at the Baxter Theater in Cape Town (where Ms. Farber will return in June to adapt “The Bacchae”) and has traveled the world for nearly four years, including a stint at St. Ann’s Warehouse in New York in 2012. In Ms. Farber’s version, Miss Julie is the daughter of a Boer farmer and her valet is black.

It also fuels her commitment to testimonial theater, such as “Nirbhaya,” she said.

“My approach to testimonial theater, ‘The Crucible’ and ‘Les Blancs’ is almost identical,” she said. “It’s about telling the truth, which is slippery and highly subjective. How do you make theater that for a brief period of time opens that portal and says ‘Listen in a new way to something so old’?”

“We’re extraordinarily adaptive creatures,” she added. “And what is extraordinary quickly becomes ordinary.”


