


Putting our 3-year-old son to bed isn’t a task my wife and I undertake lightly. On a typical night, there will be actual physical struggles and a great deal of bitter haggling over the particulars — over whether it will be she or I who keeps vigil as he bravely contends against his own fatigue, over how many stories will be read to him and which ones. There will also, typically, be a series of increasingly hostile demands for glasses of water, and at least one trip to the toilet that will eventually be exposed as a cynical diversionary tactic. One night, his claim that he needed to go was revealed as spurious, and I let him know that I was onto his hustle. “I’m not a fool,” I said.

“You are a fool, Dada,” he countered smoothly, staring up at me from his unused potty.

In recent weeks, though, these nightly torments have been relieved by a book called “The Rabbit Who Wants to Fall Asleep” — a book whose power­fully soporific effects my son is helpless to resist, and which as a result has had a transformative effect on the style and substance of his bedtime routine.

I have noticed that stories aimed at his demographic tend to operate as cultural propaganda on behalf of unconsciousness. Your typical work of toddler-focused fiction tends to converge on a climax in which the protagonist (mischievous child, curious animal, anthropomorphic steam engine) succumbs to a pleasurable exhaustion after the adventures of the preceding pages, and drifts off into peaceful slumber. It’s a nicely suggestive trajectory, certainly, but this sort of subtlety has no real purchase, at least not on my son. The beautiful, if slightly sinister, thing about “The Rabbit Who Wants to Fall Asleep” is that it functions less as cultural propaganda than as authoritarian diktat. Its explicit aim is to bring about in your child — through the sedative effects of repetition, through extreme dullness, through strategically staged yawns — a state of narrative-induced anesthesia.

The book is the work of a Swedish writer named Carl-Johan Forssen Ehrlin, whose author bio lists a miscellany of modish occupations: behavioral scientist, communications teacher, life coach, leadership trainer. In an “Instructions to the Reader” section, he tells us that passages in bold text should be emphasized, while italicized passages should be read in a particularly slow and calm voice. Used injudiciously, he writes, the book “may cause drowsiness or an unintended catnap,” and we are further cautioned never to read it aloud “close to someone driving any type of vehicle or engaged in any other activity that requires wakefulness.” (This does seem a little alarmist, though I wouldn’t necessarily want to test it out on the open road.)

The narrative proper concerns a young rabbit called Roger — a name that can, we are advised, “be read as Rooo geeer with two yawns” — who is having great diffi­culty in getting to sleep. To alleviate this situation, his mother takes him on a voyage to the other side of the meadow, where there lives a kindly wizard named Uncle Yawn, who specializes in helping rabbits and children get to sleep using spells and magic powders. Along the way, there are encounters with somnolence-themed animals (Sleepy Snail, Heavy-Eyed Owl) whose pulverizingly dull soliloquies on the topic of tiredness serve to prepare Roger, and thus your child, for the final somniferous encounter with Uncle Yawn.

At the wizard’s house, we hear more discussion on such diverse topics as sleepiness, going to sleep and being asleep, before you yourself are eventually directed, in one of the book’s frequent square-bracketed interpolations, to “symbolically sprinkle the invisible sleeping powder over and around the child.” Now “more and more tired with every step,” Roger is escorted back across the meadow by his mother, before arriving home once more, there to finally and unambiguously lose consciousness. At this point in the plot, my son is invariably — beautifully, blessedly — one step ahead of the rabbit.

Over successive nights, the story has a cumulatively calming effect; its repetitive prose, at times weirdly reminiscent of Gertrude Stein’s, is almost literally enchanting, as is the manner in which the sentences wander free of standard syntax, and even meaning, as if the text itself were drifting into a liminal territory between consciousness and dreams. A typical passage describes our drowsy rabbit “lying there thinking about falling asleep, now. He was lying there thinking about all the things that can make him tired now, all those things that usually would make him tired and sleepy, so tired and sleepy.”

I won’t deny that my wife and I experienced some squeamishness, early on, about effectively hypnotizing our son to sleep, but we came quickly to the conclusion that the book merely makes ex­plicit — and renders effective — intentions that were already implicit in many of the stories and lullabies that had for so long failed to get us anywhere. There was also, I’ll admit, some initial unease surrounding the figure of Uncle Yawn, who with his “powerful, magical and invisible sleeping powder” seemed the sort of man you’d never take your child across a meadow to visit in real life. But we realized that we were projecting our adult fears and neuroses onto a blank cipher whose only real work as a character was to act as an agent of our own parental will. And I for one am at peace with this. I can’t speak directly for my son, but he seems to be at peace with it, too. He is, at any rate, at time of writing, asleep.


