


FRONT PAGE

An article on Wednesday about efforts by state and federal officials to support existing nuclear plants misidentified the entities involved in trying to set above-market rates for power generated from some struggling coal and nuclear plants. The contracts would have been between AEP’s Ohio utility and its unregulated power-generation affiliate, and another contract would have been between FirstEnergy’s Ohio utilities and their unregulated generation affiliate; the contracts would not have been between AEP and FirstEnergy. The article also misstated the action taken by state regulators in Ohio. Regulators approved the rate plans — not the contracts — that would have allowed for above-market rates to go forward.

•

An article on Monday about lessons that the national Democratic Party could learn from Gov. Jerry Brown and the California Democratic Party misidentified the type of religious facility where Mr. Brown spent time as a young man. It was a seminary, not a monastery.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on May 10 about similarities between Rodrigo Duterte, then the Philippine presidential front-runner, and Donald J. Trump, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, referred incorrectly to Mr. Duterte’s political background. He served in the Philippine Congress from June 1998 to June 2001; it is not the case that he has “never held national office.” (Mr. Duterte is now the president-elect.)

•

Because of an editing error, an article on May 11 about the Romanian government’s approval of legislation that would give priority to restitution claims by Holocaust survivors for property lost during World War II and under Communist rule referred incorrectly to Bucovina, all of whose Jews were deported in October 1941, according to a former resident. It is a northern region of Romania, not a city.

NEW YORK

An article on Wednesday about certain undocumented immigrants who are allowed to apply for professional teaching certificates and some professional licenses referred incorrectly to Dubai, home to some of these immigrants. Dubai is an emirate, not a country.

BUSINESS DAY

The Deal Professor column on Wednesday, about the virtues of in-person annual meetings, referred incorrectly to requests for corporate action proposed by three vocal shareholders: John Chevedden, James McRitchie and William Steiner. The three were responsible for 70 percent of shareholder proposals sponsored by individuals among Fortune 250 companies in 2014 — not 70 percent of all shareholder proposals.

THE ARTS

An article on Thursday about collaborations between the photographer Gordon Parks and the writer Ralph Ellison, including the project “Harlem Is Nowhere,” misstated a comment by Ellison in a letter to the author Richard Wright. He wrote that he hoped that the Harlem project would “make for something new in photo-journalism,” not that it would be a “new departure in photo reporting.” (That comment was made in a letter to Ellison from Richard E. Lauterbach, editor of the magazine in which the project was originally scheduled to appear.)

•

An article on Monday about the Fandango Fronterizo, an annual event of Mexican music at the border between San Diego and Tijuana, misstated the name of an artist who performed. He is Tacho Utrera, not Tacho Utrera Laudería. The article also misspelled the surname of an assistant professor at Scripps College who commented on fandangos, and the name of the band in which she sings. She is Martha E. Gonzalez, not Gonzales, and the band is Quetzal, not Quetzel.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Wednesday about Rick MacLeish, who played on the Philadelphia Flyers teams that won back-to-back Stanley Cups in the 1970s, reversed the positions played by two of his teammates. Gary Dornhoefer was a right wing and Ross Lonsberry was a left wing.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


