


The singer-songwriter Anaïs Mitchell grew up on a sheep farm in semirural Vermont to a soundtrack of folk ballads and protest music. As a child, she believed that “if you could just write a song good enough, you could change the world.”

That belief has never quite left her. She is testing it in her first musical, the theatrically frisky and musically daring “Hadestown,” a version of the Orpheus myth retold in the American vernacular, which just opened at New York Theater Workshop.

Charles Isherwood, writing in The New York Times, complimented her “lovely music and well-turned lyrics.” Variety called the work “spellbinding.”

Now settled in Park Slope, Brooklyn, with her husband and young daughter, Ms. Mitchell, 35, looks like someone who knows her way around incantation and enchantment. With her choppy blond hair and aquamarine eyes, she has a sprite-like, ethereal quality, which can belie her artistic savvy.

For this interview, she chose the twisting trees and luxuriant rose bushes of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. It is a place she feels at home, a place that suits her.

Ms. Mitchell first began work on “Hadestown” a decade ago. The Orpheus myth “is especially appealing for people who work in music,” she explained. The myth tells of a famed lyre player who journeys into the underworld to rescue his beloved, Eurydice. He can have her only if he can lead her back to the surface without turning around to look at her.

She’d loved the story as a child. After college, it began to fascinate her even more.

She had graduated from Middlebury as “a very idealistic, artistically-minded, activist-minded student.” But the post-college world gave her pause. George W. Bush had been re-elected president, an event she described as a “really a dark night of the soul” for her progressive politics. She had to reconcile her artistic impulses against a climate that insisted, “you have to have a job, you have to make money, you have to make it in this adult world,” she said. Could she write a song cycle using the Orpheus myth to explore these ideas? She could.

Her version of the myth takes place in a fable-like world that looks and sounds a lot like Depression-era America. Orpheus is a singer who can’t provide for Eurydice, and Hadestown is not so much the underworld as a kind of infernal factory, a place that guarantees money and security, but at the expense of freedom.

Ms. Mitchell completed the first version in 2006. Her collaborator, Michael Chorney, provided arrangements, and another colleague, the theater artist Ben t. Matchstick, helped to enhance and stage it. With friends, they took it around Vermont, traveling “in this janky school bus that was painted silver, and it was magical,” she said.

A few years later, she reworked the songs into a concept album. She played Eurydice, and she recruited Ani DiFranco, Greg Brown and Justin Vernon of Bon Iver to play other parts. She would travel to record with each of them, a process she described as “kind of like a scavenger hunt.” Tattooed on her arm is an illustration of Eurydice that would become the album’s cover.

While touring, she met producers who expressed interest in transforming the songs into a fully realized musical. But Ms. Mitchell worried that that would mean artistic sacrifice.

“I’d seen a lot of book musicals, and the cheese-o-meter goes off after a few minutes,” she said. But in 2012, she saw “Natasha, Pierre & the Great Comet of 1812” Off Broadway, directed by Rachel Chavkin, a work she described as “alive, edgy, delightful.” (It reopens on Broadway this fall.) She had mutual friends introduce them.

Over several years, Ms. Chavkin helped her to firm up the story behind the songs and to deepen the characters and relationships. “Making a music-theater piece is really hard,” Ms. Chavkin said by telephone. She had worried that Ms. Mitchell might burn out on the material. Happily, she found Ms. Mitchell both “lightning clear about what moves her as an artist, but also really, really open to collaboration.”

Among other things, Ms. Mitchell has learned the importance of clarifying ideas that could be left ambiguous on the album: Why does Eurydice love Orpheus? Why does Orpheus turn around? Why retell this story at all?

She resolved that ultimate question at the last moment, arriving at the final rehearsal with new lyrics for the narrator character of Hermes, which explain that if we continue to sing Orpheus’s song, an unfinished ode that emphasizes the essential humanity within us all, the world might still change.

“It’s a sad song,” Hermes sings. “Gotta sing it anyway.”

Revisiting the material, Ms. Mitchell found new avenues of interest, like the way that the bad marriage between Hades, the fossil-fuel-burning king of the underworld, and Persephone, his flower-child queen, could reflect climate change. She also discovered that Orpheus’s fatal glance back at Eurydice could mirror Ms. Mitchell’s own moments of artistic uncertainty.

Todd Sickafoose, who produced the album, joked about her propensity for revisions. “If she hadn’t opened it, she’d be rewriting it tonight,” he said by telephone. “It’s good that she’s so inspiring because otherwise the actors would revolt.”

But the cast has come to wholly embrace this beguiling work. Patrick Page, who plays Hades, described his pleasure at working on material that was “weird and poetic and was about big ideas.” He also enjoys the “outrageous” bass notes that Ms. Mitchell has provided. “You never get to sing the notes she wrote for Hades,” he said.

One of Mr. Page’s songs will send a shiver for anyone following the presidential election: “Why We Build the Wall.” Though Ms. Mitchell wrote it a decade a ago, the song has taken on the uncanny echo of Donald J. Trump’s remarks on the campaign trail. Ms. Mitchell is unsurprised. “Political leaders will always invoke that image when it serves them,” she said, “because it appeals at a visceral level to people who feel scared.”

Ms. Mitchell is not scared, and she plans to keep writing — for the concert stage and the theatrical one. The Orpheus-like part of her insists on it. “Whether or not you can change the world with a song, you’ve still got to write the song,” she said. “You still have to try.”


