


PARIS — Justine Henin, a four-time French Open champion, watched helplessly from the players’ box high above the court Wednesday, unable to hit those gleaming down-the-line backhands that had dictated so many matches in her favor.

Nine years ago, Henin was on the court beating Serena Williams in the quarterfinals at Roland Garros. But on Wednesday there was nothing she could do but hope and watch. Down below, Elina Svitolina, the player Henin now coaches, was being overwhelmed.

Playing on Henin’s 34th birthday, Williams dominated from the first point to the last, placing balls where she wanted while waiting for Svitolina to make the next mistake.

After Svitolina hit the final backhand long to give Williams a 6-1, 6-1 victory in their fourth-round match on Philippe Chatrier Court, Henin was out of her seat and down the tunnel before her pupil had finished shaking hands with the victor.

Williams often had difficulty with Henin, particularly at Roland Garros, where Henin won both their matches. But the 18th-seeded Svitolina, 21, cannot yet, if ever, compete at that level.

The strategy that Henin and Svitolina had conjured up, Svitolina said, was to serve well and move Williams around the court. But it never got to that point: Svitolina had enough trouble just getting the ball over the net.

“You cannot play this way,” she lamented of her inability to show her best against the best player in the world.

The same could be said for 108th-ranked Shelby Rogers, whose remarkable run ended at the hands of No. 4 Garbiñe Muguruza, 7-5, 6-3.

Rogers had never been to the fourth round of a major tournament until this French Open. But she charged all the way into the quarterfinals by beating, among others, No. 17 Karolina Pliskova, No. 10 Petra Kvitova and No. 25 Irina-Camelia Begu.

Rogers began Wednesday’s match confidently, earning the first service break and serving for the set at 5-4. But then the match pivoted. Muguruza began to attack Rogers’s serve more aggressively and broke twice to take the first set.

The sequence seemed to shatter Rogers’s previously impenetrable confidence, and the second set was mostly a downhill stroll for Muguruza. Still, Rogers acquitted herself admirably and said she enjoyed the experience of reaching her highest level yet.

“It’s the biggest match of my life, and it’s hard not to think about that,” she said. “But I thought I handled it pretty well. I wasn’t too nervous, so I did a good job in the beginning kind of just breathing and controlling myself. Hopefully, many more to come.”

Muguruza’s opponent in the semifinals will be No. 21 Samantha Stosur, who dispatched Tsvetana Pironkova, 6-4, 7-6 (6), after trailing by 1-5 in the tiebreaker. Stosur was the only woman left in the draw besides Williams with a Grand Slam singles championship.

With three more victories here, Williams will capture her 22nd major singles title, which would draw her even with Steffi Graf. Williams won the French Open last year while sick and not playing her best, but she is rolling now. She has won 18 sets in a row dating to her rampage through the Rome tournament last month.

After two days of rain delays, Williams wasted little time once on court, beating Svitolina in just 62 minutes. She now turns her focus to Yulia Putintseva, her opponent in a quarterfinal Thursday, who was once coached by Patrick Mouratoglou, now Williams’s coach.

“She’s really hungry,” Williams said. “I feel like she gives 200 percent on every single point. She’s a fighter. I feel like I’m a little bit that way myself, too.”

On Suzanne Lenglen Court, Venus Williams did not fare as well as her sister. She was bounced by No. 8 Timea Bacsinszky, 6-2, 6-4. In the quarterfinals, Bacsinszky must get past Kiki Bertens, who upset No. 15 Madison Keys, 7-6 (4), 6-3. But if Bacsinszky does advance, she will face Serena Williams in the semifinals here for the second time in two years.

Bacsinszky is one of the more endearing players on tour, with an outgoing personality and a willingness to dissect many subjects. She has endured an estrangement from her father and once took time off from the tennis tour to mentally regroup.

She worked in a restaurant and prepared to study hotel management before returning to the tour with a new passion for tennis and life.

During an early practice round here last week, Bacsinszky found a ladybug on one of the tennis balls and mentioned the good luck those insects are said to bring. Then, during her second-round victory over Eugenie Bouchard, she spotted another ladybug trundling along the baseline, apparently oblivious to the commotion above.

Before serving, Bacsinszky reached down, scooped it up with her right hand and carried it to safety along the back edge of the court — or so she thought.

“The ball kid just stepped on it,” Bacsinszky said with a laugh. “I was like, ‘Oh, poor ladybug.’”

Her goal, if she reaches the semifinals, is to avoid a similar figurative fate at the hands of Williams. Last year, Bacsinszky won the opening set in their semifinal encounter but in the final two sets managed to win only three games.

On Tuesday, when rain caused havoc on the grounds, she did manage to find a court to practice on next to Andy Murray, an area where the juniors are based.

Because of her resilience, Bacsinszky could serve as a role model for younger players. But in a playful and self-deprecating manner, she offered a cautionary tale.

“My hitting partner told me that some juniors were complaining,” she said. “They were saying: ‘Who is Bacsinszky? Why does she need a court?’ So I don’t know if I’m such a big inspiration.”

Bacsinszky may require some kind of inspiration, though, against Bertens, who is playing terrific tennis. After battling through two rounds of qualifying in Nuremberg, Germany, Bertens won that clay-court tournament last month. She has almost single-handedly put the Netherlands on the Fed Cup map by winning four key matches, including impressive victories over Kristina Mladenovic of France and Svetlana Kuznetsova of Russia.

Bertens has also won 11 consecutive matches since the Nuremberg qualifying but was reluctant to jinx anything through overanalysis — kind of like crushing a ladybug.

“It’s just keep on going, keep on going,” Bertens said. “I don’t want to think about it too much. I’m just really enjoying it at the moment.”


