


Mardi Gras morning was difficult at the Cupcake Cafe.

The health inspector showed up, and Ruth Arcone, the cafe’s pie maker, was so startled she forgot to put the plastic babies into her king cake. “The inspector didn’t look in the fridge, didn’t even look in the bathroom,” Ms. Arcone said. When the inspector left, “We’re like, ‘Ahh!’”

She added, “We got an A.”

Ms. Arcone, 58, sank into her seat by the door. On the counter sat her ring-shaped cake sprinkled with purple, green and yellow sugar. When a regular came over and said, “This is delicious; thank you, Ruth,” she looked up from her newspaper and said, “You’re welcome.”

For five years Ms. Arcone was a fixture at the Cupcake Cafe, a Hell’s Kitchen institution at the corner of West 40th Street and Ninth Avenue in Manhattan. She made 40 kinds of pie but produced only 10 to 15 a week. “I’m making pies by hand,” she explained. “One at a time.”

She spent most of her days there, whether or not she was baking. She would chat with customers at a big marble table. And read aloud bits from the newspaper. Then, at 7 p.m., Ms. Arcone would pack up her papers and head home to Geffner House, a single-room occupancy residence a few blocks away in Midtown.

At 11 p.m., she would start her second job, as night caretaker at the Dwelling Place, a nearby women’s shelter.

Almost 20 years ago, Ms. Arcone was a resident of that shelter.

Homeless for two months, Ms. Arcone, who graduated from Stuyvesant High School and attended Cornell University, had been sleeping on the subway at night and hanging out at Barnes & Noble during the day.

She was taken in by Sister Nancy Chiarello, one of the three nuns who run the privately funded shelter. She stayed for 14 months. The day she found housing at Geffner House, Sister Nancy offered her a job.

Ms. Arcone is aware of the limits of her life: Financially, she gets by. But her room at Geffner House has no kitchen. She makes batches of food at the Dwelling Place and carries them home.

Romantic love has been elusive. “I’ve never had a Valentine’s Day,” she said, matter-of-factly.

But she is comfortable in her artistry as a baker. And on that Mardi Gras afternoon, she was starting to feel some long-delayed confidence.

“I’m thrilled,” she said, looking down at her new sneakers with aquamarine stripes. “I’ve wanted these for a year.”

Six weeks later, on March 27, the cafe closed.

Much has been written about the recent surge of homelessness in New York City, and the trauma of those living on the street. Anyone walking around Midtown Manhattan can see the toll: The bundled-up woman in the West 30s, her campsite covered with plastic, has made it through the winter. So has the woman, in a pleated skirt, who does her laundry in the bathroom sinks in Penn Station.

This story, however, is about a woman who managed to get back on her feet, and yet still struggles with the reverberations from being homeless.

For Ms. Arcone, it has been a long journey back.

She is still picking up the pieces. Her confidence took a hit. “I’m good at working,” she said. “But not at presenting myself, at finding work.” She is just starting to attend to her health. Last year, she signed up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act and saw a doctor for the first time in 14 years.

The number of homeless people and the number of single women in the shelter system have almost tripled since Ms. Arcone was homeless, according to data from the New York City Department of Homeless Services, the Human Resources Administration and NYCStat shelter census reports. When Ms. Arcone moved into the Dwelling Place in January 1997, there were 1,345 single women out of a shelter population of 23,698; in February of this year, there were 3,758 out of 60,410, the data show.

“When women first come in, they’re frightened, maybe ashamed of their situation,” said Sister Joann Sambs, who helps run the shelter, which has provided support for homeless women since 1977.

“For many of them, homelessness is a new experience,” she added. “They’ve had their own lives — jobs, bank accounts, credit cards. They’ve lost it all.”

Getting back into the mix of daily life is an arduous process.

Hell’s Kitchen has helped Ms. Arcone, she said. She relishes her lively neighborhood, particularly the two blocks — West 39th and 40th Streets — tucked into the shadow of the Port Authority Bus Terminal. Those streets contain the Dwelling Place, to which she is devoted. The vegetable markets where she shops. And the Cupcake Cafe.

The cafe, Ms. Arcone said, gave her a sense of community. “The work she did was appreciated,” said Ann Warren, 60, the cafe’s co-owner. “That’s rare. So many people work terribly hard, and nobody sees them do it.”

As a child, Ms. Arcone would stand behind her mother, a skilled baker, in the kitchen. “I was waiting to lick the spoon,” she said.

It was just the two of them. Her mother, a school secretary, raised her on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Her father, with whom she had little contact, died when she was 13.

One Sunday morning, Ms. Arcone, then a senior at Stuyvesant, went into her mother’s room before leaving to do volunteer work. Her mother had died in the night after a heart attack.

“I called the police,” Ms. Arcone said. “I was terrified.” She was 17.

“My mother had named good family friends as my guardians,” she continued. “I moved in with them. But it just was not a good fit.”

She went to Cornell but couldn’t find her footing. She did, however, discover that she loved to bake. “I wanted to make the things my mother had made — her brownies and oatmeal cookies,” she said.

Leaving college after three years, she enrolled at the New York Restaurant School in Manhattan and later found work catering. But over the years, she had a couple of setbacks. In 1991, she fell and broke her wrist. She was without health insurance, and the hospital and surgery bills “wiped out what savings I had,” she said.

Five years later, while cooking at the Cub Room in SoHo, her feet gave out. “One day I finished work,” Ms. Arcone said, “went out to have breakfast, and when I got up, I couldn’t walk.”

She didn’t have money to see a doctor. (Months later, she was given a diagnosis of metatarsalgia, an inflammation in the ball of the foot.) Unable to work, she couldn’t pay the rent. And she felt ashamed to ask for help. “Your vision narrows,” she said. “I kept thinking, ‘If I can just make it through the day.’”

Fearing she would be evicted from her Brooklyn sublet, she gave away her beloved orange cat.

Then, one night that November, she came back from the store. “They’d drilled out the lock,” she said, referring to the landlord.

Through the fall, she slept on the A train. She showered at the Russian & Turkish Baths in the East Village. By the end of December Ms. Arcone was “ completely desperate,” she said, and called a high school friend who was a lawyer. “He said, ‘I’m not even going to send you to the city shelters,’” Ms. Arcone recounted. “‘You wouldn’t survive.’”

“He sent me to Sister Nancy,” she explained. “There was this relief: I was inside. I was warm. And I had a place to sleep.”

She became a customer at the Cupcake Cafe in 2008, and in 2011, Ms. Warren, an owner, asked if she would like to do some baking for the shop.

The cafe first opened in 1988, on the corner of 39th Street and Ninth Avenue, and reflected the freewheeling character of Hell’s Kitchen in those days.

“We’re not business people,” said Michael Warren, 66, who owned the cafe with Ms. Warren, a painter. The couple divorced in 2010, but both remained with the cafe.

The cafe featured doughnuts, as well as cakes and cupcakes decorated with Monet-like flowers by Ms. Warren and her staff, and became a neighborhood hub. “Mike’s rule was: If anybody’s hungry, they can get a doughnut and a coffee,” said Adelaide Morro, 61, a longtime employee, referring to Mr. Warren’s generosity.

A glowing review in The New York Times brought in those farther afield. The musician David Byrne and the actress Sarah Jessica Parker were among its customers. But after the 1990s, there were financial struggles. Opening in 2004, the cafe on West 40th Street had a smaller following. Two years later, the original location closed. In 2005, the couple opened a cafe in Books of Wonder, a children’s bookstore on West 18th Street; that cafe closed six years later.

Yet the cafe on West 40th remained a haven for its regulars. The room was strung with paper lanterns. A few regulars stored their groceries there in an antique icebox.

Ms. Arcone is alert to every change on Ninth Avenue: The Turkish restaurant on 39th Street “got shut down by the health department,” she said, heading out from the Cupcake Cafe on a frigid night in February. She needed ingredients for tomato soup. “The owners just walked away. Then the pipes froze and burst.”

“If it was us,” she added, “we would have cleaned till everything was right.”

“What’s with the pajamas?” she said, as she passed a young man wearing pajamas with a Nordic design.

At Terra, a market on Ninth Avenue, she navigated the narrow aisles. There were bundles of bruised oranges and carrots for a dollar. And also fresh asparagus for $1.99.

She paused by the Persian cucumbers: “Have you had these?” I love them!” Then she grabbed two bunches of dill, scallions and a pint of cream for her soup. She would cook it at 3 a.m. at the Dwelling Place.

At midnight, Ms. Arcone, who is not quite five feet tall, settled into her spot: a table in the residence’s dining room. Behind her was a painting of a young woman lighting Sabbath candles. Ms. Arcone, who is Jewish, likes the painting. “It’s been here as long as I have,” she said.

“I like being here alone,” she added. “I know what I have to do at night. It doesn’t matter in what order, or when I do it.”

Upstairs, 15 women were asleep. Lights must be turned off at 10:30 p.m. “I can think of eight I know that I’ve talked to,” she said.

Like some of the women who have stayed there, Ms. Arcone has struggled with depression. It hit after her mother died. “We didn’t know the word then,” she said. “Now doctors would have prescribed an antidepressant.”

Her 30s and 40s were tough.

“So much of it I spent feeling I was not any good,” she said. “At having a successful career, at getting married.”

“But oh, my God,” she continued, smiling. “Somewhere between 50 and 60, things change. I’ve accepted I’m never going to be president, or White House pastry chef, or whatever.”

“But I’m doing what I like,” she added. “I’m taking care of myself. And I’ve got things under control.”

Two weeks before Easter, Ms. Arcone and Ms. Warren met at Cull & Pistol Oyster Bar in Chelsea Market for the dollar-an-oyster special. It was a late birthday celebration for Ms. Arcone.

It was a rare break. The two friends were giddy.

“I have a fantasy,” Ms. Warren said, looking out at the popular food marketplace, “of having the Cupcake Cafe here.” Part of the fantasy is that she could “drift into Cull & Pistol.”

“There’s no money to do it,” she added. “But I can dream.”

A waiter steered a platter of oysters toward them. Ms. Arcone closed her eyes as she ate her first.

Her thoughts turned to her 60th birthday, two years away. “I really want to see the Northern Lights,” she said. “The cheap way is to go to Iceland. The expensive way would be the Norway Coastal Voyage.”

“Maybe we could apply for a kitchen job on a cruise ship,” Ms. Warren said. “We’d see nothing!”

A week later, Ms. Arcone opened the door to her room at Geffner House for a reporter.

The walls were bare. But evidence of her passion was everywhere: There were hundreds of cookbooks in bookcases, stacked neatly on the radiator and filling bags.

A window looked north toward the Hearst Tower. “On the left you can see a bit of water,” Ms. Arcone said. “Sometimes you can see ships pull out and you can hear the horns.”

Taped to the door was The Daily News’s front page with the headline “I’m With Stupid!” featuring the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump with Sarah Palin; a fan letter left by a customer; and a picture of a black cat.

Ms. Arcone loves cats: Her one complaint about Geffner House is that no pets are allowed. “Everybody knows having a cat is a healthy thing,” she said. “It’s good for blood pressure, for loneliness.”

She is matter-of-fact about other aspects of the residence. “It’s noisy,” she said, noting that there was jackhammering during the day from a renovation. “There’s loan-sharking going on, drug dealing,” she added. “You’re riding the elevator with people so stoned they don’t know what floor they’re going to.”

Yet she said, “I don’t feel unsafe.”

So why does she stay? Ms. Arcone pays only $698 rent. She might be able to find a room in an apartment somewhere, but she said, “I don’t want to share.” Besides, she added: “My longest commute to my two jobs is three blocks. You can’t beat that.”

Ms. Warren told her staff five days before Easter that she had filed for bankruptcy and had to close the cafe.

Talking about it later, she sounded relieved. “It’s the neighborhood living room,” she said about her business, “but the neighborhood living room is not a business.”

She said she felt terrible for her staff, and especially for Ms. Arcone. “Ruth has been such a peach,” she said. Ms. Warren had been talking with her and other staff members about possible projects, maybe a pop-up. Maybe she would even reopen. But for now, everything was in limbo.

The cafe’s last day was Easter Sunday. Baby’s breath filled a vase on the big table. Wheat doughnuts were set out. Regulars milled around the piano as Murray Weinstock, 67, played jazz.

“We’re having a wake,” Ms. Arcone said, sitting in her chair. She looked exhausted. “It’s huge,” she said of the closing. “It’s not only losing the work, the money. But if you live in a room, you want to get out, find someplace where you can just sit.”

She stood suddenly. “My cake plate!” she said, and disappeared into the kitchen. Ms. Arcone came back, holding it. “This is mine,” she said, and stashed it in her tote.

The young staff members stood at the back, stunned.

“I guess I’m in denial,” said Rebecca Chambers, 31, a cake decorator who had been hired there when she was 19. “Cupcake takes these tumultuous turns. It always lands on its feet.”

At 4 p.m. Ms. Arcone said, “I’ll be right back!” She had made an Easter cake for the women at the Dwelling Place and needed to take it over. They eat at 6 p.m. sharp. “It has a passion fruit curd filling,” she said. “Rebecca iced it with coconut cream cheese.”

Hurrying, she carried the unwrapped cake down West 40th Street toward 10th Avenue. Then, emerging from the shelter, she walked back to the cafe in the fading spring light.


