


Long before Instagram feeds and MasterChef cook-offs highlighted a near-universal obsession with the visual appearance of food, a craftsman in 19th-century China meticulously carved and dyed a chunk of jasper, a jade-like stone, to look like a piece of braised pork belly. The National Palace Museum in Taipei has long showcased this uncanny sculpture, known as “the meat-shaped stone,” as one of its most prized holdings, very rarely loaning it out. But now the glistening dish is leaving Taipei to make its North American debut in a city that celebrates Chinese cuisine: San Francisco.

The sculpture will be part of a sweeping exhibition, “Emperors’ Treasures: Chinese Art From the National Palace Museum, Taipei,” at the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco from June 17 through Sept. 18. “It’s just so realistic, it looks like a real, mouthwatering piece of pork,” said Jay Xu, the director of the museum, pointing to the way the sculpture captures the dish’s unlikely combination of skin, fat and lean meat in each bite. “You can’t help but fall in love with it.”

He noted that about 100 of the 150 objects in the show, which date to the 11th century, have never traveled to the United States before. The others appeared 20 years ago in “Possessing the Past: Treasures from the National Palace Museum, Taipei,” a show that originated at the Metropolitan Museum of Art when Mr. Xu was getting his curatorial start there.

The new show, Mr. Xu adds, takes a different tack: “We are focusing on the personal tastes, predilections and fascinations of the rulers. So this show is about how the personal tastes of eight emperors — and one empress — shaped the course of Chinese art.”

Other highlights include a vibrant gold-and-red portrait of Emperor Gaozong, an advocate of painting and calligraphy in the 12th century, and a tiny Ming dynasty porcelain cup with a lively rooster-and-hen design made in the 15th century under Emperor Chenghua. (These “chicken cups” are so highly prized that one of the few left in private hands sold at Sotheby’s Hong Kong for $36 million in 2014.)

The museum is also staging a restaurant tie-in: 12 local chefs, including Michelle Mah of the Slanted Door, Anthony Myint of Mission Chinese and Brandon Jew of Mister Jiu’s, will feature pork belly dishes on their menus during the first month of the show.


