


Amir Khan readily accepts that he is a huge underdog for his World Boxing Council middleweight title fight with the champion Saúl Álvarez in Las Vegas, but he has promised to give his much bigger opponent “a boxing lesson.”

The English challenger Khan has moved up two weight classes to take on Álvarez, the red-haired Mexican fighter known as Canelo, whose only loss in 48 professional fights was to the undefeated Floyd Mayweather Jr. in 2013.

“I’m not supposed to win,” Khan told reporters while he prepared for the highly anticipated fight that is scheduled for 12 rounds at T-Mobile Arena on Saturday. “I’m a guy who’s supposed to walk in and get beaten.”

But Khan said he would not let that happen.

“This is a huge fight, as Canelo is a star in Mexico and America,” Khan said. “I know I’m here as the underdog, but I’m ready to win and take this W.B.C. belt back to my home in England.”

Khan (31-3, 19 knockouts) is a two-time former world champion who has oozed confidence in Las Vegas this week despite not having fought since his unanimous decision over Chris Algieri nearly a year ago.

“I wouldn’t have taken this fight if I didn’t think I could take it,” said Khan, 29. “I have trained for everything and worked on my speed and my power.”

Khan said a win over Álvarez would be one of the biggest victories of his career, not only because of his opponent’s star power, but also because it would take place on the weekend after Cinco de Mayo.

“The fans will be very happy on Saturday night,” Khan said. “I will be the new world champion. I think it will be difficult to knock Canelo out, but I know I can give him a boxing lesson.”

Álvarez, a former W.B.A. and W.B.C. super welterweight champion who lost both titles in a majority decision to Mayweather, is a 5-to-1 favorite in an intriguing matchup that will pit his power against Khan’s speed.

“There is a difference between wanting and doing,” said Álvarez, 25, who has a record of 46-1-1, including 32 knockouts. “On Saturday night, we will see who will give who a boxing lesson.”

Álvarez said he knew Khan’s strengths, calling him “a very fast, very elusive, very tricky fighter,” but said he was confident in his preparation.

“I’m training hard for 12 rounds, I’m ready to go all of those rounds,” said Álvarez, who had claimed the W.B.C. middleweight championship with a unanimous decision over Miguel Cotto in November. “But if the knockout presents itself, I’m ready to take it.”


