


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this article, Elias E. Lopez, editorial director of The New York Times en Español, explains how his team in Mexico City translates United States politics for a Latin American and Spanish audience.

MEXICO CITY — How do you say “caucus” in Spanish?

The question came up while Albinson Linares, an editor at The New York Times en Español, was translating an article about the United States primaries earlier this year.

The answer, given the context, was simple: “caucus.”

But that soon led to more questions about the primaries and the American presidential campaign in general: Why is Iowa so important, when it’s such a small state? What’s the difference between a primary and a caucus? How does the delegate system work? Keep in mind that these are questions that also confound many Americans.

When The New York Times en Español began in early February, the task before us was to present the best of The Times — around 10 or so of our 300-plus daily articles — to a new Spanish-speaking audience. But where to begin?

Elections seemed like a good place.

Elections in the United States have always generated a lot of interest worldwide, but the insurgent candidacy of Donald J. Trump has, unsurprisingly, caught the attention of readers in Mexico and across Latin America, in part because of his comments about immigrants.

People in Latin America and Spain, contrary to what most people might assume, have varied opinions about his candidacy. Most see it as hostile toward Hispanic immigrants and, by extension, hostile to them. But others see him as a self-made man who can take his business acumen to the White House.

“He dislikes politicians, and that’s refreshing,” wrote a Facebook commenter from Argentina recently. “And I agree with him on immigration. I don’t invite strangers to my house.”

Beyond Mr. Trump’s candidacy, our readers also care about the United States’ foreign and environmental policies, the intersection of money and politics in the campaign, and the impact Latinos will have on the election.

“Many of our readers are decision makers in Latin America,” Mr. Linares notes. “For good or bad, the governments in the region set the tone of relations with the United States based on who gets elected president.”

On Feb. 6 we took our first step and published an article with the headline “¿Por qué Iowa? Guía para entender la primera parada hacia la Casa Blanca” (“Why Iowa? A Guide to Understanding the First Stop in the Race to the White House”). It resonated with many of our readers; it even had an informative GIF done by our partners at Pictoline.

We quickly followed up with an explainer about New Hampshire. Our coverage of Super Tuesday (or “Supermartes”) had a high number of followers — as did our coverage of Tuesday night’s New York primaries.

“I think there’s a lot of interest because in many countries in Latin America democracy is still a work in progress,” observes Dulce Ramos, the editor in charge of audience development for The New York Times en Español. “And there’s no democratic system in the region like the American system, so people are genuinely curious.”


