


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

Curt Schilling, the legendary pitcher who found a second career as an ESPN baseball analyst, is also known for about three other things. He bled through a tube sock on national television while playing against the Yankees, he defaulted on a guaranteed $75 million loan from the State of Rhode Island in a failed video-game start-up; and he’s incredibly active on social media. On Monday, it was the last of those that garnered the most attention: Schilling shared a transphobic meme on his Facebook page, one conveying the perceived danger of allowing trans people to use bathrooms that correspond with their gender identity, implying that trans people are sexual predators who hunt women and children by disguising themselves and lying in wait in the seclusion of public restrooms.

Of course, there are no recorded instances of trans people attacking anyone in public bathrooms. Nevertheless, North Carolina passed a bill last month requiring residents to use the bathroom aligning with the sex on their birth certificates. Critics all over the nation denounced the bill as simple bigotry. Earlier this week, Schilling’s Facebook post took off and links to it were sent around Twitter. He defended himself on his personal blog, but the near-unanimous outrage had already forced his employer into action. On Wednesday, ESPN fired him.

Over the years, Schilling has used Facebook to curate a safe public community, where friends and like-minded followers can follow what he’s up to, post well wishes and contribute to an ever-growing wall of hatred. Nestled between corny jokes, boasts of semi-successful dadding, videos of his dogs, photos of his chickens and evidence of his legitimately dope fish tank are the thoughts and paranoia of what I would describe as a racist, sexist, Islamophobic, xenophobic, homophobic, transphobic conspiracy theorist who believes deeply in the Christian God and much less so in the humanity of people who are unlike him.

A few weeks ago, Schilling posted a Free Beacon article aggregating a Department of Homeland Security report that assessed the likelihood of someone hacking into the country’s electrical grid. That likelihood, the report found, is low, but still, Schilling wrote, “This is how WWIII is going to open.” He has raved on his wall about microchips embedded in people’s hands that allow them to open doors and pay for coffee, which he considers the Mark of the Beast predicted in the Book of Revelations over 2,000 years ago. He has surmised that President Obama is the Antichrist sent to destroy the United States. When posting a video foretelling Islam’s destruction of the country, he wrote, “I would honestly say this is the most important 14 minutes of information I’ve heard in the last 15 years, by a mile.” And, of course, there’s Benghazi.

Taking in the sum of what Schilling shares — all the links to Breitbart, Drudge, Fox News, Right Wing News and lesser-known Facebook groups, often peddling apocryphal or otherwise odious memes — is a jarring experience. But examined individually, none of Schilling’s opinions qualify as particularly novel. In the current political climate, it’s hard to even call them extreme. There’s nothing surprising about Schilling reacting just as incredulously to the idea of police brutality as to the idea of climate change. You can probably guess that he believes in denying women the right to abortion but does support torture. These are the ordinary, everyday musings of a certain type of conservative, Christian, middle-aged, jingoistic white male — the type that, like Schilling, holds to a specific vision of America that is being rendered obsolete. He’s a bigot, yes. But more than that, he seems scared.

Schilling is only 49, but his Facebook page drips with synthetic nostalgia for a time he has never known and figures was probably better than this one. In a January post, he shared a photo of Jacklyn Lucas — a man who, at 17 years old, fought for the Marines in the Second World War and survived diving on two grenades at Iwo Jima — and contemplated Lucas’s sacrifice in awe. “This generation makes that one seem centuries old, mythological almost,” he wrote. (Schilling also made news last year when, drowning in the debt of his failed video-game company, he took to selling off Nazi memorabilia via a Facebook photo album.) A week later, Schilling shared a post from conservative comedian Steven Crowder titled, “Is Liberalism Killing the Manly Man?” Unsurprisingly, Schilling thinks it is.

When his fear of a changing America manifests in an ornery disdain for millennials’ pathological laziness, unabashed admiration of Walmart’s marketing ploys or public displays of affection for Carly Fiorina, Ben Carson and Donald Trump’s kids, Schilling’s retrograde beliefs are almost quaint: He’s the clichéd right-wing uncle I’ve never known but my white friends all claim to have. More often, though, Schilling’s fear is expressed in other, more hostile ways — like when he shares a video of an American soldier playing “The Star-Spangled Banner” on his electric guitar in an effort to drown out Muslim prayer services, or celebrates Sheriff Joe Arpaio’s harsh treatment of prisoners in his tent-city prison in Maricopa County, Ariz. He sees humans rights and freedoms as extinguishable, transferable resources, reserved mainly for straight, white, middle-aged, Christian, conservative, American males — people like him.

Still, if Schilling feels blindsided by his firing, he’s justified. However ESPN may wish to appear, the company has never been a paragon of bravery or morality. Schilling is an outspoken bigot, undoubtedly one of the worst acting as an outward face of a reputable company. But he’s the same bigot ESPN hired 2010. He’s the same bigot they merely suspended last year when he claimed there were as many as 160 million radical Muslims in the world and then compared them to Nazis. The meme that led to his termination wasn’t even the first transphobic post he has shared on Facebook this week. Schilling’s worst crime, then, isn’t bigotry, but picking the wrong week to be himself.


