


CHICAGO — The people of Chicago are deeply riven by race, class and neighborhood, distrustful of the police, fearful of the growing rate of violent crime and united chiefly in their disapproval of the mayor’s performance and their conviction that the city is headed down the wrong track.

These are among findings of a new survey by The New York Times and the Kaiser Family Foundation, which polled residents of a city that has been upended in recent months by revelations of questionable actions by the police, threats of a teachers’ strike, a school funding crisis and an uptick in violence.

The poll finds broad discontent with the police and those charged with overseeing them, particularly among African-Americans. Residents expressed concerns about racial bias in shootings by officers and many show ambivalence about whether calling the police will ease situations or not make a difference.

Residents of Chicago, the nation’s third-largest city, appear to have lost faith in many of its essential institutions, including the police, courts and the public schools.

The sharpest levels of discontent appear among black residents on the South and West Sides. When it comes to hopes for young people, satisfaction with city services and — especially — expectations about interactions with the police, the divide between black and white Chicago is striking.

“It seems like the police can do anything and get away with it,” Enix Daniels, who is 50 and black and lives on the West Side, said in a follow-up interview. “There are no repercussions. If we do something, we have to pay a bond before we get out. If they do something, they get to sit at their desk.”

The survey was conducted as Chicago confronts a daunting array of problems. Six months ago, protesters took to the streets after the release of video showing a white Chicago police officer shooting a black teenager named Laquan McDonald 16 times. The Justice Department began an investigation into the Police Department, the police superintendent was fired and a task force last month issued a scathing report denouncing systemic racism at the department.

These problems and divides are not unique to Chicago. Cleveland, Baltimore and Ferguson, Mo., have all been convulsed after black people died in encounters with police officers, and neighborhood segregation and budget and school problems are common in the nation’s major cities. Here, though, the challenges reached a fever pitch all at once. And the survey shows how difficult it will be to win the trust of a divided city as it confronts some of the most fraught issues facing urban America today.

In the survey, 62 percent of residents said they disapproved of Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s job performance, and only a quarter approved. Among blacks, his disapproval rating is 70 percent.

Most Chicagoans say they doubt that the mayor cares much about the needs of people like themselves. Among black residents, the feelings are stronger: Only 8 percent believe that Mr. Emanuel cares a lot about people like them, and nearly two-thirds think he cares not much or not at all.

Responding to the survey’s findings, a spokesman for the mayor spoke of work already underway.

“The mayor’s focus is on building on the progress we have made with generations-old issues in Chicago, from jobs to education to public safety,” Adam Collins, the spokesman, said in an emailed statement. “We are striving to grow our already record high school graduation rate, to build out our first-in-the-nation free community college program, and extend our record performance of adding 41 corporate headquarters and nearly 100,000 jobs here over the past five years. And we will continue to invest in everything from technology to training as we work to reduce crime and build trust in the Police Department.”

The telephone poll was conducted April 21 to May 3 using landlines and cellphones with 1,123 adults throughout the City of Chicago. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus four percentage points for all adults.

Nearly equal numbers of blacks, whites and Hispanics live in Chicago, a city of about 2.7 million, but they often live on separate sides of town, and, the survey shows, find themselves leading vastly different lives.

By consistent double-digit margins, African Americans and Latinos on the South and West Sides are more likely than North Side whites to be dissatisfied with aspects of their neighborhoods, like the condition of public recreation facilities, services like trash removal, and the availability of public transportation.

“I’ve been living in this neighborhood about 30 years and I really like it — it’s gotten nicer over the years,” said Tammy Snider, 60, who is white and lives on the North Side. “I sometimes take the bus to an aerobics class in an area that’s not that safe, but it’s during the day.”

The split between neighborhoods can feel like a gulf. Only on the North Side do a majority of residents say it is very likely for a typical young person to graduate from high school. On the West Side, just three in 10 think so.

“In the North and Northwest Side it’s clean, you can walk up and down the street without getting stuck up,” said Carl Hill, 62, who is black and lives on the South Side. “Our area is neglected.”

Latinos in Chicago attest to experiencing slightly less discrimination and generally live in less segregated neighborhoods. But they share some of the frustrations felt by African-Americans citywide. Fewer than 20 percent feel very safe in the area where they live.

Few issues define Chicago’s divide more than schools. Most Chicagoans say their neighborhood lacks quality public schools, but the misery is lopsided: On the South Side, 71 percent of African-Americans say so. In 2013, Mr. Emanuel’s administration oversaw the closing of nearly 50 schools, many in black and Latino communities, a move that contributed to a tense re-election fight for the mayor last year.

The blowback has invigorated public support for the Chicago Teachers Union, which says it may strike if a contract deal cannot be reached. Fifty-nine percent of residents citywide support the decision to strike, and that soars to almost three-quarters among African-American parents living with children.

“Teachers are overworked and underpaid,” said Kareen Noble, 33, a black father of three, whose wife is a substitute teacher. “I know the mayor inherited some of his problems, but he closed a lot of schools without a better option or plan.”

Nearly half of all parents living with children said they would like to leave Chicago.

Chicagoans are more united in viewing crime and violence as the most pressing issues facing the city. Chicago has long wrestled with guns and gangs, and the splintering of large gangs into smaller, disparate groups has added to the bloodshed that largely plays out on the South and West Sides. As of late April, murders were up 54 percent from last year, and shootings were up by 70 percent.

The homicide rate has slowed in recent weeks, the police say, and gun seizures and murder arrests are increasing.

Some parts of the city’s mostly white North Side seem insulated from these trends. Fewer than one-fifth of residents there say they feel unsafe in their neighborhood, and 64 percent of North Side whites say their area is a good or excellent place to raise children. But south and west of the city’s gleaming Loop skyline, the fallout feels different — immediate and urgent. Nearly half of African-Americans say they have changed their daily routines in recent months in response to crime.

“When I was his age, I could go out without my mother being worried I would get shot,” Tierra Cooper, who is black, said of her 7-year-old son. She said she was afraid to send him outdoors without intense supervision.

The city was jolted by video that showed Laquan McDonald crumpling on a Southwest side street amid a spray of police bullets. Across neighborhoods and races, residents followed the case, and 56 percent consider the shooting unjustified. Only 7 percent say it was justified.

Distrust in the police began long before that video emerged. Still vivid to many are the clashes at the Democratic National Convention in 1968 and confessions coerced using Russian roulette and electric shocks on black men in the 1970s and 1980s by a “midnight crew” of detectives.

But the video’s release in November unleashed a new level of anger. Protesters marched in the streets. A task force appointed by Mr. Emanuel issued a crushing appraisal that the police department’s own data “gives validity to the widely held belief the police have no regard for the sanctity of life when it comes to people of color.”

Now, only one-third of residents say the police are doing a good job. Nearly six in 10 think officers are not punished harshly enough in cases of excessive force. And a majority of residents believe the police are more likely to use deadly force against black people and that African-Americans and Latinos are usually treated unfairly by the city’s criminal justice system.

Two-thirds of Chicagoans disapprove of Mr. Emanuel’s handling of the police, yet more approve than disapprove of his surprise choice for new superintendent of Eddie Johnson, a longtime officer who is African-American.

Chicagoans agree even more strongly that a range of reforms — some of which the city has already began to undertake — could help reduce police-involved shootings, including hiring an independent police monitor, expanding crisis and de-escalation training, and adding more police dashboard cameras.

“In recent months, the Chicago Police Department has implemented dozens of reforms aimed at rebuilding public trust, restoring accountability at every level of the department, and promoting transparency,” said Anthony Guglielmi, a spokesman for the Chicago Police Department.

But serious doubts linger. A majority of black Chicagoans doubt that calling the police will improve a dangerous situation. Forty-two percent said they thought calling the police would not make much difference, and 12 percent said they thought it would actually make matters worse.


