


Ask The Times, a Times Insider feature, draws on Times staff members’ expertise to answer questions about current events, science, sports, culture and whatever else is making headlines.

A reader asks: “Is the ‘stud life’ of championship racehorses like Triple Crown-winner American Pharoah — paired for breeding with the likes of Judy the Beauty and Take Charge Lady — really about old-fashioned attraction: a very special date waiting in the breeding shed, where they will ‘consummate’ the ‘relationship,’ as a recent Times article implied? I’d have thought the impregnating of mares by studs, at this level of pedigree, would more reliably be done via artificial insemination, especially given the noted ‘performance anxiety’ of past champions and the amount of money at stake.”

The New York Times sports reporter Joe Drape — author of the just-published “American Pharoah: The Untold Story of the Triple Crown Winner’s Legendary Rise” (Hachette Books), as well as the aforementioned Times article about American Pharoah’s “dance card this season” — responds.

The Jockey Club, which keeps the stallion registry, insists that thoroughbreds, unlike other breeds of horses, conceive their offspring the old-fashioned way. So artificial insemination is prohibited, and what has been done naturally in the wild by horses forever becomes a highly choreographed and brief — 15 seconds — encounter. It is nevertheless potentially worth tens of millions of dollars.

It begins with a teaser stallion — an awful job — to ensure the mare is ready, and up to four men or women in flak jackets and helmets. They are there to make sure American Pharoah, or whatever other stallion, mounts the mare safely. The entry man holds a breeding roll — a sort of padded baton that is soft, thick and wrapped in plastic. He is there to make sure the stallion hits the mark. He also is responsible for whisking a cup beneath to catch some semen, which is handed off to the stallion manager in an adjacent lab, where he puts it under a high-powered microscope. He estimates the quantity and motility of the sperm and adds it to his detailed notes of the assignation. The whole process is videotaped as well, in case there are any insurance claims or disputes.

Have a question for Ask The Times? Submit it using the form below.


