


Two wooden chairs are just about the only props. Dotted lines formed by tiny white lights suggest a tunnel. Otherwise the stage for Barrie Kosky’s new production of Verdi’s “Macbeth,” which runs through May 7 at the Zurich Opera House, is shrouded in darkness. Though he is also listed as set designer, Klaus Grünberg’s lighting is what matters.

Mr. Kosky, the artistic director of Berlin’s Komische Oper and one of today’s most insightful and imaginative opera directors, puts the focus here squarely on the Macbeths: The lighting often lets us see only them. The witches are heard but not seen; instead there is a group of men and women in the shadows, perhaps figments of the central couple’s imaginations.

The angst, guilt and capacity for evil of this scheming duo are laid bare as rarely before. And fortunately, in the baritone Markus Brück and the soprano Tatiana Serjan, Mr. Kosky has performers capable of exploring the characters’ psyches. Despite Lady Macbeth’s three wonderful arias, the plot is here more about Macbeth, present in both the first and final scenes. Initially seen covered by a mass of dead birds, he goes on to seem to survive his own death and experience the (unseen) victory celebration of Macduff and Malcolm that concludes the opera. (Both that scene, from Verdi’s 1865 revision, and the aria for Macbeth that ended the 1847 original are included.)

Mr. Kosky’s stark achievement, however, comes at a price, since so much of the opera’s scenic variety (and its basic action) is dispensed with. Fortunately, he allowed the chorus to be onstage — its only time — for the Scottish refugee scene, allowing Verdi’s point to be made about the devastation Macbeth has caused his subjects.

Undertaking the first Macbeth of his career, Mr. Brück was superb, often singing with quiet intensity but also stressing the character’s volatility with sudden shifts to firm, resonant full voice. Ms. Serjan threw herself into her role, offering a particularly ferocious account of the aria “La luce langue.” At times her soprano sounded raw and her intonation strayed, but these were minor blemishes. The tenor Pavol Breslik and the bass Wenwei Zhang distinguished themselves as Macduff and Banquo.

Drawing on his early-music experience, the conductor Teodor Currentzis encouraged vibrato-free playing and an astringent sound. His interpretation was full of drama, but sometimes went too far in emphasizing an accompaniment figure or inserting a pregnant pause. Still, he makes an integral contribution to a “Macbeth” that will not soon be forgotten.

Alfredo Casella’s only opera, “La Donna Serpente” (“The Snake Lady”), which had its final performance on Sunday at the Teatro Regio in Turin, Italy, could hardly be more different. Casella has been championed by the conductor Gianandrea Noseda, who was recently appointed the next music director of the National Symphony Orchestra in Washington.

First performed in Rome in 1932, “La Donna Serpente,” like Puccini’s “Turandot,” is based on a fantastical play by Carlo Gozzi, but its musical style is very different. Casella befriended Ravel as a fellow student at the Paris Conservatory during the late 1890s and later promoted Mahler, Schoenberg and Stravinsky. For three years he even led the Boston Pops. His cosmopolitan outlook is evident in “La Donna Serpente,” with Neo-Classicism at its center, and the opera’s stylized marches recall the wit of Prokofiev’s Gozzi-based “Love for Three Oranges.”

Casella shows a sure theatrical instinct in this opera about a king, Altidòr, who falls in love with the fairy Miranda. Her father cannot forbid their marriage but prescribes that if Altidòr curses Miranda for anything she does, no matter how heinous, she will turn into a snake. (If the plot sounds familiar, it may be because Wagner based his first opera, “Die Feen,” on the same story.)

Altidòr restrains himself when Miranda has seemingly killed their children, but curses her after her apparent betrayal of his besieged people. The close of Act II, depicting the consequences, is wrenching: Miranda, her transformation underway, slowly departs, but engineers a reunion of the children — now motherless — with their father, as the populace expresses sorrow in a hushed ensemble. But thanks to a countervailing wizard, Miranda’s human shape is restored for a happy ending.

Arturo Cirillo’s brilliant production, with sets in bright primary colors, suits both the fantastical story and Casella’s dazzling score. Riccardo Olivier’s choreography is also an asset, especially when a dancer mimics the movement of a snake during the poignant prelude to Act III, a highlight of the score. The fine tenor Piero Pretti dealt ably with the heroic demands Casella imposes on Altidòr, and the soprano Carmela Remigio brought both appealing delicacy and resolve to Miranda. Under Mr. Noseda’s leadership, the score unfolded with vitality and precision, a tribute to how he has built the theater’s orchestra into an outstanding ensemble.


