


Once a week, when Paula Vogel was 15 and growing up in suburban Maryland, she would fake her mother’s signature on a sick note for school and hop a bus to the Library of Congress, where she requested books that formed a kind of autodidact’s course of study.

“And they would bring them to me: these 1930s, 1940s, 1950s really pulp-fiction lesbian novels, in which at the end, one of the young women marries a man and the other one commits suicide,” this Pulitzer-winning playwright, 64, said early one recent evening at the Vineyard Theater, where her new play, “Indecent,” opens May 17.

Created with the director Rebecca Taichman, “Indecent” is inspired by Sholem Asch’s Yiddish play “The God of Vengeance” and events surrounding it. Swiftly shut down by the vice squad, its 1923 New York production contained the first kiss ever between two women on a Broadway stage. What stunned Ms. Vogel when she read it, though, as a 22-year-old graduate student at Cornell, came later in the play: a frankly erotic, achingly romantic, rain-splashed female love scene.

“It is so beautiful, really beautiful,” she said. “Not a hint or a blink that it’s morally wrong.”

Cut by the producer, Harry Weinberger, that scene never made it to Broadway when the play moved uptown from Greenwich Village. So it wasn’t in question when a rabbi from the socially prominent Temple Emanu-El, among others, lodged a complaint about the production. Weinberger was indicted, with the show’s manager and its cast of 12, for giving an “indecent, immoral and impure theatrical performance,” as The New York Times reported.

But the scene is at the heart of “Indecent,” which follows Asch’s play through the first half of the 20th century, beginning in Poland in 1906, when the writer is a young newlywed and “The God of Vengeance” is his incendiary new script.

Asch had written an upstairs-downstairs, sacred-and-profane play, in which a man who runs a brothel in the basement of his home pays to have a religious scroll made, planning to keep it in the bedroom of his daughter, Rifkele, as a testament to her purity. While her parents seek a respectable husband for her, she is already enamored of Manke, one of the prostitutes who work for her father.

For Ms. Taichman, 46, Asch’s play has been an obsession since 1997, when she was a first-year student at the Yale School of Drama. Having grown up in Port Jefferson, Long Island, in a home well stocked with Yiddish books, she was surprised to be unacquainted with “The God of Vengeance.”

Drawn to it in part because she was at the time in love with a woman, she got the trial transcript from the Yale Law Library. Asch’s papers were also at Yale, as were Weinberger’s. Ms. Taichman immersed herself. “I just couldn’t believe the memories I had happened upon,” she said.

From them, she made a play that became her thesis. Titled “The People vs. the God of Vengeance,” it cuts back and forth between Asch’s drama and the trial, at which the playwright never appeared.

Feeling unsatisfied with her script but unwilling to let the subject go, Ms. Taichman went in search of a playwright collaborator. Thank goodness, she said, that she’d “grown up some” by the time she finally got an introduction to Ms. Vogel, five or six years ago. By then, Ms. Taichman understood that her own task was to give Ms. Vogel “all my knowledge that she wanted,” not clinging to her own conception of the play but instead trusting whatever Ms. Vogel’s vision turned out to be.

Infused with music, movement and dance, “Indecent” revolves around a troupe of actors who perform and cherish “The God of Vengeance” through the decades, and a sweet stage manager called Lemml — his name a homage to Ms. Taichman’s grandfather, his function a nod to Ms. Vogel’s affection for “Our Town” by Thornton Wilder. (At the Yale School of Drama, where she began teaching long after Ms. Taichman had graduated, she would sometimes soothe an upset student by taking a drive to Wilder’s old house nearby and sitting outside to talk.)

The trial has a smaller role, and lyricism a more prominent one, in “Indecent” than in Ms. Taichman’s play. But for both her and Ms. Vogel, Asch’s actions leading up to the Broadway production and his no-show status at the trial are knotty issues. Why did he allow the rain scene to be cut from the script? Why didn’t he defend his colleagues and his work?

Ms. Taichman believes that in the political climate of 1923, he was afraid, just as she believes fear drove some Jewish objections to the show.

“That’s what I think makes it a really complicated story,” she said. “There was enormous anti-Semitism. Nobody knew what was coming, but it was genuinely ominous. So what, in that moment, when you feel at risk, do you put out into the world about who you are?”

Ms. Vogel, who has a decades-long record of championing young playwrights, is less willing to absolve Asch for failing to stand up, in middle age, for a play he wrote at 26.

“Look, it’s a young person’s play,” she said. “O.K., it’s overwritten. But it’s a beautiful young play.”

She remembers what “The God of Vengeance” meant to her when she first read it. She knows what it was like to be a lesbian playwright sending out her early plays — like “The Oldest Profession” (1981) and “And Baby Makes Seven” (1984) — and getting rejection letters that suggested, in language she can still quote, that she had a filthy mind.

To her, the framing device of “Indecent” is “a little love story to everyone along the way who helped me, believed in me as a gay woman, nurtured me, stood up for my lifestyle, stood up for my plays.”

It is also a thank you to Asch, which doesn’t quite mean that she’s forgiven him, particularly for allowing the love between two women to be cut out of his play for Broadway. To her, this was a betrayal by a mature artist of the artist he was when he began.

“I really feel it was a desecration — and I’m angry, actually,” she said. “When people bash the young writers I believe in, it’s hard for me to get over it.”


