


However busy life gets, summer still offers the promise, somehow, of leisure time with a book in hand. I asked people about what they’re looking forward to should that time materialize.

Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times, said he was eager to read C.E. Morgan’s sprawling new novel, “The Sport of Kings.” “I don’t know anything about horse racing, but this sounds like a big Southern story of race and history,” Baquet said. “Who can resist a book that Dwight Garner says is so compelling it could sustain a television mini-series?”

Ben Brantley, The Times’s chief theater critic, has a new release and a classic lined up. “Just now — amid the surreal and petty squalor of this election year — I’m feeling an aching need for the sort of big-picture (as in life and death) perspective that Don DeLillo provides, so I’m delighted that his ‘Zero K’ is waiting for me,” he said. “And I plan to quench my summer thirst for stormy 19th-century passion and thwarted psyches by finally rereading Charlotte Brontë’s strange, anguished ‘Villette,’ which left me reeling when I first encountered it in college.”

Stephanie Danler’s debut novel, “Sweetbitter,” has caught the eye of Maria Russo, the Book Review’s children’s books editor. “I have the impression this book about a young, yearning waitress is the literary equivalent of a sit-down lunch at a nice downtown restaurant: sophisticated but not too fancy, just the thing to shore up my waning faith that some of the time-tested pleasures can still be had even in a radically transformed Manhattan,” Russo said. Parul Sehgal, the Book Review’s senior editor, named “The End of Days,” “a gloomy and tricksy novel by the German writer Jenny Erpenbeck, which was published in translation in 2014 and has acquired a kind of cultlike following. It’s five novels in one — each one detailing the death of the same unnamed heroine.”

Quotable

“I hope he’ll keep at it and write some more stuff, because this is a guy who’s got a real future!” — Joe Hill, novelist and son of Stephen King, on his father, in an interview with NPR

Adapting ‘Cradle’

This week, Kristin Hannah reviews Noah Hawley’s new novel, “Before the Fall.” Hawley has written five novels, starting with “A Conspiracy of Tall Men” in 1998, but he’s become famous in recent years as the creator and showrunner of the TV series “Fargo.” He’s now adapting Kurt Vonnegut’s “Cat’s Cradle” for the small screen. Conventional wisdom has it that TV is taken more seriously now than ever, which makes it a fitting home for Vonnegut, who often fought for respectability. In 1963, Terry Southern reviewed “Cat’s Cradle” in these pages, concluding: “It is work of a far more engaging and meaningful order than the melodramatic tripe which most critics seem to consider ‘serious.’ ”


