


As Angelika Graswald revisited Bannerman Island a year ago, after the drowning of her fiancé, she told investigators that there were problems in their relationship — specifically that he had postponed their wedding, according to an officer’s testimony at a pretrial hearing on Thursday.

It was the first time the police had revealed that Ms. Graswald, who is charged with second-degree murder in the death of her fiancé, Vincent Viafore, had indicated that their nuptials were in jeopardy.

The testimony, by Anthony DaSilva, one of the three investigators who were also on Bannerman Island on April 29, 2015, 10 days after Mr. Viafore’s kayak capsized, came on the third day of the hearing in Goshen, N.Y. The purpose of the hearing is to examine how investigators obtained evidence, which in the case against Ms. Graswald relies heavily on her own words.

Ms. Graswald, 36, and Mr. Viafore, who was 46, set out in two kayaks from the western shore of the Hudson River on an unseasonably warm Sunday. They paddled to Bannerman Island, where, the police say, they spent a few hours drinking beers and taking pictures.

On the return to shore, the boat capsized and Mr. Viafore, who was not wearing a life vest, disappeared under the choppy water, which was 46 degrees — cold enough to instantly bring on hypothermia. For 10 days, Ms. Graswald was treated as a grieving fiancée while rescuers searched for Mr. Viafore’s body.

But on April 29, investigators happened to run into Ms. Graswald on Bannerman Island, a historic site with the ruins of a castle, where she had volunteered as a gardener. According to testimony from another investigator earlier in the week, Ms. Graswald, who said she was on the island to leave a memorial wreath for Mr. Viafore, confessed that she had pulled the plug from his kayak and also tampered with his paddle.

She was charged with murder the following day, after an 11-hour police interrogation. Her lawyer, Richard A. Portale, is seeking to suppress a videotape of the questioning.

Prosecutors said Ms. Graswald, who lived in an apartment in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., with Mr. Viafore, had stood to collect $250,000 in life insurance benefits from his death. Mr. Portale has portrayed Mr. Viafore’s death as a tragic accident, brought on by the dangerously rough and cold waters.

The testimony on Thursday also expanded on the unusual behavior that detectives observed in the days after Mr. Viafore’s drowning. (His body was found a month after the kayak capsized.) Among Ms. Graswald’s posts to Facebook were lewd jokes, video clips of her cartwheeling and visiting an animal shelter, and smiling selfies.

The authorites said Ms. Graswald confessed to removing the kayak plug to Donald DeQuarto, an investigator with whom she spoke privately on the island, and agreed to return to the New York State Police barracks for more questioning. On the boat ride back, she was whistling and declared at one point, “I’m free,” according to Mr. DaSilva, who testified that her demeanor was “surreal.”

As she neared the police barracks, Mr. DaSilva added, Ms. Graswald said that when she first saw Mr. DeQuarto, she thought he was cute.

The testimony this week also centered on Ms. Graswald’s cellphone. She initially told police that she had lost it in the water when her own kayak went over, moments before a rescue boat reached her. But, according to the police, she tried to make a call on the rescue boat, explaining that she had a missed call.

In questioning, Mr. Portale has tried to cast doubt on Ms. Graswald’s supposed confession on the island about the removal of the kayak plug. To that end, he asked Mr. DaSilva why he had let her go to the bathroom on the island after he said she made such an incriminating statement.

In response, Mr. DaSilva testified that she was within view of investigators.

Mr. Portale has also suggested that Ms. Graswald, who is a native of Latvia, struggled with a language barrier during the long police interrogation, in which she said, “I wanted him dead and now he’s gone and I’m O.K. with it.”

To emphasize Ms. Graswald’s grasp of English, an assistant district attorney on Thursday asked Mr. DaSilva if the investigators had spoken in English with her on the island. He responded that she had no trouble communicating.


