


L train riders finally had an opportunity to quiz top officials from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority about plans to close their subway tunnel into Manhattan, and they had plenty of questions.

At the authority’s first community meeting in Brooklyn on Thursday evening, riders asked why a shutdown was needed and how they would get around. People who live along the booming subway line have become increasingly worried that the closing could paralyze Williamsburg and other Brooklyn neighborhoods.

Officials from the authority outlined two proposals for closing the East River tunnel, starting in 2019, to repair damage from Hurricane Sandy. Hundreds of people filled the auditorium, but they were asked to submit written questions, which took some of the drama out of the event.

Riders wanted to know: Would service be increased on other nearby subway lines? (Yes.) Was the tunnel in danger of collapse? (No.) How much would new ferries across the East River cost? (Still to be determined.)

The first option for the tunnel work, officials said, would close the entire tunnel for 18 months and stop all service on the L line between Manhattan and Brooklyn. The second option would close one tube at a time over three years, providing only 20 percent of the current service through the tunnel.

One L train rider, Thomas Sukhu, who lives in Ridgewood, Queens, was not pleased with the proposals and favored building a new tunnel under the river. He said he wanted to speak at the meeting and complained that the location of the hearing, at the Marcy Avenue Armory, was out of the way so people would not attend.

“I say no to this shutdown,” Mr. Sukhu said before leaving the meeting frustrated.

Veronique Hakim, the president of New York City Transit, which oversees the city’s subways and buses, said officials had ruled out building a new tunnel because it would be expensive and would take too long. The work was too complex to complete during nights and weekends, she said.

The authority plans to offer travel alternatives, including additional buses over the Williamsburg Bridge and extra ferry service between Manhattan and Brooklyn. Nearby subway routes, including the G and M lines, would add trains to carry riders who move over from the L line, officials said.

Since news of an extended L train tunnel shutdown leaked in January, residents and local leaders have started to brace for its impact. Carlo A. Scissura, the president of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce, said businesses were panicking.

Restaurants and bars along the line fear they will lose customers. Developers worry that potential renters will stay away from those neighborhoods.

“You may see people who say: ‘It’s not worth it to rent an apartment along this corridor. I’m just going to do something else,’” Mr. Scissura said.

The Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce is part of a group called the L Train Coalition, which has pushed for details about the shutdown and wants the community to have a say in the decision. A critical issue is whether the authority plans to run enough buses on nights and weekends, Mr. Scissura said.

“This is an area where a Saturday or a Friday night is like prime-time rush hour on a Monday morning commute,” he said.

Officials said the authority planned to make a decision about the tunnel work in the next three months. A second public meeting is scheduled for May 12 in Manhattan, and riders can submit comments on the authority’s website.

On Thursday, Riders Alliance, a rider advocacy group, urged the authority and Mayor Bill de Blasio to consider a range of travel options.

“People shouldn’t have to move or find new jobs because of construction on the L train, and they shouldn’t find themselves stuck with a two-hour daily odyssey to get to work,” John Raskin, the group’s executive director, said.

For local businesses, popular destinations like the Brooklyn Brewery and the Smorgasburg market would still draw people who might take Uber or a ferry, but less prominent stores and bars could suffer, said Eric Ottaway, the brewery’s chief executive officer.

It will affect people who want to “come to Williamsburg and wander around,” Mr. Ottaway said. “It will hit smaller businesses.”


