


It did not look good for Anthony D. Weiner.

Campaigning in a Brooklyn bakery during his ill-fated 2013 comeback bid for New York City mayor, Mr. Weiner — he of sexting scandal fame — was caught on tape hurling insults at an unhappy voter. Reporters pounced: Mr. Weiner, after weeks of brutal coverage, had finally become unhinged.

But the candidate was holding an ace: Josh Kriegman, a former aide and aspiring filmmaker, who had persuaded Mr. Weiner to let him tag along, camera in hand, for the entirety of the campaign. His microphone picked up what television crews had not: the voter sneeringly referring to Mr. Weiner’s Muslim wife as “an Arab.”

The campaign distributed the footage to news outlets, prompting corrections and even an on-air mea culpa from Jon Stewart. “We were happy to correct the record,” Mr. Kriegman recalled.

Now Mr. Kriegman’s careful chronicling of Mr. Weiner’s campaign is poised to prompt a much broader reassessment of a tabloid-tarred politician. “Weiner,” a feature-length documentary by Mr. Kriegman and Elyse Steinberg, will be released on May 20, amid one of the most contentious presidential elections in memory, and it may be the most intimate and provocative portrait of a political race since “The War Room.”

Mr. Weiner — whose moth-to-the-flame instinct toward exposure led in part to his resignation from Congress in 2011 after admitting he had lied about online liaisons with women — granted extraordinary access to Mr. Kriegman, in exchange for the occasional use of his footage during the campaign. The filmmaker agreed to step out of the room whenever Mr. Weiner asked.

And yet there is Mr. Kriegman in the back of a sport utility vehicle, filming as Mr. Weiner tries to persuade his wife, Huma Abedin, to appear at a primary-night party where Sydney Leathers, Mr. Weiner’s erstwhile sexting partner, is lurking outside. Mr. Kriegman is inside the couple’s apartment at breakfast time as Ms. Abedin, a frozen smile on her face, confides to the camera that she is “living a nightmare.”

There are startling moments of Mr. Weiner analyzing his own transgressions (he calls them “the things”) and facing teary-eyed staff members. Hours after Mr. Weiner’s campaign is stricken by revelations of new online infidelities, the film finds husband and wife alone in a conference room, staring at each other for what may be the longest and most painful onscreen marital silence this side of an Ingmar Bergman film.

“The door closes, and I’m filming, and I’m riveted by what’s happening,” Mr. Kriegman recalled in an interview last month. “But I’m definitely thinking to myself: ‘I can’t believe I’m standing here right now.’”

He almost never got the chance. Mr. Kriegman had known Mr. Weiner for years, serving as chief of staff in his district office. After a decade in politics, he began pursuing a film career, earning credits on MTV and PBS. He and Ms. Steinberg, who are both 36, and previously collaborated on a documentary about prison reform, came to view Mr. Weiner as an ideal subject.

“He was reduced to a character and a punch line, and we felt that there was a more complex story to be told,” said Ms. Steinberg, whose last documentary examined the trial of Saddam Hussein. Mr. Weiner, she added, brought the appeal of an “almost Shakespearean” figure: “intense self-awareness, real insight and then complete blindness.”

For two years, Mr. Kriegman pestered, and Mr. Weiner resisted, unwilling to commit. So the filmmaker was surprised to receive a text message in 2013. “I’m running,” he recalled Mr. Weiner writing. “Do you want to come with a camera?”

By several accounts, Mr. Weiner unilaterally made the decision to be filmed. The fact that Mr. Kriegman occasionally shared his footage with the candidate seemed like an acceptable trade, according to Patricia Aufderheide, a professor at American University in Washington who has written extensively on the ethics of documentary filmmaking.

“There will be some kind of quid pro quo,” Ms. Aufderheide said. “Whether you want to or not, as a documentary filmmaker, you are going to have a relationship with your subject.”

Mr. Kriegman spent five months shadowing the candidate, generating 400 hours of footage. (The witty editing, by Eli Despres, took 10 months, with the movie’s crew communicating with him over Skype.)

At times, the proceedings resemble a particularly painful episode of “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” with the wisecracking, can’t-help-himself protagonist sinking deeper and deeper into a quicksand of his own making.

The comparison was not lost on the filmmakers, who said they frequently discussed the parallels between Larry David and Mr. Weiner. “It feels good to see somebody unapologetic for who they are,” Mr. Kriegman said. “In ‘Curb Your Enthusiasm,’ it goes off the rails and causes all kinds of problems, but we still admire his willingness to do that.” Mr. Weiner and Mr. David’s character share another trait, Ms. Steinberg added: “He doesn’t seem to be destroyed by what might destroy other people.”

What Mr. Weiner makes of the finished product is a mystery. “I haven’t seen it, and therefore I have nothing to say about it,” Mr. Weiner said when contacted for this article. The filmmakers say he rebuffed their offer to view a copy.

The film won the grand jury documentary prize at Sundance, where it had its premiere weeks before the Iowa caucuses. The presence of Ms. Abedin, a high-ranking aide to Hillary Clinton known for her discretion, added to the buzz. And the film is likely to make another splash in the political world when it is shown on television in October by Showtime.

In reality, Mr. Weiner will probably find a lot to like. His skills as a retail politician are on full display, energizing parade-goers and exchanging lopsided grins with subway riders who flash him a thumbs-up. Mr. Kriegman captures Mr. Weiner winning over a hostile crowd in the Bronx, a scene so stirring that, at the time, the campaign requested Mr. Kriegman’s footage and distributed it to supporters.

Mr. Weiner is portrayed as eager to focus on substance, but the film omits less savory details about his career, like his lack of accomplishments in Congress, where he had a reputation for rage.

“A lot of people have seen this film and come to us and said, ‘I don’t necessarily love him, or think he’s a hero exactly, but he’s so much more complex and nuanced and human than I would have thought,’” Mr. Kriegman said. “Usually there’s a fierce debate — I like him, I hate him — and that’s what we were hoping for.”

Suffused with cable-news clips and the screaming covers of tabloids, the film offers an implicit critique of a political culture dominated by spectacle. Yet it also presents Mr. Weiner as a creature of that world, even as he is undone by it.

“He was hopeful that there might be another version of the story that could be told,” Mr. Kriegman said of Mr. Weiner’s cooperation. “When the scandal resurfaced, that motivation, and that need — the importance of having a camera in the room to tell a bigger, more nuanced, complex, version of the story — somehow became even more important.”

Or, as Mr. Weiner tells the filmmaker in a closing scene: “I hope that it’s more than just a punch-line kind of thing. I want it just to be viewed as the full person that I was.”


