


ST.-DENIS, France — The barricades went up early. Metal fences, police officers directing traffic, military personnel with guns slung over their shoulders. It was hard to move around the Stade de France on Friday, and this was by design.

In packs and throngs, people still shuffled toward this huge stadium on the outskirts of Paris. From the Metro station. From the cafes. From the caged-in basketball court a few blocks away, one game ending a few hours before another, in a different sport, began.

The fans, many in the yellow of Romania but most in the blue of France, smiled and laughed. Some took selfies with other spectators or even law enforcement officers. A young boy tried on a gendarme’s hat.

Eighteen years to the day since France opened the 1998 World Cup here (and went on to win it), six years since France was awarded this tournament and about seven months since suicide bombers and gunmen murdered 130 people — including one just outside this stadium — during a chilling night of terror, the European Championships are, finally, open.

The first game was everything the French could have wanted, a 2-1 victory over Romania that featured a beautiful, powerful, majestic shot from Dimitri Payet in the 89th minute that rippled the top corner of the net and settled everyone’s nerves. With an expanded field of 24 teams competing for the first time and only eight set to be eliminated during the group stage, little lasting damage would have been done to France’s title hopes with a tie, but victory fit the script far better.

“It was emotional — from a psychological perspective, it was, in no way, easy to manage,” Didier Deschamps, the France manager, said afterward. “But we were rewarded.”

It is a strange time here. Strikes involving transit workers, airline pilots and gas company employees, among others, have crippled the gears of France’s infrastructure. Intense rain recently caused the Seine to rise over its banks, flooding parts of the city and forcing relocations that included some of the most valuable pieces of art in the Louvre and Orsay museums, which were shifted to higher floors to ensure their safety.

For the past few weeks, a sense of fraying has lingered over France, particularly in Paris. Delays and cancellations on buses, trains and subways have become common, even as demand has swollen because of the influx of foreign visitors. Garbage has piled up on the streets. Water damage is ubiquitous. Until recently, lines at gas stations routinely stretched for blocks.

All of that was fueled even more by a wariness regarding the possibility of a terrorist attack during this tournament. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks last winter and has said the Euros are a target. Many countries, including the United States, have issued travel warnings for citizens headed to France during this period; some players have expressed concerns about the safety of their families.

At least one, the German defender Jérôme Boateng, decided to leave his children at home because “the risk is simply too big for me,” he said in an interview with the German newspaper Bild.

French officials have vowed to do everything possible to secure the tournament, with upward of 100,000 people devoted to the job. Spectators coming to the match on Friday found a multilayered perimeter around the stadium, with phalanxes of armed guards augmented by bomb-sniffing dogs as well as undercover officers moving among the crowds.

Some groups mixed sports and politics, chanting that France is a police state — it has been under a state of emergency since the November attacks and will remain so throughout this tournament — or voicing protests against an unpopular labor law. Others simply milled around in the official fan zone, enjoying the significance of the evening (and the smell of sausages) even as the security presence loomed.

“One might say it’s going to damper the atmosphere,” said Pierre-Yves Cerel, a 28-year-old Parisian. “But there’s a feeling of security. I talked to many friends to see whether it was safe to come here tonight.”

In the end, he did come, as did about 75,000 other fans. And what they saw was a stirring opening ceremony that concluded with a loud, lively, emotional version of the French national anthem. They saw a stunted start in which Romania nearly scored in the first few moments — the French goalkeeper Hugo Lloris made a stunning save on a shot from close range — and a nervy performance from the hosts in the first half.

They saw N’Golo Kanté, a midfielder, running everywhere. They saw Antoine Griezmann, a forward, frustrated by missed opportunities. They saw Olivier Giroud, another striker, make up for his own wasted chances by heading France into the lead just before the hour. And they saw Romania draw level on a penalty kick — Bogdan Stancu converting after an ill-advised foul by Patrice Evra — about seven minutes later.

And then, gloriously, they saw Payet — who might have been the man of the match anyway, with his slick play and his assist on Giroud’s goal — send a rippling blast from about 20 yards that stopped rising only when it smacked into the goal’s taut netting.

A year ago, Payet, who plays for West Ham in the English league, was not even a certainty to be on the French team for this tournament. On Friday, he produced the team’s biggest win since the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.

“If someone had told me it would have gone like this,” Payet said, “I wouldn’t have believed it.”

Minutes later, Payet was substituted. As he ran off the field, a long, loud ovation washed over him and, just for a second, he looked around to take in the scene. The fans shouted. The stands shook. Payet stared, his eyes wide and warm and wet.

It had been an emotional night. For everyone.


