


NEW YORK

Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about Joseph Percoco, a former aide to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo who is under federal investigation, quoted incorrectly from comments by Blair Horner, the executive director of the New York Public Interest Research Group. Mr. Horner said that the actions of Mr. Percoco could cause harm if he was “gaming the system,” not “manipulating” it.

•

An article on Saturday about the increasing presence of birds at Westchester County Airport, using information from government officials, misidentified birds that nest above hangar doors there. They are cliff swallows, not barn swallows. The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Wednesday about Uber’s plans to raise as much as $2 billion through the use of leveraged securities described a leveraged loan incorrectly. It is issued by a company with heavy existing debt, not to that company.

THE ARTS

A dance review on Saturday about the Pennsylvania Ballet, at the Merriam Theater in Philadelphia, misidentified the designer of the lighting of the starlit sky in “o zlozony / o composite,” one of the works performed. The designer is Colman Rupp, the assistant to the work’s original lighting designer, Jennifer Tipton — not Ms. Tipton.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about “The Evidence Room,” an exhibition at the Venice Architecture Biennale that is a reconstruction of architectural elements of the Auschwitz death camp, misspelled the given name of a member of the team that worked on the project. She is Sascha Hastings, not Sacha.

THURSDAY STYLES

The Scouting Report column last Thursday misstated the address where the Metropolitan Museum of Art is holding a book sale. It is 1000 Fifth Avenue, not 6 East 82nd Street.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.


