


My mother’s brain has been melting since she had a serious stroke a year and a half ago, and if I had to map it, I’d say the major territories now are pastrami, kittens, egg rolls and, lately, a man in her nursing home unit we’ll call Sam.

Sam, as we say in my family, is not from the big talkers. Actually, he’s almost a nontalker; I have yet to see him excited or upset about anything. Romantically, he is a tabula rasa; project on him what you will, and he has no complaints. This makes him my mother’s ideal man.

“Wheel me over to Sam; I want to give him a kiss,” Ma says.

Ma is in a wheelchair, as is Sam, and a kiss is about all she can give him. Still, one wants, in these litigious and sexually correct times, to establish consent.

“What if Sam doesn’t want to be kissed, Ma?” I say.

Ma snorts, as if I’m asking, What if somebody doesn’t want to win the Mega Millions?

“He’ll want it, all right,” Ma says.

Is there an essential personality, a bedrock you? Or is what remains after a massive stroke merely cranial geology? Before what her hospital records list as “a right temporoparietal infarct,” Ma was blunt, unconventional and such a monument of self-confidence you could have sold tickets.

“People find me fascinating,” she’d say. “I don’t know what it is about me; they just do.”

Now, although Ma does not understand distance or time, the self-confidence remains. It doesn’t matter that when I wheel her to Sam for a kiss, Sam doesn’t react. Ma, who does not kiss him, knows what she’s got.

“There are starers here,” Ma told me when she went into the nursing home. “These men just sit and stare at me. Why do they do that, do you think?”

“Well, you see, Ma, some of these people are not in good health,” I explained. “They’ve had medical problems that affect their brains. It’s not that they’re staring at you; they’re just staring.”

Bzzzt! Wrong answer. Bring on the next contestant in the “Best Adult Child” show, my brother Martin. Men are staring at your 89-year-old mother, Mr. Wadler. Can you tell her why?

“Face it, Ma,” my brother says. “You’re a good-looking woman. Men can’t take their eyes off you. You’ll just have to live with it.”

What do you do when your mother spends half her time on another planet, a snowbird of dementia? At first I thought I should keep her tethered to reality.

No, Ma, you wouldn’t be in the pool if you were home in Daytona. Think about it: How would you get in and out? You can’t walk.

Friends who’ve had parents in this situation say it’s better to step into their reality and soothe or distract them. But distracting my mother from her plans for her and Sam is like distracting a Mack truck. It’s all she wants to talk about. She and Sam are thinking of getting a puppy, she says; Sam can walk it.

“Sam said he wants a puppy?” I say. “I never hear him talk.”

“He talks to me,” Ma says.

I’d love it if my mother had a boyfriend, real or imagined. But I don’t know how much Sam is into this, if at all, and Ma’s plans are way out of sync with their abilities. She and Sam are both in diapers; Ma cannot walk; the aides need a Hoyer Lift to get her out of bed.

“Know any cheap hotels in New York?” Ma asks me. “Say, $77 a night?”

“Ma,” I say, “is this about Sam? Do you want to spend the night with this guy? Which is fine with me.”

Ma feigns nonchalance. It’s remarkable. Hunks of her brain are gone, and she is still trying to gaslight her daughter.

“Not right away,” Ma says. “We’ll see what develops. We’d stay in separate rooms. Maybe one big room.”

I go home and call my friend Herb.

“My mother is trying to get into some guy’s diapers,” I say.

But who doesn’t want her mother to be happy? On my next visit, I bring extra bagels and lox and invite Sam to join Ma and me for lunch. He declines. I get tea for Ma and myself, and we share a bagel and talk.

“Know any cheap hotels in New York?” Ma says.

“What do you want to do in New York, Ma?” I say.

“Sam and I want to spend a few days and take in the sights,” Ma says. “Go to the Statue of Liberty, take that boat around Manhattan.”

Step into her reality; then soothe or distract her.

“That sounds really nice, Ma,” I say. “But it will take planning. What about a picnic in the garden here? You and Sam make a list of your favorite foods, and I’ll bring them, and ——”

Storm clouds start darkening the face of Mount Ma.

“What does Sam say he’d like to do in New York?” I ask.

“He’d like to go to a ballgame,” Ma says, brightening. “I was thinking we could see that Jewish ballplayer, the one who didn’t play on the holidays.”

“Sandy Koufax?” I say. “I’m not even sure he’s alive.”

I get my phone and look him up.

“Sandy Koufax is 80 years old, Ma,” I say. “He’s not playing anymore.”

Ma looks skeptical.

“It’s a young man’s game, Ma,” I say. “But look, I’m sure we can find another Jewish player. There are hundreds of them out there.”


