


Le Coucou White brick, glass, impressive chandeliers and a sleek, wide-open state-of-the-art kitchen provide the stage for the American debut of Daniel Rose. The Chicago native built his reputation in Paris at his restaurants, Spring and La Bourse et La Vie. In partnership with the prolific restaurateur Stephen Starr, he is taking on New York, where French cooking is enjoying a renaissance. French dishes include pigs’ feet with caviar, pike quenelles, fish stew bourride and poached chicken for two to four. But the other day, Mr. Rose was sampling cheeses from Vermont and California. “I’m trying to find American-made products that remind me of France,” he said. His pastry chef, Daniel Skurnick, is working on an updated version of riz au lait impératrice, the classic glazed rice dessert rarely seen these days. (Opens Monday): 138 Lafayette Street (Howard Street), 212-271-4252, lecoucou.com.

Beach Bistro 96The Brazilian chef Carlos Varella and his wife, Andressa Junqueira, have opened a bright orange storefront serving pasteis, pão de queijo (traditional cheese rolls), picanha (sirloin cap) with mashed potatoes, and on Wednesdays and Saturdays, feijoada, the Brazilian national dish of beans and meats. They plan to be open year-round. But no caipirinhas yet: 95-19 Rockaway Beach Boulevard, Rockaway Park, Queens, 718-474-6000.

The Cannibal A branch of this Murray Hill restaurant has opened in Los Angeles, with a butcher and sandwich shop: 8850 Washington Boulevard, Culver City, Calif., 310-838-2783, thecanniballa.com.

Chikarashi At this new spot bordering Chinatown, SoHo and the Lower East Side, the chef and an owner, Michael Jong Lim, offers hybrid Hawaiian poké with elements of Japanese chirashi (“scattered sushi”), a touch of bibimbap from his native South Korea and even Chinese accents. Sichuan chile-sansho-salmon is one example. Mr. Lim, the former executive chef of Neta in Greenwich Village, a restaurant that has become quite an incubator, said he began to notice the poké craze and realized how it was not unlike chirashi, so he went from there. And though his restaurant is fast-casual, you do not choose your ingredients on an assembly line. “I serve curated poké bowls, with combinations that make sense to me,” he said: 227 Canal Street (Baxter Street), 646-649-5965, chikarashi.com.

Georgie Geoffrey Zakarian’s career has kept him close to his home base in New York, with forays to Miami. But now he has embarked on a transcontinental commute with a restaurant in Beverly Hills, Calif. In a luxurious, well-upholstered setting, Mr. Zakarian is taking advantage of Western ingredients, including Santa Barbara sea urchin and Dungeness crab, on a seasonal menu that includes baby artichoke frito, black bass, John Dory with spring garlic purée and Rancho Gordo bean salad. Next to the restaurant is the Garden Bar, serving drinks curated by the marquee mixologist Brian Van Flandern and a menu of light food: Montage Beverly Hills, 225 North Canon Drive, Beverly Hills, Calif., 310-860-7970, georgierestaurant.com.

Hey Hey Canteen From the ashes of 2 Duck Goose comes this mash-up of Asian cuisines, Hong Kong style, featuring seafood laksa, sesame peanut noodles, a chrysanthemum Caesar salad and eggplant fries (Wednesday): 400 Fourth Avenue (Sixth Street), Gowanus, Brooklyn, 347-987-4808, heyheycanteen.com.

Indie Fresh The chef Akhtar Nawab is expanding his collection of fast-casual spots serving soups, assorted bowls including various meatballs with mushrooms: Chelsea Market, 75 Ninth Avenue (15th Street), 917-472-7915, indiefresh.com.

Teremok This blini chain, with more than 300 units across Russia, is opening its first American outpost. In fast-casual style, it will serve 18 savory and sweet blini with fillings like mushrooms with cheese; salami with tomatoes and cheeses; chicken with apple cream; salmon caviar; and dark chocolate. The owner, Mikhail Goncharov, was inspired to create the chain after seeing how well creperies did in France. The menu also includes soups, salads, kasha (buckwheat groats) with additions like smoked salmon, and, among the drinks, some Russian options like kvass, a fermented beverage. A second location at 555 Avenue of the Americas (15th Street) is to open in September (Wednesday): 358 Seventh Avenue (30th Street), 917-472-7322, teremok.com.

Lowlife This Lower East Side restaurant with some high-end aspirations is gone.

Faun Brian Leth, a chef who caught our palates at Vinegar Hill House, will open this spot with David Stockwell, an architect and an owner, in about a month. The name is meant to convey mischief and pleasure, and Mr. Leth’s menu promises to challenge, with tongue with green sauce, cockscomb pasta with cockscombs and tripe, preserved Spanish mackerel, veal short ribs, and braised lamb neck: 606 Vanderbilt Avenue (Prospect Place), 718-576-6120, faun.nyc.

Gotham Market at the Ashland Those attending the fall seasons at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Theater for a New Audience will have new dining choices. A 16,000-square-foot spinoff of the Gotham West Market in Hell’s Kitchen will offer vendors like Mu Ramen, Apizza Regionale, Flip Bird and Mason Jar. A pop-up area will have guest chefs: 590 Fulton Street (Ashland Place), Fort Greene, Brooklyn.

Meir Adoni, a star Israeli chef, will open a modern Middle Eastern restaurant, as yet unnamed, in New York in the fall, in partnership with Gadi Peleg, the managing partner of Breads Bakery: 34 East 20th Street.

The Modern The restaurant and barroom at the Museum of Modern Art will close for kitchen renovations from Aug. 8 to Sept. 14. Abram Bissell, the executive chef, said that changing tastes called for a different approach. Back when the restaurant opened in 2005, “all your temples of food were in Midtown,” he said. “That’s no longer the case. People will go anywhere, eat at counters, and it’s all fine dining.” Mr. Bissell said the new plan would remove the division between the kitchens for the dining room and the barroom to provide more menu flexibility and more interaction among the cooks. A chef’s table seating four to six people will be added, “but it will not have a tasting menu. We’re making no requirements.” 9 West 53rd Street, 212-333-1220, themodernnyc.com.

Tavern 62 The first example of the collaboration between the chef David Burke and ESquared Hospitality will open in Mr. Burke’s former Fishtail space in late summer or early fall: 135 East 62nd Street.

Park MGM and Sydell’s NoMad Hotel Las Vegas The Monte Carlo Resort on the Las Vegas Strip will be converted into these two places. A branch of the Eataly market and restaurants will be installed in the Park MGM, and a NoMad restaurant from Daniel Humm and Will Guidara will open in the NoMad hotel, both to be completed in late 2018: The Strip, Las Vegas.


