


Three-point records have fallen rapidly this season, mostly to the mighty Warriors. On April 24, Golden State made 21 in a first-round game against the Rockets, setting a playoff record.

But on Wednesday night, the Cavaliers took that record away and added another: Cleveland hit 25 3-pointers, not just the most in a playoff game, but more than the regular-season record, as well.

The Cavaliers’ 3-point marksmanship has been overlooked this season in the shadow of the Warriors. While Golden State made 1,077 3-pointers, a record, Cleveland made 880 of its own, the fifth-highest total of all time. J. R. Smith led the way with 204, but Kevin Love, Matthew Dellavedova, LeBron James and many others had 3-point punch, as well.

Ten Cavaliers made 3s in Wednesday’s game. Smith hit seven, one off his season high, and James and Kyrie Irving had four each.

“J. R. is the only one on the team who has the ultra-green light,” James told reporters after the game. “It’s fluorescent.”

Even Dahntay Jones, who played most of the season for the Grand Rapids Drive of the N.B.A. Development League, drained one in his five minutes on the court.

The Cavaliers shot 25 for 45 from 3-point range. They tried and made more 3s than 2s, and shot them at a higher percentage, .556.

The Hawks could not stand up to the barrage of 3s. They were never in the game and lost, 123-98. Atlanta was 11 for 27 from 3-point range, and no player made more than two.

“With Kevin posting the basketball, smaller guys have to double-team,” Coach Tyronn Lue explained to The Cleveland Plain Dealer. “With LeBron being aggressive and driving the ball to the basket, and Kyrie getting to the basket, teams are trying to shut the driving lanes off. That makes for guys kicking it out.”

The regular-season record is 23, shared by the 2009 Magic against the Kings (Jameer Nelson made five) and the 2013 Rockets against the Warriors (Jeremy Lin also made five).

Since the adoption of the 3-point shot, teams have been hoisting up bombs in hopes of stealing a last-second win, rallying from a deficit or punctuating a win. And while the 3-pointer was initially dismissed as a gimmick, to be used only in unusual situations, it has increasingly become a crucial weapon.

Just about every 3-point record that can be thought up has fallen in the last few seasons. Golden State’s Stephen Curry made 402 this season, shattering his own record of 286 from the season before. The Warriors set the team record, and N.B.A. teams made, on average, 8.5 3s a game, up from 5.7 a decade ago and 0.8 in 1979-80, the shot’s first season.

After a sweep of the Pistons (with 12, 20, 12 and 13 3-pointers), the Cavaliers now lead the Hawks, two games to none (15 and 25).

The Cavaliers are 6-0 and untroubled in the playoffs so far. Playing in the weaker Eastern Conference, they look like a good bet to make the finals.

The result of a potential Cavaliers-Warriors series is uncertain. But it is a sure thing the 3s would be raining down.


