


It has not yet been seen on television, but the early notices for a digital advertisement from a Democratic candidate for the Senate from Arkansas, Conner Eldridge, suggest it could well become a blueprint for how other Democrats — incumbents and challengers alike — attack their Republican opponents by linking them to Donald J. Trump.

THE AD Highlighting some of Mr. Trump’s most misogynistic remarks, the ad alternates between those quotations and slowly spelling out the definition of the ad’s title: “Harassment.”

A white, blinking cursor on a black screen begins to peck out a dictionary’s entry for “harassment,” before the screen cuts to video and audio clips of Mr. Trump: “She ate like a pig.” “I’d look her right in that fat ugly face of hers.” The cursor continues typing the definition — “To subject someone to hostility” — before cutting again to the voice of Mr. Trump opining about a woman’s cosmetic surgery: “The boob job is terrible.”

This continues for a full minute before the cursor blinks ahead of a new phrase: “Trump enabler: Arkansas Senator John Boozman,” who is shown in a black-and-white photo as he is heard saying he will support the Republican nominee, “regardless of who we pick,” even if it is Mr. Trump.

THE IMPACT The two-minute ad was instantly seen as a preview of general-election attacks on down-ballot Republican candidates with Mr. Trump at the top of the ticket. It received even more attention on the right than on the left: “This is brutal,” wrote Erick Erickson, a conservative writer who opposes Mr. Trump’s candidacy. He called it a road map for how Democrats “are going to take back the Senate.”

THE TAKEAWAY Mr. Trump’s victory in the primary campaign has created a sense of worry and uncertainty for lower-level Republican candidates, unsure if he will drag them down or if they will need to hold onto his avid supporters to have a chance in November. The threat contained in this ad — effectively using Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Boozman’s own voices against them — could well prompt some Republicans to try to distance themselves from their presumptive nominee. Either way, it provides a warning: Every vow to support the Republican standard-bearer — normally a routine statement, not a fraught one — may now be turned into a Democratic cudgel.

One of Senator Ted Cruz’s final commercials sought to tie Mr. Trump to Hillary Clinton, calling them “two sides of the same coin” on tax increases, guns and transgender bathrooms. But something seemed off: It showed Mr. Trump’s and Mrs. Clinton’s profiles on a spinning gold coin — the sort ordinarily reserved for esteemed former presidents. Then again, at least the ad reflected Mr. Cruz’s desire to return to a gold standard.

NextGen Climate, a “super PAC” run by Tom Steyer, a billionaire hedge fund manager turned environmentalist, released a 30-second ad showing Mr. Cruz dismissing climate change as “not science” and Mr. Trump calling global warming “a hoax.” But in the ad’s second half, Mr. Steyer, a Democrat, faces the camera in blue shirt sleeves, with rolling green hills behind him — classic “I’m a candidate” staging. He urges people concerned about climate change to vote, without saying for whom. But the healthy face time could help make him a more familiar figure in California, where he is said to be considering a run for governor.

Mrs. Clinton and her allies were ready when Mr. Trump became the presumptive nominee. Both her campaign and Priorities USA released digital ads mocking his promise to be a “unifier.” One showed other Republicans calling Mr. Trump a “con artist,” “phony,” “bully” and more, with Jeb Bush saying Mr. Trump needed therapy. Another repurposed Mr. Trump’s own “unifier” audio over video showing violence and protests at his rallies.

$2.8 million: Total spent in Indiana by Mr. Cruz’s campaign and a super PAC supporting him.

$2.6 million: Amount spent in Indiana by super PACs opposing Mr. Trump.

$900,000: Amount spent in Indiana by the Trump campaign.


