


BEIJING — During the early morning tumult of getting the children ready for school, my gaze falls for a split second on a photograph on the refrigerator of three middle-aged Chinese women who have all helped raise my children over the last 13 years.

Yao Ayi, Shi Ayi and Wang Ayi are paid helpers, sure, but so much more — the allomothers, or “other mothers,” who make it possible for me to continue in a profession that is tough on parents, especially mothers who may feel the competing demands of work and family most acutely. Journalism is riven with deadlines and demands 24-hour attention. A bit like children.

Women like these ayis (meaning “auntie,” it’s used for relatives and helpers alike) are everywhere in the world, and everywhere they can be wonderful. Child care is a global issue. Yet in China their ability to educate, as well as care, is striking. Even those from poor rural provinces are the beneficiaries of China’s nine years of compulsory schooling. The Beijing natives among them are as sophisticated as any New Yorker.

They know so much, drawing on folk wisdom embedded in their culture. Even Shi Ayi, the most hapless of the three, was invariably right about the weather. “Bring an umbrella,” she’d say. “It’s going to rain.”

Many are self-taught health experts. “A standard cold,” Yao Ayi would say when one of my children was feverish, as I, for several gut-wrenching minutes, wondered if they had SARS, bird flu, even meningitis. Motherly anxiety is a deep well, and it was good to have her experienced voice.

And her encouraging words: “After the fever comes the intelligence!” There is a Chinese saying that after a fever a child takes a developmental step forward. (“发烧一次、聪明一次,’’ or “Fashao yici, congming yici.”) Western science teaches us that illness strengthens a growing child’s immune system, so perhaps it’s true.

Leaving for a reporting trip some years ago, my 2-year-old son threw up on me as I said goodbye. Moments like this haunt working mothers. Was it a protest at my departure?

Yao Ayi helped me clean up the curdled milk. I caught my flight, feeling guilty but knowing that between my husband and her, he was in safe hands.

In the photograph, Yao Ayi and Shi Ayi, joined by Wang Ayi, a neighbor’s helper who was part of the intimate network, sit behind my son and daughter and a friend, in my daughter’s bedroom, grinning broadly.

Mothers themselves, they had one child each in the 1980s, the years of the “one-child” policy.

I know some of their joys and troubles: Yao Ayi’s mother died recently, nursed by her daughter through a long illness. Shi Ayi’s nephew was arrested on suspicion of murder but later released. Wang Ayi’s daughter is chronically ill.

Dong Ayi is missing from the photograph. She quit suddenly one day, suffering from depression.

I asked why, and she said: When her son was small, her in-laws declined to care for him because her husband was their second son and, in keeping with patriarchal and hierarchical tradition, they would only care for their elder son’s child.

She worked at a mattress factory in Beijing, with no access to state child care. Her husband worked a day shift at the same factory, so she took a night shift, returning home at 6 a.m. to care for their son until her husband came home.

“When did you sleep?” I asked, staggered.

“When the baby slept,” she shrugged. As a mother, I knew what that meant — in patches. No wonder she was depressed, even years later.

In a series of talks recently in Beijing to Chinese and international groups, feminist or general, I’ve discussed family, marriage, work-life balance, journalism. And each time, young Chinese and foreign women approach afterward to ask: How do you combine journalism and motherhood?

I say: It’s really hard. You have to be tough. Tougher than anyone knows — unless she is also a working mother.

They often look disappointed. It’s not what they want to hear, and I understand. I wish it weren’t so. But for now, at least, it is, and we all need allomothers. It really does take a village to raise a child. And China is a great village.


