


Pop Warner, the country’s largest youth football organization, will ban kickoffs in games starting this fall, the latest attempt to reduce the risk of head blows that can lead to concussions.

Stung by declining enrollment, high-profile lawsuits and unflattering conduct by some of its teams, Pop Warner will be the first major youth league to take a step that has even been considered by the N.F.L.

The elimination of kickoffs will apply to the three youngest Pop Warner divisions, which include players between 5 and 10 years old. The ball will be placed at the 35-yard-line at the beginning of each half and after each score.

Pop Warner will review the results and could apply the rule change to older age groups next year.

“We are constantly working to make the game safer and better for our young athletes, and we think this move is an important step in that direction,” said Jon Butler, Pop Warner’s executive director. “Eliminating kickoffs at this level adds another layer of safety without changing the nature of this great game.”

On Thursday, Pop Warner also said that it would further reduce the amount of contact time in practice in all age groups, to 25 percent from 33 percent.

Kickoffs are considered among the most dangerous plays in tackle football because defenders run full speed down the field and charge into ball carriers and blockers, some of whom do not have time to brace before they are hit.

The N.F.L. and other leagues have tried to reduce the number of kick returns by, for instance, moving kickoffs up to produce more touchbacks. In 2011, when kickoffs were moved up 5 yards, to the 35-yard line, the percentage of returns fell to 53.5 percent, from 80.1 percent the year before. The rate has since fallen to 41.1 percent.

This off-season, the league tinkered further. Teams that opt for a touchback will take over at their own 25-yard line, not their 20, another inducement not to return the ball. The rule change will be reviewed after this season to determine whether it should be made permanent.

Eliminating kick returns and reducing contact in practices are the latest steps by Pop Warner to decrease hitting in its games.

In 2010, the organization began requiring that any player removed from a practice or game because of a suspected head injury be cleared by a doctor before returning. Two years later, Pop Warner banned full-speed, head-on blocking or tackling drills in which players line up more than 3 yards apart.

As the most established youth league in the country, Pop Warner has become a bellwether for football leagues, some of which have made similar rule changes. But some critics say that the rule changes sidestep the larger issue, which is that young boys should not play tackle football at all.

“This is their way of saying that boys younger than ninth grade should not play contact football, and they’re correct about that,” said Terry O’Neil, who runs Practice Like the Pros, which advocates safer training techniques. “But banning kickoffs is bastardizing the game. Leave the game as it is. Grade school boys should play flag football. Begin contact in high school.”

Pop Warner’s announcement came a day before lawmakers on Capitol Hill were to hold a hearing on concussions in youth sports. In March, the House Commerce and Energy Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations held a meeting in which an N.F.L. executive acknowledged a link between head hits and chronic brain disease.


