


A small sampling of our favorite stories from the week.

“I woke up one morning last spring and decided it was time to move out of London after nearly 20 years,” says Chloe Lonsdale, owner of the British brand M.i.h Jeans. So she moved into what was once a boathouse and harbormaster’s residence in coastal England — and didn’t change much. “I’ve never once in my life put on a brand-spanking-new outfit. I always wear something I treasure and build around that. I work the same way when appointing a room.”

For many of us, it’s synonymous with war and strife. But for the artists, chefs, designers, architects and scholars who live there, Beirut will always be a place where ideas and beauty flourished ... and flourish still.

Jeremy McAlpine is constantly looking for underwear — and the older it is, the better. “Late 19th- and early 20th-century undergarments — bloomers, petticoats, nightdresses and slips — make up the core of our women’s collection,” he says. He visits flea markets around Europe and works with vintage dealers to collect these garments. But, before going to out to luxury clothing retailers around the world, each is dyed black.

The conservator Gloria Velandia’s now-ubiquitous presence at fairs came out of a casual conversation in Paris with the former Art Basel director Sam Keller. “Who does something for the exhibitors if something happens?” she asked Keller, referring to works being damaged, however slightly, during the bustle of the fair. “He said they had no one, and invited me to give it a try.” Sixteen years later, Velandia is the go-to for Art Basel, Frieze and the Armory.

“We had been in discussions and reviewing sketches and I just so happened to take my daughters to see the show ‘Hamilton.’ I’ve seen it a few times now, so I can look at singular pieces of the show rather than focusing on the bigger story. I was looking at the costumes and, in particular, the men’s suiting of the period. All of a sudden, I was like: ‘Oh, that’s it.’” Sarah Jessica Parker explains the decision behind the unusual choice — and, with the help of her stylist Erin Walsh, shows how it all came together behind the scenes.


