


Rebecca Miller’s new movie, “Maggie’s Plan,” is a screwball comedy, set in New York, about a young woman (Greta Gerwig) whose ditziness takes the form of hyper-rationality. She thinks she can plan everything, until she runs into a married couple (Ethan Hawke and Julianne Moore) who are professors of something called ficto-critical anthropology — a real academic discipline that, in the movie anyway, is every bit as nutty as it sounds. Ms. Moore, playing a Dane, speaks in an accent even furrier than the one she used in “The Big Lebowski.”

Some people who have seen the movie have likened it to the work of Noah Baumbach, a comparison probably inevitable, since Ms. Gerwig is Mr. Baumbach’s girlfriend and appeared so memorably in his “Frances Ha” (2012). But a more obvious debt is to the movies of Woody Allen and even to classic comedies like “The Philadelphia Story” and “Bringing Up Baby.” In other words, “Maggie’s Plan,” which opens May 20, is almost the last thing you would expect from a director who is Arthur Miller’s daughter and also a literary novelist, and whose previous films, especially “Angela” (1995) and “The Ballad of Jack and Rose” (2005), though highly regarded, had about them a whiff, and sometimes more than a whiff, of art-house loftiness. They were the kinds of movies that ficto-critical anthropologists might lecture about.

But people who know Ms. Miller, 53, insist that, besides being brainy, she has always been very, very funny, and in person she is direct and disarming. In a recent interview at her West Village office, she was wearing argyle socks with a bell-bottom denim pantsuit that might, or might not, have been a parody of old-fashioned Western wear. Despite its genre, she said, the new movie is actually very personal.

“It’s not personal in terms of plot,” she explained, “but the tone is personal: the gait of the film, the way it walks through the world. Its confusion, its pace, the spirit of frothiness — that all feels personal.” She added: “I injected a lot of myself into Maggie. A kind of goofiness that goes with a certain kind of intelligence — I guess you could call it stupidity — is definitely one of my traits.”

The movie was partly inspired by her move, five years ago, back to New York from Ireland, where she had been living with her husband, the actor Daniel Day-Lewis, and their children. “I fell in love with the city all over again — just being here,” she said, “and I wanted to make something that reflected that excitement.”

The movie’s premise — a young woman who wants to arrange her own pregnancy with minimal male involvement — came from an as yet unpublished book by her friend Karen Rinaldi, a novelist and book editor, that touched on some issues she had already been thinking about. “Life is very complicated now,” she said. “The rule book has been thrown out the window. Women can have babies in all sorts of ways — they don’t necessarily have to have a male partner. And when life is made of choices one has to ask the question, ‘What are we to each other, what does marriage mean, what does coupling mean?’”

It was the story that determined the genre, she went on, and not the other way around. “It quickly became clear what kind of movie it wanted to become. I started with that fast pace, like the screwball comedies, where the dialogue waits for no man.” She added that she then found a shooting style that went with it. “What I wanted to create was a world that’s like our world but very slightly lifted off the ground. A little bit heightened, so we can enjoy the magic.”

Despite her literary background, Ms. Miller came to filmmaking not through writing but in a roundabout way, starting with painting and even a brief stint as an actor. She studied art at Yale and tried to make a living as a painter before concluding that she “really needed to meet people and have some kind of life on the outside as well as the inside.” Her earliest films, though shot with a Bolex, were what we would now call video installations. They were continuous loops and depicted things like a double-headed construction crane dunking two naked women into tubs of milk.

The notion that you could make movies with sound and that people could watch in a theater came to her later, and her earliest efforts were financed in part with money she made during a brief acting career. It started as a lark, she explained, when she tried out for the Mike Nichols movie “Regarding Henry” (1991) and wound up getting a part. “I ended up having this strange trajectory of a five-year acting career where I worked with all these wonderful directors and really learned my trade from them,” she said. “Mike Nichols and Carroll Ballard and Paul Mazursky and Peter Brook and Al Pakula: I worked with giants on some of their worst films.” She laughed. “But I learned a huge amount.”

Even with her connections, though, breaking into movies — real movies, with beginnings, middles and ends — was a struggle. “I got no support,” she said of her experience with agents and studio executives. “A young woman comes along and says I’d like to be a director, and they hear a sort of squeaking: eeeh, eeeh, eeeh.” But she added: “The kinds of movies I was making, quite frankly, whether I was male or female, it would have been hard. I wasn’t trying to cater to an audience. I was making films with the spirit of a poet. I was making what I wanted to make in a spirit of just naïveté and bloody-mindedness.”

Rachel Horovitz, who produced “Maggie’s Plan,” said recently that she and Ms. Miller developed the script together and that as far as she knew this was the first time Ms. Miller had worked this way. “I remember when we first sat down in 2012,” she recalled, “and I said I wanted to make a Rebecca Miller film for a wider audience. I knew she had it in her — her eye, her comedic style of writing.”

The easiest part of making “Maggie’s Plan” was the casting. Ms. Moore is an old friend, and had worked with Ms. Miller on her last movie, “The Private Lives of Pippa Lee” (2009). Maya Rudolph, who has a smaller part, is also a pal of Ms. Miller’s. Ida Rohatyn, a 3-year-old scene stealer, is the daughter of the film’s composer, Michael Rohatyn. Bill Hader, who didn’t know Ms. Miller, jumped in just for the chance to work with her, as did Ms. Gerwig and Mr. Hawke.

“Rebecca is at once incredibly flexible and very decisive — a rare combination,” Ms. Moore said. “She’ll let you play around and try things, but she’s also very confident and sure of what she wants.”

Ms. Miller said that in her final draft she will often alter a screenplay to suit the actors. “To a degree, I like actors to be advocates for their characters. I actually altered the ending slightly because of something Ethan said. It’s not so much that they have writing solutions, but they often have questions that lead to writing solutions.”

Ms. Gerwig said: “Sometimes working on a project you experience a kind of mind-meld, saying the same thing at the exact same time. I had that with Rebecca. She also has a real point of view, which is something I always look for — something that only that person can express. Rebecca has that in spades.”

Ms. Miller, who got into novel writing in part because of her frustration at not being able to make the films she wanted, finished one, “Jacob’s Folly” (published in 2013), just before beginning to think about “Maggie’s Plan,” and said the experience had left her spent. By contrast, the movie felt liberating — a sort of screwball move on her own part.

“Not that it’s easy to write a screenplay,” she said. “But a screenplay is a blueprint, signs for an actor you’re going to work with. In a novel every sentence is only that, a sentence. You have to be very complete of mind. If I was only a novelist and went from one novel to another, I think I’d be crazy. I’m not kidding. Films have their own insanity, but it’s a different kind of insanity, and the fact that you share it with other people makes it bearable.”


