


KARACHI, Pakistan — Seven police officers keeping watch over a polio vaccination campaign were gunned down in two separate attacks in a suburb of Pakistan’s southern port city of Karachi on Wednesday, government officials said.

The attacks occurred in a poor neighborhood of Orangi Town, where health workers have been administering vaccinations.

There was no immediate claim of responsibility and police officials said they were investigating whether the attacks were connected to the immunization campaign.

Taliban militants have repeatedly targeted health workers in the past, accusing them of being spies, and the violence has seriously hindered immunization campaigns in Pakistan, which is one of three countries in the world where polio remains endemic. But Karachi itself has a long history of political and sectarian violence, and criminal gangs have also been known to kill police officers.

Feroze Shah, a senior Karachi police official, said eight gunmen riding on four motorcycles had carried out the killings.

“In the first attack, militants killed three policemen escorting a polio team in streets of the locality,” Mr. Shah said. “In the second attack, the same men killed four policemen in a police van, a few streets away.”

The officers were rushed to the nearby Abbasi Shaheed Hospital but all seven were dead on arrival, the hospital said.

No health workers were harmed in the attacks.

The four-day polio vaccination drive started on Monday, with the goal of immunizing 2.2 million children in and around Karachi. According to city government officials, the campaign involves 6,200 health workers and teams of police officers to protect them.

Commissioner Syed Asif Haider Shah, a city official, vowed that the polio eradication campaign would continue on Thursday, its last day.

The police chief of Sindh Province, A.D. Khawaja, announced a reward of 5 million rupees, or about $47,000, for information leading to the arrest of the gunmen. He said that the families of the police officers would receive $19,000 each in compensation.

Although the Taliban have long accused health officials in Pakistan’s northwestern and southern provinces of spying, the hostility toward polio vaccinations escalated after the United States killed Osama bin Laden in a raid on his compound in May 2011. It later emerged that the C.I.A. had used a Pakistani doctor, Shakil Afridi, operating under the cover of a vaccination campaign to help find Bin Laden in Abbottabad.

In January, a suicide bomber killed 15 people, including police officers, outside a polio vaccination center in Quetta, the capital of Baluchistan Province in the southwest.

But officials cautioned that it was too early to say who might be behind Wednesday’s attacks near Karachi.

A campaign to stamp out political violence has been in operation there for some time, and various political and criminal factions, as well as the Taliban, have lashed out at the police and security forces in retaliation.

“We have been investigating whether today’s attack is part of the trend,” said Raja Umar Khitab, a senior police official overseeing counterterrorism operations. At least 95 officers have been killed in the last 16 months in the city, police statistics show.

“Taliban groups in the city have been weakened because of the ongoing operation,” Mr. Khitab said. “However, they still have ability to carry out hit-and-run attacks.”

“We did not suspend the vaccination drive,” said Faiza Bibi, a polio worker in Gulshen-e-Buner, a Karachi neighborhood, because the campaign’s officials “said the police killing today has nothing to do with the polio drive.”

In a statement, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who recently returned to the country after a trip to London, condemned the attack and praised the police officers. “They laid down their lives to secure the country’s future,” he said.


