


The longtime girlfriend of the Boston gangster James “Whitey” Bulger was sentenced on Thursday to an additional 21 months in prison for refusing to testify before a grand jury investigating whether other people had helped him while he was a fugitive. The woman, Catherine Greig, 65, was already serving an eight-year sentence for helping Mr. Bulger while he was a fugitive. She spent 16 years on the run with him before they were captured in Santa Monica, Calif., in 2011. Prosecutors said Ms. Greig refused to answer questions before the grand jury even after she was given immunity and was ordered to testify. Mr. Bulger, 86, is serving a life sentence after being convicted in 2013 for playing a role in 11 murders. (AP)

One day after a man publicly revealed that he was victimized by Dennis Hastert, a judge ruled Thursday that another victim did not have to reveal his name in a lawsuit that contends the former House Speaker has not paid all the money promised in exchange for his silence. But Kendall County Judge Robert Pilmer did not rule out requiring the man, known in federal court documents as Individual A, to be identified in the future. Judge Pilmer also wants the lawsuit refiled, under seal, with the man’s name on it. Mr. Hastert received a 15-month prison term Wednesday in the hush-money case. (AP)

The State House voted 83 to 0 on Thursday to prohibit a commonly used second-trimester abortion procedure called dilation and evacuation. The procedure would be allowed only if necessary to prevent “serious health risk” to the mother. Similar laws have been passed in four other states, with anti-abortion activists describing the procedures as “dismemberment abortions.” State courts have blocked laws in Kansas and Oklahoma. Supporters of the ban describe the abortion method as torturous and barbaric. Opponents say that description is not medically accurate. They say the bill would criminalize the safest method of second-trimester abortion. The Senate considers it next. (AP)


