


INTERNATIONAL

The byline and the first six paragraphs of an article about a study on whether women should be deacons in the Roman Catholic Church were omitted from some editions on Friday. The full article, by Elisabetta Povoledo and Laurie Goodstein, can be found at nytimes.com/world.

•

An article in some editions on April 15 about what the Pentagon called the failed launch of a ballistic missile by North Korea misstated the name of a South Korean news agency that reported the launch. It is Yonhap, not Yonghap.

NEW YORK

An article on Friday about fund-raising efforts in 2014 for New York Senate races overstated what Basil A. Smikle Jr., a leader of the New York State Democratic Party, knew about allegations that a group led by Mayor Bill de Blasio used earmarked funds through local county committees. While he cited published reports of such allegations, Mr. Smikle did not know of such an effort. The article also misstated the circumstances of Joseph Percoco’s departure from the Cuomo administration to run the governor’s re-election campaign. He resigned from the administration; he did not take a leave of absence. The error also appeared in an article on Wednesday.

BUSINESS DAY

The Common Sense column on Friday, about insurance company losses on their hedge fund investments, misspelled the given name of a hedge fund manager who commented on the difficulty in making profits. He is Steven A. Cohen, not Stephen. The article also omitted part of the name of a drug company that was a favorite of hedge funds. It is Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, not Valeant International. And the article rendered incorrectly part of the name of a pension fund. It is the Illinois State Board of Investment, not the Illinois State Board of Investments.

•

An article on the Automobiles page on Friday about the 2016 Chevrolet Camaro omitted the writer’s byline. The article was by Tom Voelk.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Friday about Mark Lane, who concluded in the mid-1960s that Lee Harvey Oswald could not have acted alone in killing President John F. Kennedy, referred incorrectly to the origin of the term “grassy knoll” to describe a green expanse of Dealey Plaza in Dallas that Mr. Lane argued was the source of several shots fired at the president. While it is unclear who used the term first, it was not coined by Mr. Lane. (He himself said it was coined by Jean Hill, a witness to the Kennedy assassination; other sources credit the United Press International reporter Merriman Smith.) The obituary also referred incorrectly to Mr. Lane’s college and postgraduate education. He received an undergraduate degree from Long Island University and a law degree from Brooklyn Law School; he did not “earn an undergraduate degree and a law degree at Brooklyn College.”

OPINION

An editorial on Wednesday about President Obama’s planned visit to Hiroshima failed to say Caroline Kennedy, the ambassador to Japan, was among the American officials who have visited Hiroshima in recent years. It also incorrectly described presidential visits to Cuba. The first sitting American president to visit was Calvin Coolidge, not Mr. Obama.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


