


MADRID — A Spanish judge on Friday overruled a decision by the authorities in Madrid to ban Catalan flags from the Copa del Rey soccer final, helping to defuse a dispute that had spilled the country’s territorial and political tensions into its favorite sport.

The judge’s ruling was a setback for the Madrid authorities, who had moved to ban the Estelada, a Catalan flag that has become a symbol of Catalonia’s independence movement.

The final of the Copa del Rey, or King’s Cup, one of Spain’s biggest soccer competitions, is being contested on Sunday by teams from Seville and Barcelona, the Catalan capital.

The ban had outraged Catalonia’s leading politicians, who vowed not to attend the match at Vicente Calderón Stadium in Madrid to protest what they described as a blatant attack on freedom of expression. After the judge’s decision on Friday, however, Carles Puigdemont, head of the Catalan regional government, said he would go to Madrid to watch the match.

The judge rejected the public prosecutor’s argument that waving a politically charged Catalan flag could lead to serious public disturbances, or even violence.

The Estelada flag has taken on particular importance in recent years as Catalan separatist parties, which now hold a majority of seats in the regional Parliament, forge ahead with plans to secede from the rest of Spain. Their secessionist drive comes as the country prepares for a rerun of national elections on June 26, after six months of political deadlock.

At Barcelona’s home games, where the team slogan is “more than a club,” fans not only wave the Estelada but many also shout “independence” in unison after 17 minutes and 14 seconds of play to mark the year 1714, when the city of Barcelona was captured during the War of Spanish Succession.

The waving of the Estelada has also brought controversy outside of Spain. Last year, UEFA, the governing body of European soccer, imposed a fine on Barcelona after its fans waved Catalan flags during a European club competition. UEFA said promoting the flag breached European soccer rules that forbid “the use of gestures, words, objects or any other means to transmit any message that is not fit for a sports event, particularly messages that are of a political, ideological, religious, offensive or provocative nature.”

The Spanish government’s representative in Madrid, Concepción Dancausa, came to a similar conclusion. Ms. Dancausa announced the flag ban on Thursday, arguing that “soccer in particular should not be converted into a setting of political confrontation.”

In response, the Barcelona club immediately began a court appeal, and some Catalan separatist politicians suggested the team should avoid traveling to Madrid, instead forfeiting the final.

Flags or no flags, the match is expected to be a tense affair, with Catalan fans likely to jeer Spain’s national anthem, as they did last year in the presence of King Felipe VI.

The authorities have heightened security measures for the final, with about 2,500 police officers expected to patrol the stadium. Almost 20,000 Barcelona supporters are expected to travel to Madrid.

Most of Spain’s political establishment had backed the flag ban, with the notable exception of Xavier García Albiol, the regional leader of the conservative Popular Party in Catalonia. “I would allow each to enter with the flag that he sees adequate,” he told a news briefing earlier this week.


