


The Tragically Hip, the Canadian rock band, announced Tuesday that its lead singer, Gord Downie, had been given a diagnosis of terminal brain cancer. But doctors have cleared Mr. Downie to go on tour for a series of summer concerts.

“This feels like the right thing to do now, for Gord, and for all of us,” the Hip said in the statement on its website.

Mr. Downie, 52, is a household name in Canada, and the news of his illness quickly lit up social media, to the puzzlement of some beyond the country’s border.

As the frontman and lyricist for the group fondly known as “Canada’s band,” he writes songs that are rooted in his experience of and love for his country.

That has earned the band thousands of fans, including Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, who pinned a statement honoring Mr. Downie to the top of his Twitter page on Tuesday.

A magnetic live performer, Mr. Downie described his onstage persona to the novelist Joseph Boyden in an interview in Maclean’s in 2009.

“I throw myself on the altar of song,” he said, “and I see my own personal musical life in fast flashes of faces and names and colors and sounds and I get lost in the euphoria of standing up there like Howling Wolf or Otis Redding or David Bowie with a mic in my hand and an audience that’s ready.”

Randy Lennox, the president for entertainment production and broadcasting at Bell Media (a Canadian equivalent to Viacom), is the former president of the Tragically Hip’s label, Universal Music Canada, and a friend of Mr. Downie’s. He described Mr. Downie as a hybrid of Bono and Leonard Cohen, and compared his success to that of other rock luminaries.

“He is Canada’s poet for this generation,” Mr. Lennox said. “And the Tragically Hip have sold more albums in this country than U2, than Rush, than every other very, very renowned musical band.”

The Canadian singer Leslie Feist is a close friend of Mr. Downie’s. “My feelings are big for Gord, as they have been since I first met him 20 years ago,” she said via email. “He’s always been a teacher to me for how to fight for the true view in a song and inhabit them with conviction. I admire him deeply and wish him strength and love in this struggle.”

The Tragically Hip released their first studio album in 1989 and have won over a dozen Juno Awards, the Canadian equivalent of the Grammys. Eleven of their 12 studio albums have gone platinum in Canada, some of them many times over. A new album, “Man Machine Poem,” is coming out June 17.

The band never managed to catch on in the same way with American listeners as they did up north. Six months after their 1994 album, “Day for Night,” hit No. 1 on the Canadian charts, the band was invited to play on “Saturday Night Live,” where they were proudly introduced by a fellow Ontario native, Dan Aykroyd.

That appearance probably marked the performers’ deepest penetration into the American cultural consciousness, and their chart performance in the United States was negligible compared to their extraordinary success in Canada.

Mr. Lennox said that the band’s unique appeal to Canadians is directly attributable to Mr. Downie’s lyrics.

“He writes about such indigenous subjects,” he said. “Every country has their own vocabulary, their own vernacular. And Gord just wrote for all of us like-minded music lovers about Canada from a Canadian perspective.”


