


STRATFORD-UPON-AVON, England — You’re never far from Shakespeare on the streets of Stratford-upon-Avon.

From the Hathaway Tea Rooms to the Bard’s Mistress health and beauty store (not forgetting Tudor World, the Falstaff Experience and the Shakespeare in Love wedding boutique) he erupts into everyday life. That was never more true than last weekend, when this town observed the 400th anniversary of the death of its most famous son, who shuffled off his mortal coil on April 23, 1616.

Noted thespians swept in to give public readings. There were flags, processions, flowers. The BBC decamped from London for a marathon of onsite broadcasts. And although the spoken word was naturally the focus, music featured too — with a commemorative concert in the church where Shakespeare was baptized and buried, based around two sprawling celebratory odes, one old, one new.

Involving Ex Cathedra — one of Britain’s very best choirs, based in nearby Birmingham — with the actor Sam West; The City Musick, a period band; and massed children’s voices, it was an event created in the spirit of the grand outpourings of collective praise for great men that historically were common practice.

The first half reconstructed one such tribute, organized at Stratford in the 18th century. Shakespeare’s reputation at that point had been equivocal: his romance didn’t suit the Age of Reason. Dr. Johnson recommended that “Macbeth” and other plays dependent on the supernatural be “banished to the nursery.”

But then the Seventh Cavalry arrived in the form of David Garrick: actor, Shakespeare champion and deviser of the first significant commemoration of the poet’s birthday, in 1769 — for which he wrote a long, elaborate ode to be recited by himself with added choruses and songs by Thomas Arne (composer of the tune to “Rule Brittania!”).

Only fragments of the score for Garrick’s ode survive. But with some scholarly attention, and new music for the choruses commissioned from the composer Sally Beamish, it reappeared last weekend with viability — of a sort.

Arne’s music turned out to be unremarkable, largely in lilting/skipping triple-time, with decorous but dreary 18th-century utility. And Garrick’s words were comparably the product of their period: “Tis he, tis he, that demi-god/Who Avon’s flowery margin trod.”

But Mr. West (looking not altogether happy in a powdered wig and period breeches) gave the event first aid. Ex Cathedra, with successive solo singers and baroque musicians, were superb. And the new chorus music from Ms. Beamish had a striking vibrancy, auguring well for what would follow.

The whole second half was given over to the premiere of Ms. Beamish’s “A Shakespeare Masque,” which was the sort of entertainment Garrick might have put his hand to had he lived today — and been a better poet.

Pageant-like, with choreography and costumes, adult choirs and singing children, its long text in praise of Shakespeare mirrored Garrick’s. But where Garrick’s ode was focused on himself, this was a true community piece, written after the example of the indestructible (although meticulously fashioned) massed-voice scores that Benjamin Britten wrote for church performance in the 1950s.

Referencing the tuneful clarity of Britten’s “St. Nicolas,” the boistrous vigor of “Noyes Fludde,” and the mock-Tudor fantasy of “Gloriana” (his opera about Elizabeth I), it also had the Brittenesque appeal of audience participation.

But a spiky charm and wistful eloquence confirmed that there was a contemporary voice at work here, perfectly attuned to texts by England’s poet laureate, Carol Ann Duffy, that played with scenes from Shakespeare’s life in a contemporary manner — without Garrick’s bluster, and a lot more fun.

The songs and choruses mused on the paradox of knowing everything and nothing about William Shakespeare (as Ms. Duffy writes, “You vanish into poetry/You come and go.”)

And there were haunting numbers in which Shakespeare and Anne Hathaway addressed the audience directly: Hathaway’s a sonnet of surreal enchantment pondering her husband’s infamous but probably misunderstood intentions when he left her in his will their “second-best” bed. Best beds were for guests in Tudor times. It would have been the second-best that witnessed matrimonial love, if love it was (the happiness of Shakespeare’s marriage is much debated).

That so many voices were accompanied by a modest consort of Elizabethan string, wind and percussion instruments should have generated balance problems; and with the performers moving constantly around the church, things could have been chaotic. But they came together with unwarranted coherence thanks to Ex Cathedra’s genial conductor, Jeffrey Skidmore, whose idea this project was from the beginning and who calmly steered it through to realization.

By definition, this was an occasional piece and one that may not have a busy future life, since major Shakespeare anniversaries don’t come around too often. But it lives on in a film made by the BBC, accessible for six months at bbc.co.uk/shakespearelives. But it was a privilege to have experienced its birth, beside the Bard’s grave, in these special circumstances.


