


AMSTERDAM — The board of trustees at the Rijksmuseum announced on Monday that Taco Dibbits, the museum’s director of collections, would replace Wim Pijbes as general director. Mr. Pijbes, who had seen the museum through a major expansion, announced his resignation in March after accepting a job as director of a new private museum.

Mr. Dibbits, who has been with the Rijksmuseum since 2002, will assume the post after Mr. Pijbes steps down on July 15.

“It’s one of the most beautiful museums in the world, and it’s a dream come true for me,” Mr. Dibbits said in a telephone interview. “I’ve already got a fantastic team of people, and we hope that we can make as many people as possible enjoy and be inspired, and be touched by, the great works of art that the museum houses.”

Mr. Dibbits, 47, joined the Rijksmuseum 14 years ago as the curator of 17th-century painting, before the museum closed for a decade-long expansion and renovation at a cost of 375 million euros, or about $415 million. “I came in because the museum was going to renovate,” he said, “and I was excited to have a central role in the renovation project.”

Mr. Dibbits was responsible for the re-installation of the museum’s collections and was instrumental in developing the digital strategy of the museum which has made free high-resolution images of its works available to the public. In 2008, he was promoted to director of collections.

Mr. Dibbits was educated at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and at the University of Cambridge, and had previously served as the director of the old masters department at Christie’s in London.

The Rijksmuseum, which houses the Dutch national collection of about a million works of art, moved to its current location in 1885. Among its best-known works are Rembrandt’s “Night Watch” and Vermeer’s “Milkmaid.”

Mr. Pijbes is to be the director of the Museum Voorlinden, a private contemporary art museum and sculpture garden financed by a chemical industry executive, Joop van Caldenborgh, that is to open in September on a nature reserve near The Hague.

“He’s experienced at the Rijksmuseum, so he knows the collection, he knows the institution and he knows the building,” Mr. Pijbes said on Monday, referring to Mr. Dibbits. “He has a very international network, which I think is very relevant today, because the Rijksmuseum is a global player and very active as a lender and as a co-producer in all kinds of projects.”


