


Nearly two days after the most recent episode of “Game of Thrones,” fans are still struggling with the loss of a gentle giant previously known for being everyone’s favorite “Thrones” punch line.

Hodor.

In the final moments of Sunday’s episode, the lumbering, loyal servant died saving Bran Stark, his paraplegic charge, from an army of zombies, which was sad enough on its own. But the sequence also revealed that, thanks to some convoluted time-skipping, the incident itself is actually what doomed the character to a life of simple-mindedness, sacrifice and a one-word vocabulary. Hodor is short for “Hold the door,” both the last phrase the character ever heard and the one that fried his circuits as a young lad named Wyllis. (It made sense if you saw it, sort of.)

[ Recap: Hold the Door ]

The twist, which recast a figure of fun into a tragic hero, sparked an emotional online outpouring that has continued unabated, at times crossing creatively into the real world. Even David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, the creators of the show, called it one of the most shocking revelations they ever received from George R.R. Martin, who writes the books the series is based on and conceived the details of Hodor’s origin.

“There’s a very nice thing going around the Internet that says, ‘Not all heroes hold weapons, some hold doors,’ ” Kristian Nairn, the 6-foot-11 Irish actor who played him, said on Tuesday. “He is a hero now, but I think he always was, in his own way.”

“He’s proven himself now — he’s not just a joke,” Mr. Nairn added. “But I want people to remember him both ways, because I think it’s fun as well.”

The 40-year-old actor, who famously gave away the fact that he would not be appearing in Season 5, has successfully held his tongue since shooting the final scene in November. He has spent the intervening months on his thriving music career and in talks for a possible Netflix series and various film roles.

In a phone interview on Tuesday he discussed why Hodor would be happy with his send-off and why, despite the show’s fluid ideas about death, he doesn’t think Hodor will be returning. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.

Have you gotten used to the idea yet?

What? Of being dead and irrelevant? No. I’m used to being irrelevant but being dead is novel, I’ll give it that.

So he’s definitely dead?

Yeah. I don’t think he’s going to survive that. As far as I know, put it that way.

Any chance he’ll come back as a zombie?

There’s always a chance. It’s actually very freeing — I have a really big mouth and it’s difficult for me to not tell things. The fact that I can watch the rest of the show and not have to hold back because I might let something slip is freeing. But I don’t think he’s coming back.

What did you think when you read the script for Sunday’s episode?

It was a double-edged sword for me. I really wanted him to have a good send-off. I don’t think there’s been many better send-offs on the show so far. But I definitely was a bit weepy when I read it. More so because these guys are my friends, who I work with. It’s going to be strange not seeing them on a professional level.

Did the fact that Bran was responsible for not only his death, but also his simple-mindedness change your idea about the nature of their relationship?

No it doesn’t. Although Bran was responsible for the whole chain of events that killed Hodor, Hodor didn’t have to hold that door. He wasn’t being warged into at that stage. It was Meera who asked him to hold the door, it wasn’t Bran. He wants to protect the little guy. That’s all he’s ever done. He wants to help — this is the ultimate helping hand here. I just think he would be happy they could continue without him.

How did it feel to finally know what you had been saying for all these years?

That was great, man. Because I literally had no idea. All my theories were wrong. So it was nice to know it actually meant something. After all the different meanings I’ve given it over the years, it’s strange to know it actually means “hold the door.”

What was your favorite theory about it?

This is more about Hodor’s origin story, but I liked the theory that he was one of the lost Clegane brothers. You’ve got Hodor, Sandor and Gregor, perhaps? You know Gregor was very cruel to Sandor when he was a child; he burned his face and stuff. Who knows what he did to Hodor? He could’ve dropped him out of his cot or pram, and maybe that’s what happened to him. That’s what I played around with in my head, but obviously it was completely wrong.

What’s your understanding of what actually fried his brain?

Bran has some kind of telekinetic force in his brain that can overtake the electronics of animals and obviously Hodor as well. I think it’s almost like a telephone call with crossed wires. Bran’s in this time-shift mode, he’s hearing Meera say “You have to warg into Hodor.” I just think Hodor got caught up in this vortex and it fried his circuitry. It’s almost like pressing a reset button on him.

So you don’t think he had any sense throughout his life of what his destiny was?

I don’t think so. I don’t think he had any sense of what was coming. I don’t think he recognized Bran when he saw him the second time around. He maybe felt some sort of connection to him, which was why the bond was there. But I don’t think he said to himself “Oh that’s that little [expletive] from the courtyard, stay away from him. Run!”

How did that final scene change your understanding of Hodor?

It didn’t change it at all. Obviously it gave me the answers to the reality of the character, but it was very true to him and to, I hope, the way I played him. There was a lot of humanity there and I think he always had a lot of humanity. I think that’s exactly what Hodor would have wanted. Well, I don’t think he wanted to die. But I think he happily did.

Why do you think people are taking Hodor’s death so hard?

There’s no one else like Hodor on “Game of Thrones.” There’s no other character with that warmth, humanity and a little bit of comic relief. People are taking it badly. He’s just such a nice guy and it’s so rare on this show, and he didn’t deserve it. But that’s just “Game of Thrones” for you. I think it was set up earlier in the episode, Jaqen H’ghar asks Arya something like, “Does death only come for the wicked and leave good people behind?” Because Hodor is such a good person and he’s about to get slaughtered.

What was the final day like?

It was emotional, man. It was the day either before or after my birthday. It was a really heavy day — you’ve got these 100-mile-per-hour winds being blown into your face with false snow. I was really holding the door — there were like eight people pushing from the other side and I was really holding them back. It’s definitely Method acting [laughs]. It was a very intense day but one of the nice things was they let Isaac wrap me. He got to come over and say “Mr. Nairn, that’s a wrap.” It was very emotional. It’s always been a little group of us together and it felt like our little group was breaking up. And it’s sad!

How many different ways are there to say “Hodor”?

There’s infinite ways to say it, but it’s not all about the word, man. It’s about body language as well.

Do you have a favorite one?

My favorite one I think was back in Season 3 and Osha was complaining about, “Why do we always have to do the work? Why do we build the tent and light the fire while Bran talks to the Reeds?” And I just looked up at her and gave her this sort of “Why are you telling me this” Hodor. What do you want me to do about it? It was such an obscure “Hodor” but everyone got it. It was fantastic.

You have other shows and films coming up, as well as your music career. But have you made your peace with the fact that you’ll always be Hodor for many people?

Absolutely. Some people say that like it’s a bad thing. To play this iconic character from this historically wonderful series of books — who wouldn’t take that opportunity and be happy about it? I’m happy to be Hodor forever.

Great.

But ask me that in 10 years.


