


The post-matinee crowd began streaming into Sardi’s restaurant on Saturday, just as it had for decades. After passing through the Chianti-red facade, many patrons entered the Little Bar, an alcove-like room to the left of the entrance. Then they settled in for drinks and conversation in the company of a tall man wearing a maroon jacket, a white starched shirt and a black bow tie who had long been a steady presence there.

In the years after World War II, Sardi’s, on West 44th Street in Manhattan, was practically synonymous with Broadway. People like the playwright Tennessee Williams and the actors John Barrymore and Helen Hayes frequented the restaurant, and opening-night theater reviews in The New York Times and The New York Herald Tribune were distributed to diners when the ink was barely dry. Some of the restaurant’s glory may have faded since that heyday, but it remains a staple of the neighborhood, cherished especially by those who see tradition in its red walls, lined with drawings of famous patrons.

Part of that tradition includes José Estevez, who began working at Sardi’s in 1990 and presided over the Little Bar since 1993 — as familiar and reliable as the Rolex clock that ticks there above the rows of bottles and polished glasses. But a few weeks ago, Mr. Estevez, 72, told the restaurant’s main owner, Max Klimavicius, that he was planning to retire. The word spread quickly, and during Mr. Estevez’s last shift, on Saturday, more than two dozen regulars gathered to wish him a fond, raucous goodbye.

Mr. Estevez, who grew up in the Dominican Republic, began working at Sardi’s when it was facing grave challenges. Vincent Sardi Jr., who had bought the restaurant in 1947 from his father, sold the business in 1985 to investors who planned to expand it. Instead, within a few years, they declared bankruptcy. The restaurant was shuttered for about four months until Mr. Sardi came out of retirement in Vermont at the end of 1990 to resume running it, first as a temporary receiver and then, once again, as its owner.

Sardi’s regained stability, and Mr. Estevez said that he relished his years working there, partly because of the regular customers who became his friends.

“This isn’t working; it’s socializing,” he said on Saturday as he poured drinks and talked with those at the bar. “I have been lucky.”

Customers arrived that day while the sun was still shining, requested drinks and began reminiscing. Several described visits from Broadway stars. Others recalled the many evenings that Joyce Randolph, known for playing Trixie Norton on “The Honeymooners,” spent inside the Little Bar, sitting a few feet from a drawing of herself while sipping Dewar’s and milk and chatting.

There were memories of less common occurrences, too. Salvatore Salamone, a trade magazine editor from Pennsylvania, remembered the time that Raymond L. Flynn, the former mayor of Boston, posed for a picture behind the bar. Chris Edelmann, a physician from Rye Brook, in Westchester County, N.Y., recalled speaking with a stranger who offered a tip on a horse running in the Belmont Stakes. He took the tip, Dr. Edelmann said, and won.

Part of what made Mr. Estevez special, said Frank DeGirolamo, a 25-year regular, was his ability to foster a friendly atmosphere with easy conversation despite the anonymity and commercial bustle of Times Square and the surrounding blocks.

“He’s got that old-school mentality,” Mr. DeGirolamo said. “He brings people together.”

The television was off at the Little Bar on Saturday, and no music played. Instead the room was filled with the sound of voices talking about, among other things, the plays of David Mamet, the current Broadway production of “American Psycho” and the mixed fortunes of Mr. Estevez’s favorite baseball team, the New York Yankees.

As the afternoon progressed into evening, the conversations were punctuated with singing. At one point a few people at the bar harmonized on a doo-wop song. The Rev. John R. Sheehan, a Jesuit priest, sang a traditional song called “The Parting Glass.” All the while, Mr. Estevez exchanged greetings with guests as they arrived and departed.

The hands of the Rolex above the bar ticked down to 8 p.m., quitting time for Mr. Estevez, and patrons began offering thanks and congratulations. Ruben Brache, who runs a Manhattan company that raises money for Broadway productions, called for silence and then handed Mr. Estevez a silver trophy cup engraved with the words “for the world’s winningest bartender.”

“I want to toast the bartender extraordinaire, our lifelong friend, José Estevez,” Mr. Brache shouted as the other patrons cheered. “Our cups runneth over for you, brother.”


