


Michal Neuvirth made a playoff career-high 44 saves, and the visiting Philadelphia Flyers beat the Washington Capitals, 2-0, in Game 5 on Friday night to stay alive in their first-round Eastern Conference series.

Neuvirth was dominant, blunting every charge by Alex Ovechkin and the Capitals to cut the deficit in the best-of-seven series to three games to two and send the series back to Philadelphia for Game 6 on Sunday.

Ryan White scored the lone goal for the Flyers against Braden Holtby, with the puck deflecting off Washington defenseman Taylor Chorney and into the goal. Chris VandeVelde added an empty-netter late.

Holtby was barely tested in making 10 saves.

The pressure is now on the Presidents’ Trophy-winning Capitals, who won the first three games of the series against Steve Mason, who was replaced in Game 4 by Neuvirth. Washington lost back-to-back games in regulation for the first time this season.

Sidelined by a lower-body injury for three weeks, Neuvirth had played only two games since March 4 before making his Flyers playoff debut in Game 4 on Wednesday, stopping 31 of 32 shots against the team that drafted and developed him.

Neuvirth faced the Capitals in relief while with the Islanders in the 2015 playoffs, but this was his big opportunity. Some of his former teammates made sure it was a busy one.

The Capitals hemmed the Flyers in their zone almost all game and turned it into a shooting gallery. Neuvirth, a 28-year-old Czech, made a big glove save on Daniel Winnik’s short-handed attempt early in the second period to keep the Capitals off the board, and Philadelphia then gave him some support.

Three seconds after an unsuccessful power play, White was credited with a goal when the puck banked off Chorney’s skate and in. The Flyers fell to 1 for 21 on the power play in the series.

Neuvirth was single-handedly the reason the Flyers stayed alive as he sprawled to stop Karl Alzner, denied Ovechkin and robbed Marcus Johansson in the second period. In the third, he denied Dmitry Orlov on a rush and smothered the puck.

On a Capitals power play midway through the third, Neuvirth made another stand and always looked in control while facing an onslaught. VandeVelde scored an empty-netter with 30.8 seconds left to seal it.

The 33-shot disparity (44 to 11) tied the second-biggest margin by a losing playoff team since 1989-90, according to Stats L.L.C.

SHARKS 6, KINGS 3 Joonas Donskoi broke a tie with his second goal early in the third period, and San Jose blew a three-goal lead before rallying to wrap up its first-round playoff series with a victory over at Los Angeles in Game 5.

Chris Tierney and Matt Nieto scored early goals and Joe Pavelski got another late score for the Sharks, who stared down the demons of their past playoff failures against Los Angeles and advanced to the second round for just the second time since 2011.

San Jose led by 3-0 early in the second period before the Kings scored three goals in nine electric minutes. But after Donskoi broke the tie with the second playoff goal of his rookie season, Pavelski added his fifth goal of the series.

WILD 5, STARS 4 Mikko Koivu redirected Ryan Suter’s shot from the left point 4:55 into overtime and Minnesota won at Dallas to stay alive in their first-round series.

Koivu scored the last two goals for the Wild, who go home still down by three games to two in the best-of-seven series. Game 6 is Sunday.

Jason Spezza and Alex Goligoski scored 28 seconds apart almost midway through the third period, giving the Stars their first lead of the game.

But the Wild forced overtime when Koivu scored the tying goal with 3:09 left in regulation. Koivu, the Wild’s leading scorer in the regular season with 56 points, had only one goal without an assist in the series until then.

Dallas fell behind 2-0 in the first five and a half minutes and did not lead until Goligoski’s goal with 11:04 left in regulation that hit the back of defenseman Marco Scandella on the way into the net and made it 4-3.

That came right after Spezza’s third goal of the series. With a defender tugging along, Spezza sent a shot that slid in front of Devan Dubnyk and hit the far post before ricocheting past the line to tie it.

Dubnyk stopped 37 shots.

CANADIANS TUNE OUT The first-round playoff series being shown on Sportsnet’s cable channels in Canada and on the broadcast network CBC drew an average of about 500,000 Canadian viewers from April 13 to 17. That is down from about 1.3 million over the same period last year, when five of Canada’s seven teams were playing.

The drop is happening two years into Sportsnet’s $4.1 billion deal for the N.H.L.’s English-language broadcasting rights in Canada. Scott Moore, the executive who committed Toronto-based Sportsnet to a 12-year television rights agreement, is not surprised that Canadians are tuning out their national pastime because there are no “home” teams competing.

But the ratings in Canada are still outpacing those in the United States. NBC announced that the first eight days of the playoffs had drawn an average of 484,000 viewers. That was up by about 30,000 over the same period last year, but it pales in comparison to the figures in Canada, with its population of 35 million.

NORDSTROM GETS EXTENSION Joakim Nordstrom and the Carolina Hurricanes have agreed to terms on a two-year contract extension.

Nordstrom, a forward, had 10 goals and 14 assists in 71 games this season for the Hurricanes, who acquired him in September in a trade with Chicago.

He will earn $1.25 million this season and $1.3 million in 2017-18. He would have been a restricted free agent this summer.


