


CANNES, France — Woody Allen, lifestyle guru? The 69th annual Cannes Film Festival opens Wednesday night with the director’s latest film, “Café Society,” a bicoastal romp set in Hollywood and New York in the 1930s. At a news conference earlier Wednesday, Mr. Allen was asked his views on romance, fame, casting, and how he keeps fit on the set at age 80. He was not, however, asked anything about accusations of sexual abuse by his adoptive daughter, Dylan Farrow.

Those accusations were raised anew Wednesday by Ronan Farrow, Dylan’s brother and Mr. Allen’s son from his relationship with Mia Farrow. In a column posted by The Hollywood Reporter a little less than an hour before the news conference and headlined “My Father, Woody Allen, and the Danger of Questions Unasked,” Mr. Farrow blamed the news media for not asking tough questions and Mr. Allen’s public relations machine for fending off the media. He compared the situation to the one involving Bill Cosby before his public fall from grace. Mr. Allen has denied the accusations in the past, including in The New York Times. (This reporter didn’t see the article until after the news conference.)

Wednesday’s news conference, with journalists from around the world, covered lighter ground and captured the generally adoring reception the director has gotten in Europe.

He was asked whether it was physically harder for him to make films. “I’m so youthful, agile, nimble, spry, mentally alert, that it’s astonishing,” he said, adding, “I eat well, I exercise.” His father lived past 100, he said, and his mother to nearly 100. “What it is, is luck,” he said. (The director wears hearing aids and sometimes couldn’t hear the questions.)

Mr. Allen said he was a romantic, raised on Hollywood movies. After so many films with love affairs between an older man and a younger woman, Mr. Allen was asked if he would ever consider making a film with a romance between, say, a 50-something woman and a 20-something man.

That, he said, would be “a perfectly valid comic idea,” but it wasn’t really his field. “I just don’t have any material,” he said. “I don’t have anything really to draw on. But I wouldn’t hesitate if I had a good story.”

“Café Society,” which stars Jesse Eisenberg, Kristen Stewart, Steve Carell and Blake Lively, is Mr. Allen’s fourth film to open the Cannes festival, where it will be shown out of competition. Mr. Allen said he didn’t like the idea of being in competition. “You can’t determine is a Rembrandt better than an El Greco? Is a Matisse better than a Picasso?” he said. “It’s all very subjective.”

The festival runs through May 22.


