


ROME — The strange became normal at the third round of the Italian Open on Thursday, beginning with Novak Djokovic being blanked in his opening set against 37th-ranked Thomaz Bellucci before recovering for a 0-6, 6-3, 6-2 victory.

Djokovic called the opening set “a complete Bellucci storm.” When he finally got on the board by holding his serve in the opening game of the second set, he celebrated by raising his arms high into the air.

“Sometimes if you don’t start well and your opponent is seeing the ball like a watermelon, that’s what happens,” Djokovic said. “You’ve got to give him credit, that’s all I can say. But it was one set, fortunately for me, not two.”

Roger Federer played two sets on Thursday and lost them both, falling by 7-6 (2), 6-4 to 13th-seeded Dominic Thiem. Still nursing a back injury he sustained in Madrid, Federer had declared that winning his first title in Rome was out of the question after he eked out a victory in his first match on Wednesday.

“I’m too far off,” Federer said. “I’m so far off that it won’t happen.”

Despite his loss on Thursday, Federer said he was encouraged by playing in Rome. “This was an information tournament for me, never a result tournament,” he said. “I knew I wasn’t good enough for any result here, so that’s why I hope you don’t read into it so much — and I don’t.”

The information that Federer gathered, however, was insufficient to let him wholeheartedly commit to playing in the French Open, despite his obvious desire to do so. The tournament begins on May 22, and Federer has played in the main draw of a record 65 consecutive Grand Slam tournaments.

After missing much of the spring hardcourt season with injury and illness, Federer had hoped for success on clay this year by gaining more rest and having more time to focus on clay court preparations. “I actually thought I could really do a good result in Paris,” he said. “Now the last couple of weeks it’s been more difficult. I see my chances as not great to have the most unbelievable run. But if maybe in three, four days I can practice 100 percent for the next week, then I believe that something is possible again.

“But as of now, clearly the way I’m playing right now is never going to be enough for any good run in Paris, and then I also wouldn’t play this way. But I’m still confident I will be fine, somehow.”

Djokovic is continuing his preparations for his pursuit of the only Grand Slam tournament title he has never won. His efforts seemed to take a hit in the first set on Thursday, the first time he has lost a set without winning a game since Federer blanked him in the opening set of the Cincinnati final in 2012. In the next round, Djokovic will almost certainly need a better start against fifth-ranked Rafael Nadal, who survived the flashy Nick Kyrgios, 6-7 (3), 6-2, 6-4.

“At this level, logically you should not expect to have too many bagels, especially if you play as a top player playing against somebody who is top 20, top 15,” Djokovic said. “Usually these matches are decided in few instances, few points. So it is weird to see bagels. And, yeah, fortunately for me I didn’t end up as Tomas.”

Djokovic was referring to eighth-ranked Tomas Berdych, who lost, 6-0, 6-0, to 12th-ranked David Goffin. It was only the second shutout on the ATP Tour this year, the first at a Masters event since 2007, and the first with a top-10 player on the receiving end since 2005.

Goffin had not won so much as a set in his two previous matches against Berdych, and he entered the contest with a 2-26 record against top-10 opponents. “It’s just an amazing feeling,” Goffin said. “It’s the perfect day, the perfect match for me. I’ve never played like this. The ball was like a soccer ball. Everything was going my way.”

The quirkiest moment in the women’s draw concerned the lingering effects of Serena Williams’s dietary choices on Wednesday, when she sampled cuisine designed for canines. After shaking off the ensuing ill effects on Thursday, Williams fended off a set point in a 7-6 (7), 6-1 win over Christina McHale.

Williams said she ordered room service from her hotel’s “Doggy Menu” for her Yorkshire terrier, Chip. She thought the salmon-and-rice dish looked so appetizing that she tried a spoonful herself — a decision she quickly regretted.

“I don’t know how my dog eats that,” Williams said. “I guess he’s O.K. with it.”


