


Army teams and emergency crews on Friday recovered the bodies of four soldiers who were missing after a truck overturned a day earlier during a training mission near Fort Hood in central Texas, an official said. The bodies of five other soldiers were found on Thursday. Three soldiers were rescued.

Maj. Gen. John Uberti, the base’s deputy commanding general, said on Friday morning that the accident was a “tragic loss” and that the Army was making the search a priority.

The three who were rescued were in stable condition in a hospital and could be discharged later on Friday, he added.

General Uberti provided no further details about the soldiers or the accident, which occurred in an area that had been inundated with heavy rain over the last week.

At least an additional inch of rain was expected on Friday, and the National Weather Service issued a flash flood watch for northern and central Texas through midnight. The rainfall comes on top of record-breaking rains in parts of the state that have resulted in the deaths of at least six other people.

The accident, which took place about 12 miles north of the base’s main area, was reported shortly after 11 a.m. on Thursday. Rescue teams searched by air, land and water.

Chris Haug, a spokesman for Fort Hood, said on Thursday that floodwaters from recent rains were believed to have overturned the truck, a Light Medium Tactical Vehicle, while the soldiers were conducting a low-water crossing, and that the episode would be investigated.

Mr. Haug said the soldiers were on a mission that “they do every day,” and driving on “a normal dirt road” that was not known to be a problem.

Around the time of the accident, concerns about flooding had caused emergency personnel to close a paved road parallel to the dirt road.

“All the low water crossings are potentially dangerous when we’ve had this much rain,” another Fort Hood spokesman, Tyler Broadway, said.

The names of the victims will not be made public until their families are notified.

This is not the first fatal episode in recent months during a training exercise at Fort Hood. In November, a Black Hawk helicopter crashed during an exercise at the base, killing four crew members.


