


Gordie Howe could break a lobster claw with his fingers, one of his sons said, and make people melt in his hands with his kindness and humility.

Howe’s son Murray began the funeral service for his father on Wednesday with a eulogy that emphasized the toughness and generosity of the man known as Mr. Hockey, who died Friday at age 88.

Hall of Famers including Bobby Orr, Wayne Gretzky and Scotty Bowman and N.H.L. Commissioner Gary Bettman attended the service in Detroit, where Howe played most of his remarkable 32-year professional career.

Penguins Celebrate a Title Hundreds of thousands of fans lined the streets of Pittsburgh as the Penguins paraded through the city with the Stanley Cup — seven years to the day since the last time they held such a celebration.

Johnny Cueto struck out nine over seven innings for his team-leading 10th win, and the San Francisco Giants completed a sweep of the visiting Milwaukee Brewers with a 10-1 victory.

Buster Posey hit a bases-loaded, two-run single in the third to get things going on a big offensive day, and Matt Duffy followed with a run-scoring single against Jimmy Nelson (5-6) as the Giants used a balanced offensive attack on the way to their fifth straight win.

Around the Majors Jayson Werth singled in the winning run with two outs in the 12th inning, and the Nationals beat the visiting Chicago Cubs, 5-4. Washington’s Stephen Strasburg and Chicago’s Jason Hammel each gave up one run in seven innings. Clayton Kershaw struck out 11 in his 10th victory of the season as the Los Angeles Dodgers won at Arizona, 3-2. Kenley Jansen tied Eric Gagne for the Dodgers’ franchise record of 161 career saves. Chris Sale allowed three runs in seven innings and became the first 11-game winner in the majors as the Chicago White Sox beat visiting Detroit, 5-3.

Three more women have filed a federal civil rights lawsuit against Baylor University, claiming the institution did nothing to help them after they reported having been sexually assaulted. Baylor has come under intense criticism over its handling of allegations of sexual assault over several years, including cases involving football players.


