


The Mets surged late last season by mercilessly beating bad teams down the stretch. They have done it again this season, sweeping the lowly Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds heading into the weekend. They will play the Braves again this week, at Citi Field, and then head for San Diego to meet the Padres, another last-place team.

The Padres have had an unusual season. They were shut out in each of their first three games, and they have since been blanked three more times. When they broke loose for nine runs on Thursday, they gave up 13 and lost to the Giants, who completed a three-game sweep.

In Andy Green, at least, the Padres have a manager who should help them grow. The Padres, who have not reached the playoffs in a decade, gave Green his first major league managing job last October.

“He is a star,” said Tony La Russa, the Arizona Diamondbacks’ chief baseball officer, who would know. La Russa, a Hall of Fame manager, noticed Green’s acumen while touring the Arizona farm system in 2014. Green — who, like La Russa, had a brief major league playing career as an infielder — knew his boss’s meager batting statistics.

“The first time I met him, he asked me to introduce him to my team in Double-A,” Green said recently. “And I’m like, ‘You really think you need an introduction?’ He’s got, like, all three World Series rings — he’s Tony La Russa.

“So I said to the guys: ‘If he needs an introduction, you don’t deserve the jersey that’s on your back. He’s got more World Series rings on his fingers than I’m guessing all of you have ever seen. But there’s really only one thing all of you need to know: He’s a career .199 hitter, I’m a career .200 hitter. So in this clubhouse, you know who you need to be listening to.’ ”

Green laughed as he told the story. He played parts of three seasons with the Diamondbacks, hitting .199 from 2004 to 2006. He went 1 for 4 in four games for the Mets in 2009, freezing his average at .200.

After one more season as a minor league player, Green spent four years climbing the managerial ranks for the Diamondbacks, who promoted him to Chip Hale’s staff as the third-base and infield coach last season.

“He knows how to communicate with people; he knows how to develop relationships, which then creates a trust factor where he can start to teach the game,” said Diamondbacks shortstop Nick Ahmed, who played for Green in the minors. “He’s very intelligent about the game, he studies it, he cares about it. There’s no arrogance about him. He just wants to learn and get better.”

The Padres have plenty of room to get better. After a series of costly moves for veterans before last season, the Padres staggered to a 74-88 record. Two of the new stars — Craig Kimbrel and Justin Upton — did not return, and while others like Wil Myers and Matt Kemp have been productive, the Padres entered the weekend with the National League’s second-worst slugging percentage. They also lost their No. 2 starter, Tyson Ross, to a shoulder injury after one start.

Green cannot control all that, but he said that he hoped he could at least influence the Padres’ style of play.

“I want to be opportunistic,” he said. “Every team has a weakness on the field, and we should be able to take advantage of it. We should play intelligent, aggressive baseball. That’s why the fine details matter to me, because that’s how I want my teams to be defined.”

A Road Back to Baseball

By the end, Jeremy Sowers’s body was screaming the message to him: He needed to find a new line of work. Sowers, chosen sixth over all by Cleveland in the 2004 draft, had lost one season to rotator-cuff surgery and another to a torn Achilles’ tendon. He was accepted to business school at the University of North Carolina in 2013, but he wanted to pitch just a bit more, in an independent league, to show that two years of rehabilitation had paid off.

“After about 50 innings, my arm hated me,” Sowers said. “It was everything imaginable just to get ready to pitch.”

Sowers, who was 18-30 in four major league seasons, got on with his life. After business school, he went to work in a finance and strategy program at the Walmart headquarters in Arkansas. The job offered a stable lifestyle, but it was not for him.

“I started realizing I actually care a lot about this game,” Sowers said. “When you do play the game, you think this is normal because you’re around it every day and these are your friends. You grow up with these guys, you spend tons of time in the clubhouse, you have to treat it like it’s everyday life — but it’s far from it. Every now and then, you need to take a step away and re-remind yourself of how significant and privileged you are to get to play this game.”

Playing was no longer an option, but working was. Armed with a résumé on the field and in the classroom — he also has an undergraduate degree in political science from Vanderbilt — Sowers landed a baseball operations internship with the Baltimore Orioles last season. That led to a full-time job as a major league operations assistant for the Tampa Bay Rays.

Sowers spends the games in Tampa Bay’s video-replay room, and he was ready in the first week of the season when the Rays won a game on a replay reversal. Toronto’s Jose Bautista was ruled to have slid illegally to break up a double play, the first prominent application of baseball’s new slide rules.

“The first meeting I went to, they were basically coming in and saying, ‘O.K., new slide rule, let’s talk about this,’ ” Sowers said. “Any baseball person knew it was going to get interesting, how this gets interpreted.”

Sowers joked that in one game, he was more valuable to the Rays than he had been to the Indians, for whom he compiled 1.5 wins above replacement, as calculated by the Baseball-Reference website. The Rays’ manager, Kevin Cash, said he was happy to have him on staff.

“Jeremy’s got a calmness about him,” Cash said. “In that position, there’s a lot going on in the game, there’s an urgency to get a call right, the umpires are waiting, we’re waiting. You’ve got to have that calm presence about you, and Jeremy definitely has that. He’s as smart as anybody in the room, obviously, and having played the game, it helps.”

Knowing when to stop playing — and how to stand out when he wanted back in — may have been Sowers’s smartest move of all.

Near Miss for a Catcher

Last Monday afternoon, the Chicago White Sox posted their lineup for that night’s game against the Toronto Blue Jays. A new catcher, Kevan Smith, would be batting ninth and making his major league debut.

“It’s awesome,” Smith told reporters before the game, “and it’s going to be a great experience.”

Before batting practice, though, his experience turned sour. Smith felt back spasms while the White Sox stretched, and he was scratched from the game. Smith was placed on the disabled list and has still not officially appeared in a major league game.

Smith had been hitting well at Class AAA Charlotte, with a .345 average and two homers in eight games, so he would seem to have hope of coming back. But returning to the majors, after coming so close, is no guarantee. Smith, 27, will hope to avoid the fate of Larry Yount.

The Houston Astros called on Yount to pitch the top of the ninth inning against Atlanta on Sept. 15, 1971. Yount, who had not thrown for a week while fulfilling a military obligation, felt elbow pain while warming up. Because he was announced, Yount was officially listed as having played in the game. But he was removed before ever throwing a pitch and never returned to the majors.

A few years later, though, Yount’s brother, Robin, did play in the majors for the Milwaukee Brewers. He ended up staying for 20 seasons, collecting 3,142 career hits and earning a spot in the Hall of Fame.


