


Times Insider shares insights into how we work at The New York Times. In this article, Lew Serviss, an assistant editor on the Print News Hub, reveals the genesis and decade-long stewardship of Robert Lipsyte’s moving tribute to a “transcendent” cultural icon.

For Robert Lipsyte, the process of memorializing Muhammad Ali began 52 years ago. “Ali was the single most important subject of my professional life,” Mr. Lipsyte told me on Sunday, two days after the heavyweight champion’s death. “I was a 26-year-old sports rewrite man and feature writer sent to cover Clay-Liston because the real boxing writer didn’t think a one-round KO was worth his time.” This was the 1964 title fight in which Ali — then Cassius Clay — was given little chance to upset the reigning champ, Sonny Liston. But of course he did.

“Ali and I were among the youngest there in Miami for the fight. We bonded, and when it was over, both our careers were made,” Mr. Lipsyte said. “I’ve covered him since 1964, and his humanity, cruelty, ignorance and intelligence have been overwhelming. He was transcendent. He could hug you from across the room, kiss you over the phone; his vibes were thrilling.”

Mr. Lipsyte filed a draft of the Ali obituary shortly before Bill McDonald took over as the obituaries editor of The Times in 2006. “Writing his obit was bittersweet,” Mr. Lipsyte said. “He’d already been lost — he was mute and immobile — but going back over our five-decade journey together was joyous and sad.”

Mr. McDonald inherited a stockpile, hundreds strong, of advance obits — articles prepared in anticipation of the deaths of historical figures — in various stages of completion. As mini-biographies, these obits undergo layers of drafts, rewrites and close edits. Production includes photo research and print page design. Shreeya Sinha, the web editor for obituaries, helps coordinate with the copy desks and shepherds slide shows, video, sidebars, mobile alerts and photo captions.

The obituary editors try to get the big figures — “particularly those of advanced age or those who are dangerously ill” — to the copy desks for final editing quickly, Mr. McDonald said. To have one in readiness for more than a decade “is not the norm.”

“In Ali’s case,” he recalled, “I had read it at some point after I took the job — when he was 64 or 65 — and I could see it was terrific.”


