


KEY WEST, Fla. — Nineteen Cuban migrants trying to reach the United States climbed a lighthouse off the Florida Keys and refused to come down during a standoff that lasted for about eight hours on Friday, the Coast Guard said.

Shortly before 9 a.m., a homemade craft carrying a group of Cubans was spotted in the water near the American Shoal lighthouse, about seven miles from shore and nearly 15 miles north of Key West, Chief Petty Officer Ryan Doss said. Apparently fearful that they had been caught before reaching land, the Cubans jumped off the craft and climbed to the top of the lighthouse.

The standoff is the latest episode involving a growing number of Cubans trying to make it to the United States before immigration rules that favor them might be changed. El Paso is overflowing with Cubans who recently arrived from Mexico after being flown there from Panama, where they had been stranded for months. And a group of more than 5,000 Cubans arrived this year in Texas from Costa Rica.

Since October, more than 3,500 Cubans have tried to reach the United States by sea.

The migrants stuck at the top of the nearly 140-year-old lighthouse on Friday had planned to wait it out, Chief Doss said.

The Coast Guard was hesitant to forcibly remove them or even approach them because someone might have been tempted to jump into shallow water, he said. The group eventually came down safely, the Coast Guard wrote on Twitter.

During the standoff, the Coast Guard created a 1,000-yard safety zone around the lighthouse to prevent recreational and commercial vessels from approaching.

Many Cubans are worried that the United States will eliminate the Cuban Adjustment Act, a 1966 law that allows any Cuban to apply for residency a year after arriving. When tens of thousands of Cubans took to the sea to try to reach the United States in 1994, the Clinton administration adjusted American policy so that any Cuban caught at sea would be turned back. The policy, known as “wet foot, dry foot,” is among the reasons so many Cubans in the past few years have made the voyage by land. The Obama administration has said it has no plans to try to repeal the federal law.

After they came down from the lighthouse, the migrants were processed by the federal authorities. Chief Doss said that several agencies would have to determine whether reaching the lighthouse was considered “dry foot.” However, the Coast Guard later wrote on Twitter that “in most instances migrants interdicted at sea will be returned to their country of origin.”

In 2006, several Cubans who had reached an old bridge off the Florida Keys were repatriated. A federal judge later ruled that the government had erred, and ordered the Bush administration to take steps to bring them back.


