


Donald Trump has been a familiar, if intermittent, presence in this magazine for more than three decades. And long before this week’s cover story by Robert Draper chronicled the still-hard-to-believe reality of Trump as the probable Republican nominee for the presidency of the United States, the traits that have made him the Republican Party’s most unlikely but unstoppable politician were on display in our pages.

In April 1984, William E. Geist profiled Trump after he made an eye-popping impulse purchase: the New Jersey Generals, a football team in a rival league to the N.F.L., which folded the following year. The article captured Trump in “Master Builder” mode, detailing his plans to build a stadium in New York for the Generals and a 60-story castle for himself, with “six cylinders of varying heights with gold-leafed, coned and crenelated tops to be built at 60th Street and Madison Avenue,” Geist wrote. “There is to be a moat and a drawbridge.”

Trump admitted to his own impatience. “He paid $75,000 to truck several 40-foot trees from Florida to Trump Tower, where a tunnel was built into the building so the trees would not be damaged by frost. The 3,000-pound trees were then installed in the lower plaza of the atrium. Mr. Trump did not like the look. He ordered the trees removed, and, when workmen balked for 24 hours, Mr. Trump had the trees cut down with a chainsaw.”

William H. Meyers caught up with Trump in September 1988, following Trump’s purchase of the Plaza Hotel. The article followed Trump as he was pressured into a game of cat and mouse with an old rival who had tried to partner with Trump in joint ownership of what would become the Hudson Yards, but Trump doesn’t play well with others. “They wanted equal control,” Trump tells Meyers. “I said nobody can have control in my deals. I don’t do partners.”

Trump’s rivalry with his own family surfaced in a short entry by Phillip Weiss on Trump’s late father, Fred C. Trump, in the magazine’s 2000 Lives They Lived issue. In the elder Trump’s office, Weiss wrote “There’s only one picture of Donald a framed 1986 cover of Fortune. That was just before ‘The Art of the Deal,’ just before Donald became a household name. Just before it became clear that Donald had eclipsed his father’s noble achievement forever. They say that when pictures were taken of father and son, Fred would rise just a little on his toes — so he would look taller.”

But Trump was still his father’s son. “Once when a cement contractor had given Fred Trump a $900,000 bill, he cut a $1 million check, just for the pleasure of handling such a sum, and hand-delivered it to the contractor,” Weiss wrote. “That same cement contractor later poured the Trump Tower in Manhattan.”

When James Traub checked back in with Trump in 2004, he had risen from the ashes, leaving behind the bankruptcy of the company that held his Atlantic Hotel and casino operation to launch the next iteration of the Trump brand as the star of “The Apprentice.” “Trump does not bother to distinguish between the promotional and the actual,” Traub wrote.

Last fall — after Trump’s ascent in the polls but before his Republican primary victories that would confirm that this was, in fact, happening — Mark Leibovich sat down with Trump to make sense of his presidential ambitions. Circa-2015 Trump, like the Trumps of old, is bold, hasty, independent and artful with the truth, but the differences also stand out. In 1984, Geist offered this impression of the mogul:

In 2015, Leibovich wrote, Trump is “impolite company personified,” a man who has called undocumented immigrants rapists, claimed Fox News debate moderator Megyn Kelly asked him difficult questions because of her period and declared Karl Rove to be “a totally incompetent jerk.” What is he after, exactly, in running for president? “Some people think this will be good for my brand,” Trump said. “I think it’s irrelevant for my brand.”


