


It’s pretty clear at this point that whatever Michelle Obama wears is going to be greeted with shouts of excitement. That when she appears in a gown for a formal occasion, the effect will be described with words like “stuns” and “glistens” and “sparkles.” And so it was indeed last Friday at the Nordic state dinner, where David Letterman and Snapchat’s Evan Spiegel and his girlfriend, Miranda Kerr (among others), dined with the heads of five Nordic states, Demi Lovato sang, and Mrs. Obama wore a draped bodice off-the-shoulder peach-toned Naeem Khan.

“Showstopper,” E! online cried.

It was a nice dress. But it was also, I can’t help but feel, a missed opportunity.

Before you start screaming sexism, because this is about a woman’s dress, as opposed to the dress of her husband, let me say that this is actually about using every possible political tool available, and it just so happens that when it comes to dress, women have significantly more tools than men. It’s not reductive; it’s realistic.

Mrs. Obama has become adept, over the two terms of her husband’s administration, at transforming what has traditionally been a decorative job (hostess) into a piece of diplomatic art, largely through the use of her clothes to promote homegrown designers whose background bridges the United States and the guest country.

This has worked both to introduce Mrs. O-obsessives to new, and lesser known, names, hence helping the designers, and to reflect the ties between countries, hence underscoring the message of the event. She hasn’t always done it, but she has done it enough, and it has been effective enough, that it has inspired a generation of political spouses, from Samantha Cameron, the wife of Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, to Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, wife of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, to do the same.

But she didn’t do it at the Nordic dinner Friday night. She went with a familiar name — she has worn Naeem Khan on multiple occasions (including the India state dinner in 2009), and her daughters wore Naeem Khan to their first state dinner, with the Canadian first family — but not one with any apparent relationship to her guests. It’s too bad, because this dinner was rife with the potential for sartorial substance and communication.

And not just because she could have introduced oft-overlooked Scandinavian designers to a new audience. Yes, they exist, and not just for pared-down daywear: There is a Copenhagen Fashion Week and a Stockholm Fashion Week, and Crown Princess Mary of Denmark, who is known for wearing Danish names, was voted “Most Stylish Royal” (beating out the Duchess of Cambridge, the former Kate Middleton) by Hello magazine readers in 2014 and 2015. Among her favorite designers is Ole Yde, of YDE Copenhagen, who is known for his poetic approach to clothing and his way with an evening dress.

(Meanwhile, Petra Mede, co-host of this year’s Eurovision song contest, held in Sweden, wore looks from the local designers Lars Wallin, Ida Lanto and Valerie Aflalo.)

But also because one of the points of discussion of the state visit was climate change, an issue on which the Nordic countries have long been in the lead. Indeed, at the same time as the visit, Copenhagen was playing host to a series of fashion-related events around the subject of sustainability and style, including the Sustainable Apparel Coalition’s annual members meeting, the Youth Fashion Summit, Planet Textiles: The Sustainable Textile Summit, and the Copenhagen Fashion Summit, which focused on “responsible innovation” (full disclosure: I was part of the Copenhagen Fashion Summit). As fashion wakes up to the issue, the state dinner could have been a very effective platform for reflecting the idea of responsible fashion.

Imagine, for example, if the first lady had chosen a gown from the green carpet challenge, like the ones worn by Emma Watson and Lupita Nyong’o to the Met Gala that were designed by Calvin Klein and made from fabric formed from recycled plastic bottles (and that were among the more lauded dresses on that not particularly lauded red carpet)?

Or even more provocatively, and perhaps appropriately, a gown from H&M’s new Conscious Exclusive collection (a line that focuses on merging glamour and good by using eco-sensitive materials), as modeled by Crown Princess Mary during a dinner in the palace for the fashion summit, which would tick both the climate change box and the Scandinavian designer box, not to mention the economically accessible box.

It would have been a powerful message to send, but it didn’t happen.

Indeed, along with Mrs. Obama’s appearance at the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner in Givenchy couture, the choice of Naeem Khan seems to indicate that she may be less interested in forwarding a particular agenda at this point in her husband’s “fourth quarter” than perhaps getting ready for her future in private life.

That’s fair enough. But there is over half a year left to go before the Obamas exit the White House. Mrs. Obama raised the bar, and expectations, when it comes to first ladies’ image (or first spouse’s), and how it could be used. Let’s hope she doesn’t lower it now.


