


ATLANTA — Jacob deGrom returned to the Mets’ clubhouse on Saturday, resuming the life of a major league pitcher with some typical worries, such as his mechanics, his command and his back muscles.

DeGrom’s more serious concern — the health of his newborn son, which had kept him away from the team for 12 days — appeared to be behind him. DeGrom darted out of the Turner Field clubhouse around 4 p.m. with a big smile.

The Mets had even more to smile about a few hours later, with starter Steven Matz dodging trouble over six and one-third innings as the Mets beat the Atlanta Braves, 8-2. After starting the season 2-5, the Mets have won seven of nine.

Matz gave up nine hits and two runs while striking out eight and walking none.

The Mets had 15 hits spread among eight starting players, including back-to-back home runs in the ninth by second baseman Neil Walker and shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera.

“We started off a little slow the first week,” Walker said, “and the second, third week here, we’ve really got the ball rolling from our offense to our starting pitchers to our relievers. We have a very talented group here.”

Walker added that, over the last several games, players “aren’t putting that extra pressure on themselves to get the big hit.”

Third baseman David Wright, who had two doubles and two R.B.I., was one of six Mets with two hits. And that was all without center fielder Yoenis Cespedes, who did not play because of a leg injury.

“We’re getting into the flow of what the baseball season is about,” Manager Terry Collins said.

DeGrom, who will make his second start of the season on Sunday, clearly sounded relieved as he talked about the ordeal with his son, Jaxon Anthony. The baby was in a hospital in Daytona Beach, Fla., hooked up to a battery of monitors for five days for what deGrom said was sleep apnea, a breathing problem.

“When all the tests came back and nothing was seriously wrong, we were pretty relieved,” deGrom said. “At first it was a scary time.”

DeGrom, who left the team April 11 for the baby’s birth, said his son’s medical problem had resolved itself.

That also appeared to be what had happened with the soreness in deGrom’s right latissimus muscle in his back, which had bothered him enough in his first start of the season, on April 8, that he was removed in the sixth inning. DeGrom said that he had not thrown for four or five days while the baby was hospitalized and that the rest seemed to have helped.

“I feel good; the last few bullpen sessions have been good,” deGrom said. “I threw five innings down in St. Lucie. Felt good there.

“We were working on some mechanical things, too, which I think kind of made the lat a little sore early on. We noticed some things watching video that I was doing wrong and worked on that. I think my mechanics are a lot better this time through.”

Collins said Friday that he hoped deGrom could get to 85 pitches as he built endurance for the season.

“We’ll watch him,” Collins said.

The Mets have reason to be cautious about deGrom’s muscle. Matz pitched with latissimus tightness last season and tore a muscle. He did not pitch for the Mets from July 5 to Sept. 6.

On Saturday night against the Braves, Matz worked around trouble in three of his first six innings. The Braves had just one hit in six at-bats with runners in scoring position in those six innings. Matz finished with 98 pitches, 74 for strikes.

With deGrom’s return on Sunday, the Mets will try to continue synchronizing their rotation after a fitful start to the season.

Matt Harvey won for the first time this season Friday night, and Matz had the decent start Saturday. Now it will be deGrom’s turn to continue the Mets’ roll.

In deGrom’s only start this season, a 7-2 victory over the Phillies, he threw 76 pitches and allowed one run and five hits in six innings.

“For some reason, I was throwing against a stiff front leg versus last year,” deGrom said. “We looked at the video, and I’m really over my front side, and this front leg stays bent. In the video against Philly in the home opener, my leg was straight, so I don’t know if that put some extra stress on the lat, too.”

INSIDE PITCH

Yoenis Cespedes was out of the lineup Saturday because of significant swelling of a leg bruise, Terry Collins said. Cespedes left in the eighth inning of Friday’s 6-3 victory over the Braves after a fall in the outfield.


