


“I think the photo community sometimes takes their own and holds them hostage,” said the dealer David Zwirner. “It’s important for Eggleston’s work to be seen among the great art that’s being made. I know that’s very important for him in choosing our gallery.”

Mr. Zwirner was talking about the artist William Eggleston, 76, who has joined his gallery after having been represented by Larry Gagosian for five years.

“Eggleston is really a living legend of American art,” Mr. Zwirner said. “And it’s important for us — and for the artist — that he is contextualized as an artist and not just as a photographer.”

In November, the gallery, at its West 20th Street location, will mount a show of Mr. Eggleston’s “The Democratic Forest” images, taken on his travels in the 1980s.

Mr. Eggleston has inspired other artists in the gallery, like Wolfgang Tillmans, Thomas Ruff and Philip-Lorca diCorcia, Mr. Zwirner said. “All, in one way or another,” he added, “have looked at Eggleston’s work.”

To some extent, Jim Dine has been the victim of his own success. Or so believes Paul Gray, a partner at Richard Gray Gallery, which will represent Mr. Dine. Although Mr. Dine, 80, had for 40 years been represented by Pace, with whom he parted last year, Richard Gray has featured the artist in shows since 1980.

“I’ve always regarded him as one of the unsung heroes of his generation,” Mr. Gray said. “His work became kind of pigeonholed because it was so popular.”

Mr. Dine became known for his Venus sculptures and heart paintings. The pressure to respond to market demand, Mr. Gray said, prevented him from being able “to do the things he’s doing now.”

Some of that work will be on view at Art Basel in Switzerland this month, where Richard Gray will present Mr. Dine’s sculptures of dancers and a self-portrait head in a room of poetry, handwritten by Mr. Dine on the walls.

Then on June 24, Mr. Dine will open a solo show of self-portraits at the Albertina Museum in Vienna.

And in the fall, Richard Gray will show Mr. Dine’s latest abstract paintings in Chicago and New York.

It seems like just yesterday that Dominique Lévy parted with Robert Mnuchin to open her own gallery, which she did in 2013 at 909 Madison Avenue, sharing the space with Galerie Perrotin. Now Galerie Perrotin is moving out — to an unannounced location — and Ms. Lévy is taking over the entire building.

Ms. Lévy will have three exhibition floors, enabling her to simultaneously display the new and historical work of a single artist — like Pat Steir in 2017.

“It gives us even more flexibility,” Ms. Lévy said, “and allows us to expand our passion for sculpture.”

Higher ceilings. That is what fueled Lehmann Maupin’s new gallery on West 24th Street in a building named the Getty, a former Getty gas station. Peter Marino designed the interiors.

Having taken over the Sonnabend Gallery for its current Chelsea home on West 22nd Street, which it will continue to operate along with an East Village location, David Maupin said he was “excited to have a new home that was built to our specifications.”

The new gallery, under construction, is to be completed in 2017.

Théodore Rousseau is among the Barbizon school artists who have perhaps been given short shrift as merely precursors to Impressionism. So the J. Paul Getty Museum has decided to give Rousseau his due in an exhibition opening on June 21.

The show is called “Unruly Nature” to highlight the artist’s “tremendous stylistic and technical variety,” said Scott Allan, a curator.

“It was hard to get a handle on this artist and how to categorize certain types of work by him,” Mr. Allan said. “We wanted to represent the diversity of his achievement.”

The show will feature more than 70 works that the Getty says makes it the largest Rousseau exhibition since a 1967 retrospective at the Louvre.

“He was working at an important moment in French landscape painting,” Mr. Allan said. “We’re trying to convey that sense of excitement and experimentation. It’s not simply a way station en route to Impressionism.”

At a time when art prices far exceed the capacity of museum acquisition budgets, six Northeast college and university art museums are joining forces to collect and share new works. The master copy of each acquisition will travel among the museums at Bowdoin, Colby, Mount Holyoke, Brandeis, Middlebury and Skidmore.

The first acquisition by this New Media Arts Consortium is William Kentridge’s “Tango for Page Turning” (2012-13), a video featuring the turning pages of a 19th-century chemistry book, upon which Mr. Kentridge illustrated images of the South African dancer Dada Masilo.

“These are not inexpensive works of art,” said Sharon Corwin, director of the Colby College Museum of Art. “With six institutions rather than one, it made it possible.”


