


Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson would not admit that he was surprised by the play of Neil Walker or that Walker’s seven home runs were unexpected entering Monday’s game against the Cincinnati Reds.

“I think we’re pleasantly,” Alderson said, before adding, “pleased.”

Walker further ingrained himself in the Mets’ good graces by bashing a two-run homer in the seventh inning, breaking a tie and sending the Mets to a 5-3 win at Citi Field.

When Walker took the field in the eighth, the crowd serenaded him with a roaring recital of his name.

Walker’s eight home runs in April are the most he has hit in a calendar month. After the game, he could not recall when he had been able to hit with such power.

“My swing feels good; I’m seeing the ball good,” Walker said.

After the Mets acquired Walker in the off-season from the Pittsburgh Pirates for pitcher Jon Niese, he replaced Daniel Murphy at second base, providing the pop the Mets were unsure that Murphy could replicate from his memorable playoff run last season.

“He’s just swinging the bat great,” Manager Terry Collins said of Walker.

Walker’s compatriots in the middle of the lineup — Michael Conforto, hitting third, and Lucas Duda, batting cleanup — combined for all five of the Mets’ R.B.I., three home runs and seven hits, picking up Noah Syndergaard on a night when he gave up three runs, a season high.

Through his first three starts, Syndergaard performed like one of the best pitchers in baseball, flummoxing opponents with heaters that registered in triple digits on the radar gun and secondary off-speed pitches that came in with more velocity than most pitchers have on their fastballs.

Collins was hypothetically asked how he would combat such ferocity if Syndergaard did not wear blue pinstripes. Collins answered that he had conjured a few machinations, but would not divulge them.

Regardless, the Reds had their own formula for combating Syndergaard — countering the speed of his pitches with speed on the basepaths.

Syndergaard struck out nine batters in six and two-thirds innings, but the Reds kept him off-balance with five stolen bases. Syndergaard acknowledged that he had to improve in holding runners on.

“We still got to get better at it,” Collins said. “There’s no question.”

With the Mets leading by 3-1 in the seventh, Syndergaard, conscious of the Reds’ swiftness, tried to pick off Tyler Holt at first base, but his throw was wild. Zack Cozart singled with two outs to score Holt, chasing Syndergaard from the game. He was charged with one more run and wound up with a no-decision, despite not allowing a base hit past the infield until the sixth.

One year ago, the Mets were unsure of what to make of Syndergaard, their 6-foot-6 power pitcher with the long golden locks. The reputation of his blazing fastball preceded him, but did he have the secondary pitches, in-game composure and personal maturity to succeed at the major league level?

Before the game, some of the most prominent members of the Mets organization — David Wright, Collins and Alderson — each validated Syndergaard’s development.

Collins said Syndergaard could not be intimidated. Wright called him as dominant a pitcher as he has seen in 13 seasons in the majors.

While Wright spoke, Syndergaard dressed across from him in the clubhouse. He did not hear Wright’s compliments, but the description of Syndergaard’s maturation is significant.

During spring training last season, Wright caught Syndergaard — then a minor leaguer — eating lunch in the clubhouse during a game and told him he belonged on the field. Another veteran teammate threw Syndergaard’s lunch into the garbage.

“I think what he’s done in the last — if you go back just 12 months or even less — is pretty remarkable,” Alderson said. “Not just his performance on the mound, but his growth as an individual, his maturation, his emergence as a personality.”

Syndergaard fell short of his third win, and his E.R.A. crept up to 1.69. But he was there to congratulate Walker after the go-ahead home run in the seventh, satisfied with the Mets’ ninth win in 11 games.

“All that really matters is that the team got a win,” Syndergaard said. “That’s all I’m happy about.”

INSIDE PITCH

TRAVIS d’ARNAUD left the game before the eighth inning, citing discomfort in his right throwing shoulder. He will see a physician on Tuesday. ... YOENIS CESPEDES did not play after getting fluid drained from a bruise in his right leg.


