


BUCHAREST, Romania — In the 24 years that Nicolae Ceausescu ruled Romania, the mansion where he lived with his wife, Elena, was shrouded in secrecy.

No ordinary citizen could get near the villa in a well-heeled neighborhood in northern Bucharest. But rumors abounded about its lavish décor — the gold-plated bathroom fixtures, the closets packed with Elena’s furs, clothing and shoes, and the mosaic-lined indoor swimming pool.

After the Ceausescus were toppled — and executed by a firing squad on Dec. 25, 1989, in the bloodiest of the revolutions that tore down the Iron Curtain in Eastern Europe — the state news agency excoriated the “extraordinary luxury” of their home. Ordinary Romanians, living on strict food and fuel rations, were enraged by the Ceausescus’ lifestyle.

Born in Romania but raised in Hungary, I was just a young child when the Ceausescus met their end. But I spent that Christmas and many summers that followed with relatives in Transylvania, listening to their stories of the privations of the Communist period. By the time I grew up, most Romanians I knew had moved on, or wanted to do so.

Yet when the Romanian government opened the Ceausescu mansion as a museum in March, I was intrigued. So I signed up for a guided tour, which costs about $11. The mansion has received about 8,000 visitors since the opening.

Known as the Palatul Primaverii, or Spring Palace, the villa is spacious — 30 rooms, 53,000 square feet, with gardens designated for winter and summer — but not quite opulent by palace standards. The mansion itself is well kept, with cleaners busy wiping windows and the constant hum of a lawn mower coming from the garden.

The area, with homes originally intended for employees of Bucharest’s gas and electricity plant but which were later reserved for officials of the Communist elite, remains exclusive.

Visitors are asked to put on blue shoe coverings before stepping inside. Our guide, Andrei Stancu, a slender and bookish man in his mid 20s, told us that the Ceausescus, both born into peasant families, always took off their shoes at the door to preserve the carpets.

Mr. Stancu led us through more than a dozen rooms decorated in a mix of late Renaissance and Rococo styles. He pointed out each crystal chandelier and Flemish tapestry. In room after room, he took note of the Romanian brands — Medias crystal, Cisnadie carpets — that are now struggling or defunct.

The mood lightened when Mr. Stancu shared stories of the Ceausescus, all of them cautiously nonpolitical.

In the padded cinema, he explained that Nicolae Ceausescu enjoyed American movies. He had a soft spot for Westerns and for the television series “Kojak,” about a big-hearted New York City detective played by Telly Savalas. For Romanians back then, television was limited to sober homegrown productions, many of them propagandistic.

Next to the couple’s bed, which looked freshly made, we learned that Ms. Ceausescu, known for her luxurious wardrobe, wore only men’s pajamas.

A brochure quotes her housekeeper describing how “the comrade” would get down on her stomach, demonstrating the right way to dust under a bed.

The children on the tour were delighted by the indoor swimming pool, now drained of water and filled instead with a drab exhibition about the Ceausescus on holidays or foreign visits.

However heavily decorated, the mansion is nothing like the House of the People a few miles away. At four million square feet, that concrete fortress built by Ceausescu and often compared in size to the Pentagon, now houses the Romanian Parliament.

While the House of the People is open for public tours, “nobody tells you that a quarter of Bucharest was demolished for that thing, that people died on that building site,” said Radu Preda, executive president of the Institute for the Investigation of Communist Crimes and the Memory of Romanian Exile, a government agency charged with studying the Ceausescu regime. “While it was under construction, Romanians had to put up with cold and hunger.”

On the Spring Palace tour, far more attention was paid to upholstery and porcelain than to the brutalities of a Communist dictatorship.

Many of my fellow visitors were fine with the lack of political context. “I’m impressed,” Silvia Rosman, 61, a visitor from Tel Aviv who left Romania before Ceausescu came to power in 1965, said of our tour guide. “I loved his presentation — without bitterness or criticism.”

The government agency in charge of the mansion seemed to want to draw such reactions.

“We present the house, and it is up to everyone to draw their own conclusions,” said Alexandru Niculae, an official with the agency. “We are neither trying to demonize Ceausescu, the man or the leader — nor providing him with alibis or offering excuses for what happened.”

Mr. Niculae said most of the guides his agency hired are too young to have lived under the regime, in an effort to keep the tours neutral. Some scholars see that approach as a missed opportunity, or even a tone-deaf reflection of Romania’s troubled relationship with its history.

In this country of 20 million, the feared secret police, the Securitate, maintained a network of around 100,000 informers in the years before the Ceausescus fell, according to Florian Banu, a researcher at the secret police archives. Many who collaborated with the regime kept their jobs after Communism fell.

In one small example, two housekeepers who looked after the villa under the Ceausescus still work there today.

Romania joined the European Union in 2007, along with Bulgaria, but on the condition that it submit to regular reviews from Brussels because of the country’s long struggle with corruption. Officially, the former Communist government is condemned in the strongest terms by the current Romanian leadership.

“We can no longer allow ourselves to ignore the lessons of the past,” President Klaus Iohannis, the first president from Romania’s ethnic German minority, said as he took office in 2014.

When I lived in Bucharest in 2008 and 2009 for a journalism internship, the once-drab capital was experiencing a building boom. Colorful billboards covered much of the gray concrete, and the palace everyone was talking about was that of Gigi Becali, a real estate tycoon and soccer team owner who installed a life-size statue of Jesus in front of his home. (Mr. Becali was later imprisoned for corruption.)

On my visit in March, many Romanians told me that with endemic corruption and the political unrest that forced out the prime minister in November, this relatively young democracy had yet to absorb the lessons of its past.

“Real corruption was born in Communist times, when we thought one way and acted in another, and what existed was not what was said,” said Mr. Preda of the Institute for the Investigation of Communist Crimes and the Memory of Romanian Exile.

He has been advocating the establishment of a museum of Communism, as cities like Berlin or Budapest have done. He called both the Palatul Primaverii and the House of the People surrogates for such an institution, and said he hoped guided tours both in the Spring Palace and the House of the People would evolve to describe more of the history and less of the fixtures.

“How can you understand freedom if you don’t know, if you haven’t seen, what its absence means?” he asked.


