


It was Weather Education Day at Citi Field on Wednesday, and the atmosphere obliged with cool temperatures, wind and spitting rain — conditions that typically suppress offenses. But the Mets hit anyway.

They hit home runs out to the corners and the deepest parts of the ballpark. Their phenomenal power display of April has carried into May, turning Citi Field — once a tormenting wasteland of warning-track flyouts — into a bandbox. Just wait until the temperatures rise.

“I’m enjoying this a lot,” shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera said.

Cabrera hit one of the team’s four home runs in the 8-0 afternoon win over the Atlanta Braves, the fourth time this season the Mets have homered at least four times in a game. The Mets have never had more than eight such games in a season.

Their 40 home runs are the most the franchise has ever totaled through 26 games, and the total tied Colorado, St. Louis and Arizona for the major league lead through Wednesday night’s games. Thirty-eight homers have come within the last 18 games.

That figure could continue to rise if Lucas Duda heats up, riding the home runs he hit in the third and fifth innings, one of which went to the opposite field.

“Those are great signs for Lucas Duda,” Manager Terry Collins said. “I hope he stays hot, because he can carry you.”

Oddly, before the second inning, the Mets had been shut out for 17 consecutive innings, a stretch that started after the team had hit three home runs in the first inning Monday. Collins said he thought the team had good swings Tuesday, but it managed only a base hit in a 3-0 loss.

The power returned Wednesday. Rene Rivera, a backup catcher, got it rolling with a two-run homer to left in the second off a low slider from Braves starter Jhoulys Chacin that drifted over the plate. In the third, Cabrera hammered a two-run shot to left-center, one of the deepest parts of the ballpark.

“We were shocked how far that ball went,” Collins said. “When you hit the ball hard, it doesn’t matter what the conditions are.”

Then it was Duda’s turn. He took Chacin out twice for his 14th career multihomer game.

“I didn’t think the ball was carrying very well,” Duda said. “But it left the yard, so I’ll take what I can get.”

All the offense arrived in support of Steven Matz, who allowed just two hits in seven and two-thirds innings to cruise to his fourth straight victory.

Since a disaster in his season debut (seven runs in one and two-thirds innings), Matz has pitched to a 0.67 E.R.A. (two runs in the last 27 innings), with 29 strikeouts and only 21 hits allowed.

Matz retired 19 of the first 20 batters he faced on Wednesday, giving up only a single by the opposing pitcher, Chacin, in the third before another single, to Erick Aybar, in the eighth prompted Collins to relieve him.

“I felt like I was comfortable with all my pitches,” Matz said.

Matz credited his routine. Rivera noted his composure. Collins praised his efficiency.

“What he did today is how I think you pitch,” Collins said. “You get the ball, you get on the mound, you throw it. It keeps you in a better rhythm, you’re not thinking about anything but throwing strikes.”

Matz said that it did not take extra effort on his part to work quickly. It comes naturally to him. Actually, he often has to remind himself to go more slowly.

“If I’m 2-0 on a guy real quick, then I’m kind of like, ‘O.K., slow it down here,’ ” Matz said.

That was rarely the case Wednesday. In fact, Matz fell behind into a 2-0 count just twice all afternoon, and he threw first-pitch strikes to 17 of the first 23 batters he faced. Rivera said Matz had shaken off his signs only a couple of times, and his quick pace kept Atlanta off balance. He induced 10 groundouts and struck out eight and has not allowed a run in 132/3 innings.

Matz did not speculate about what might have caused such trouble in his opening start, but the recent run support has certainly helped. The Mets have outscored opponents, 35-3, in the last four games Matz has started.

“It builds up confidence,” Collins said. “We saw that with his second start — we got him some runs, and he relaxed and made his pitches. Now he knows he can do it no matter what the score is.”

INSIDE PITCH

Wilmer Flores got the start at third base on Wednesday after David Wright received the day off (rest).


