


PARIS — For nearly five decades, the French conceptual artist Daniel Buren has been applying stripes in varying colors, sizes and materials to assorted objects and environments, including bridges, bus stops and museum walls.

The latest canvas for Mr. Buren is the Louis Vuitton Foundation building here, a Frank Gehry design that rises above the Bois de Boulogne like a ship cresting a wave.

Mr. Buren has covered the museum’s 12 glass-paneled “sails” with a checkerboard of translucent colored gels, punctuated by panes of white stripes. The installation, “The Observatory of Light,” opened on Wednesday and runs through the end of the year.

Mr. Buren has described his signature stripes as a “visual tool” he uses to draw attention to a given space or context. “Here, they are always pointing toward the ground, creating the only system of verticality,” he said as he sipped Champagne at the preview last Tuesday night. “Because, as you already saw, there are not too many vertical things in this building. So the stripes are spatial anchors, in a way.”

Seen from the outside, the bright panels pick up hues and textures present in their surroundings: green expanses of forest, the red of neighboring buildings.

“The colors go anywhere the sun hits,” Mr. Buren said, “so as it moves throughout the day, they might end up on the reflecting pool outside at one moment, or on the grass. It travels.”

Mr. Buren took a similar approach in a 2005 installation at the Guggenheim in New York, which included a web of colored filters plastered to the skylight over the main atrium.

“But this space is even crazier than the Guggenheim,” he said. “The Guggenheim looks very traditional compared to this one.”

Mr. Buren has other plans for the Louis Vuitton Foundation. On June 2 to 4, he will stage a series of performances in what he calls the BurenCirque in three tents on the building’s lawn.

“This circus has nothing to do with the circus you saw when you were young,” he said, describing the events as “somewhere between poetry and philosophy.”

Inside each tent, which can accommodate up to 150 people, Mr. Buren has asked his performers to react to the space — a square, topped by a cone — and to the expanses of primary colors. The shows will take place simultaneously, so that sounds from one will be audible in the next, creating a multisensory experience.

But what would Mr. Gehry think of all the modifications — albeit temporary — to his design, which he described as a “work in progress” soon after its completion.

“The building was designed to allow artists to work in between the glass and the solid parts of the building — the icebergs,” Mr. Gehry said on Thursday in an email. “I had always hoped that the foundation would allow artists to take on the space in different ways.”

“Knowing Daniel’s work, I knew he would not be timid,” he added.

Mr. Buren said it was the architect who had asked him to do the project, although Mr. Gehry had not yet seen the colorful panels.

“Of course, I am not working with him directly, because I am working with his architecture,” Mr. Buren said. “But in a certain way I am working with him.”


