


SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea said Wednesday that it would open the seventh congress of its ruling Workers’ Party next week. It will be the country’s biggest political convention in more than three decades and a likely platform for its leader, Kim Jong-un, to cement his authority.

The party faced a “task of advancing the final victory of its revolution under the leadership of Kim Jong-un,” its Politburo said, announcing that the congress, the first since 1980, would begin next Friday.

Mr. Kim already oversees the party as its first secretary. In recent weeks, towns and provinces in North Korea have held party meetings to elect delegates to be sent to the congress in Pyongyang, the capital. They all adopted a motion to uphold Mr. Kim as the party leader.

The congress is expected to last several days. It will probably review or change party lines and elect new leaders, said Jeong Joon-hee, a government spokesman for the South, referring to the role of the congress as defined in the charter of the Workers’ Party.

Under the one-party rule of North Korea, the congress is, in theory, the country’s highest decision-making body. The rare gathering allows Mr. Kim to put his stamp on the party and formally usher in his era by filling its congress with handpicked loyalists, South Korean analysts said.

Mr. Kim’s grandfather, President Kim Il-sung, founded the North’s government after the Korean Peninsula was liberated from Japanese colonial rule at the end of World War II. Mr. Kim took over the dynastic rule after his father, Kim Jong-il, died in 2011.

During its last party congress, in 1980, North Korea elevated the status of Mr. Kim’s father as heir apparent by showering him with crucial party posts.

Mr. Kim already holds top posts in the party and military. He has also reshuffled the elites in his government with a series of purges and executions. Some analysts in the South said the congress would serve as more of an occasion to celebrate Mr. Kim’s authority than to institute major changes in leadership.

But one function of the congress is to elect a new Central Committee, which could prompt changes in other important party organs like the Politburo.

In recent months, the North Korean military, the Workers’ Party and the administration began a number of construction and other projects to be finished in time to celebrate the congress.

Mr. Kim has shown up frequently to watch missile tests and what his government has called the successful tests of technologies, including a new rocket engine, needed to make nuclear-tipped long-range missiles as a deterrent against invasion by the United States.

Under Mr. Kim, the Workers’ Party has been regaining some of the economic and other powers, including the right to trade in minerals, that it had ceded to the military under his father, who championed a “military-first” policy, analysts and officials here said.


