


The interior designer Samuel Amoia lives in Manhattan, but these days his thoughts often stray to the beach. That’s because one of his largest projects is Itz’ana, a resort and residential development in Belize opening later this year.

The design is a mix of Spanish and British colonial styles and “a beach vibe” that celebrates indoor-outdoor living, said Mr. Amoia, 33, who worked for the hotelier André Balazs and the designer Stephen Sills before founding his own company in 2012. “Every room has an outdoor chaise, sofa and dining table.”

But when it comes to relaxing outside, he added, it’s the chaise longue that matters most.

Mr. Amoia isn’t doing much relaxing himself these days. In addition to his work in Belize, he just introduced a collection of furniture at DeLorenzo Gallery in New York, and will receive a Rising Talent award at Maison&Objet Americas, the design fair running from May 10 to 13 in Miami Beach. But for those who do have time to relax, Mr. Amoia offered a few tips on choosing an outdoor chaise longue.

• Think about how you’ll use your outdoor space. If it will be both a social gathering space and a place for sunbathing, you need a chaise that offers an upright sitting position and can also function as a bench when flat.

• Do you plan to move the chaise around? If so, weight is a consideration — and wheels are desirable.

• How much maintenance are you willing to do? Some chaise longues need more cleaning and upkeep than others, and some also require covers when not in use.

Portside Lounger | $549 at West Elm; (888) 922-4119 or westelm.com

The wire-brushed weathered gray finish of this model, Mr. Amoia said, “is simply beautiful.” And with its spare, muscular shape, he added, it could be used just about anywhere: “It has a nice urban feel to it, but could easily work in the country or at the beach.”

522 Toyko Chaise Longue | from $5,795 at Cassina; (212) 228-8186 or cassina.com

This piece was designed by Charlotte Perriand in 1940, “but she was way ahead of her time,” Mr. Amoia said. “There’s something very contemporary or futuristic about it, even though it also has a heritage look.” And having stood the test of time, he said, “it’s a really good investment.”

Grid Chaise | $3,363 at Design Within Reach; (800) 944-2233 or dwr.com

Mr. Amoia admires this chaise longue by Henrik Pedersen for its mix of materials, an amalgam of contrasting elements that makes it seem on trend. “This strong, dark fabric with the teak wood and wheels, and a metal frame, is very now,” he said. “I also love the integrated table for your drink.”

Reeded Armless Chaise | From $5,200 at Sutherland; (212) 871-9717 or sutherlandfurniture.com

This teak chaise by John Hutton has clean, timeless lines, and can be easily adjusted to suit different uses, Mr. Amoia noted. “You could use it flat as a little sofa or daybed with lots of pillows, and then pop it up to get a suntan.”

Ave Chaise | from $18,000 at Todd Merrill; (212) 673-0531 or toddmerrillstudio.com

“This is not something you’d lie in to relax for a long time,” Mr. Amoia said, but as a sculptural element, it would add excitement to a backyard. “It would be great in a garden.” Designed by Soraya Osorio, it is suitable for outdoor use in aluminum or with a powder-coated finish.


