


The New York City Education Department is expected to announce a plan on Thursday to help black and Hispanic students gain acceptance to some of the most competitive high schools.

There are eight specialized high schools in the city, like Stuyvesant and Brooklyn Technical High School, that admit students based solely on their performance on a single assessment, the Specialized High School Admissions Test. But while black and Hispanic students make up 68 percent of the city’s public school students, they are just 11 percent of the students at these academically rigorous schools. Asian students make up about 54 percent of those admitted, and whites 27 percent.

At Stuyvesant, which historically requires the highest score for acceptance, black students earned 10 of the 953 seats in 2015.

The NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund filed a complaint in 2012 with the federal Education Department calling the admissions process at the schools racially biased.

The city cannot change the admissions criterion at these schools; that would require an act of the State Legislature. So in an effort to diversify them, the de Blasio administration hopes to help more students pass the existing hurdles.

Many of those who gain admission take intensive test preparation courses, so the city will expand free tutoring and offer test prep through after-school programs at middle schools.

Because black and Latino students take the test at a much lower rate than their white and Asian peers — 22 percent compared with 52 percent — the Education Department will hire up to five outreach workers to recruit more students from underrepresented groups. And this fall, the city will give the admissions test during the school day at five pilot schools, rather than asking students to travel to another testing site on a weekend, when they might have other obligations.

“Our specialized high schools need to better reflect the diversity of our neighborhoods and our city while maintaining their high standards, and this strong package of reforms is an important step forward,” said Mayor Bill de Blasio. His son, Dante, attended Brooklyn Technical.

The city’s program of outreach and test preparation will cost $15 million over the next four years and it will begin this summer, to prepare students for the October test.

Earlier this year, a group of Democratic state legislators introduced their own plan to diversify specialized schools, a package of initiatives that also included recruiting underrepresented students.

The city’s ninth specialized school, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, uses auditions in its admissions.


