


On Wednesday, the producers of the megahit musical “Hamilton” announced that they were raising the price for premium seats to $849. The news sparked debate among Times readers about the continued high cost of going to Broadway, and what should be done to combat scalpers from making a killing.

Many readers expressed dismay that the new pricing would put tickets out of reach for many people.

“As a New Yorker who used to go to the theater regularly, the economics of this ‘premium ticket’ pricing causes me to stay home. I can pay it, BUT I WON’T,” said Benjamin of New York. “I remember when ‘Miss Saigon’ prices were over $100 in ’91; this pricing was not replicated because it was difficult to sell seats. A lottery for a high demand show like ‘Hamilton’ is absurd. This show has been so hyped, and with good reason, but the prices are unrealistic for the masses. This will be the beginning of the end of Broadway if this pricing is allowed to persist.”

“It used to be when we talked about the high prices of Broadway we meant the actual face value of a ticket,” wrote jch of New York. “In these late days of vulture capitalism we’d be happy to pay that. It’s a vexing problem and is not the fault of Mr. Miranda or the producers: it’s robots, the internet, income inequality, in other words — it’s our future.”

“Now we know why many folks in the east, particularly in new york, are against raising the minimum wage to $15 per hour (effective in a few years),” said jb of St. Louis. “These many folks need to save money so they can pay $849 per seat to a show.”

“To pay $849 for a single theater ticket is simply obscene,” wrote LIChef. “It goes to show how more and more regular aspects of life are being appropriated by and tilted toward the rich. I can still remember the days when just about anyone could afford a Broadway production and there were no special VIP tickets beyond regular orchestra seats.”

“Greed. Greed. Greed. Period,” wrote Peter of New York.

Others appeared more understanding that exorbitant ticket prices might be the new normal on Broadway.

“They should! Supply and demand!,” wrote ASG of San Francisco. “If they don’t, then that extra money just goes to the ticket resellers when it should be going to the actors.”

Along with news of the price increase, the “Hamilton” producers announced they were more than doubling the number of tickets that would be sold for $10 apiece on the day of performance. Some readers were thankful:

Other readers didn’t begrudge the show’s creators from making it rain.

One reader wondered what Alexander Hamilton himself would have made of the whole thing.

“While I understand Mr. Seller is upset to be missing out on so much money to the scalpers he should have the courage to be honest about this goals with this price increase,” said Greg Maughan of Philadelphia, referring to Jeffrey Seller, the lead producer of “Hamilton.” “After all, his musical’s namesake was an avowed elitist who would no doubt have liked to know maximum profit was being squeezed from its audience.”


