


“Fun Home,” the poignant family drama that overcame enormous skepticism about its Broadway viability to win last year’s Tony Award for best new musical, will close in September, the show’s producers said on Tuesday.

The musical, a true story about a lesbian cartoonist trying to understand her father’s suicide, was the against-all-odds triumph that Broadway occasionally loves, recouping its capitalization and booking a national tour. But despite the awards and acclaim, it was unable to build the audience necessary for a multiyear run on Broadway; its weekly grosses, which topped out at $817,665 last July, had dropped to $313,556 last week.

The show is scheduled to close on Sept. 10, at which point it will have played 26 preview and 582 regular performances. The tour begins in Cleveland in October, and at least one foreign production, starring Lea Salonga in the Philippines, has been licensed.

“Fun Home” is an adaptation of a graphic memoir by Alison Bechdel, and in the musical, three actresses portray her: as a child, as a college student and as an adult cartoonist.

The story is unusual in its specifics: The Bechdel family ran a funeral home (the “fun home” of the show’s title) in rural Pennsylvania, and when Ms. Bechdel, as a college student, came out as a lesbian, her mother informed her that her father had been sexually involved with men; her father went on to commit suicide. But the musical succeeded partly because audiences found many of its themes of family relationships universal; its writers often said that the show was for anyone who had a parent, and anyone who had a child.

“Fun Home” was nominated for 12 Tony Awards, and won five, for best new musical, for best book (by Lisa Kron), for best score (music by Jeanine Tesori and lyrics by Ms. Kron), for best performance by a leading actor in a musical (Michael Cerveris), and for best direction of a musical (Sam Gold). It was the first show with an all-female writing team to win the best musical Tony, and the first Broadway musical with a lesbian protagonist, according to the producers.

The show began its life with developmental workshops and an Off Broadway production at the Public Theater in New York. The lead producers are Kristin Caskey, Mike Isaacson and Barbara Whitman.


