


Troy Brouwer tapped in his own rebound to break a third-period tie, and the Blues advanced to the second round of the playoffs for the first time in four seasons, eliminating the defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks, 3-2, in Game 7 of their Western Conference quarterfinal series Monday night in St. Louis.

Brouwer, who played for the Blackhawks’ Cup winner in 2010 and was among the veteran additions to a team trying to break through, swiped in a backhander. The goal, 8 minutes 31 seconds into the third, was his first in 24 postseason games since 2013.

Chicago just missed a chance to tie the game when Brent Seabrook’s shot went off both posts with about 3:30 left.

The Blues advanced past the first round for the first time since 2012, when they beat San Jose in five games but then lost four straight to Los Angeles.

Jori Lehtera scored his first career playoff goal, and the rookie defenseman Colton Parayko also scored for the Blues, who avoided another inglorious finish. They led by 2-0 early before the Blackhawks tied it in the second.

Marian Hossa scored his third goal of the series, and Andrew Shaw got his fourth on a power play for the Blackhawks. Patrick Kane was dangerous all night but was scoreless.

The Blackhawks have won three of the last five Cups — but when they do not win it all, the postseason can be a short one, with three first-round eliminations the last six seasons.

Brouwer, playing in his seventh career Game 7, scored from close range off a feed from Robby Fabbri. The first shot went off the right post, and he nudged the second past Corey Crawford.

St. Louis was coached by the Blackhawks’ Joel Quenneville the last time it played in a Game 7, a loss at Vancouver in 2003.

The Game 7 win on Monday was the franchise’s first since 1999.

PREDATORS 3, DUCKS 1 James Neal scored the winning goal late in the second period, and Nashville held on to beat visiting Anaheim and force the first Game 7 in franchise history.

The Predators had lost the previous five Game 6s when needing a win to stay alive in the playoffs, and they ended a three-game skid against the Ducks to force this series back to Anaheim for the deciding game Wednesday night.

Shea Weber had an empty-net goal with 10 seconds left off an assist by Neal. Mattias Ekholm also scored a goal, and Pekka Rinne made 26 saves for the win.

Ryan Kesler scored a power-play goal for the Ducks, who now are 8-6 in Game 6s. They return to Anaheim, where they lost their last Game 7, a year ago.

Rinne, who had been struggling in this series, came up big late. He stopped Corey Perry on a point-blank shot from in front with 6:40 left and turned away David Perron’s wrister with less than three minutes to go.


