


RE: TRUMP

Robert Draper traveled with the Trump campaign in the weeks before the Indiana primary as both America and Trump himself began to come to terms with the fact that he would most likely secure the G.O.P. nomination.

Many stories have already been written on Trump. I am baffled and deeply disappointed that the loud male dominates over the brilliant female in Times coverage. Hillary Clinton is the first woman who will likely be a nominee for president. She has had a brilliant career to date. Is there nothing interesting to write about? The First Words column on the meaning of “presidential” briefly touched on how a female president might change that perception, but it would have made for a much more interesting focus. What about a piece on the women in Hillary’s life, her childhood, her college years? How about a definitive review of all of the Benghazi investigations that have revealed no wrongdoing on Hillary’s part? An article on the unique qualities of women in powerful government roles would be a fascinating read. Audrey Rabinowitz, Chappaqua, N.Y.

Most of Donald’s quotes in this article can be summed up in two ideas:

“I win/won XYZ.”

“I have the best XYZ.”

He sounds like a child, desperate for attention. Being president is so much more complicated than that, and the fact that people don’t seem to realize it is astonishing. Managing a hotel and a golf course is not running a country; he has no knowledge at all of the world or how government works.

I wouldn’t want a chef doing my surgery just because he’s held a knife anymore than I would want Donald Trump running my country just because he’s owned a business. Holly Belli, Glen Ridge, N.J.

RE: CANCER

For the Health Issue, we considered the new anatomy of cancer in several articles.

Almost 30 years after my own cancer diagnosis, and a lifetime as an advocate, it mattered a lot to hear the new cancer leaders Siddhartha Mukherjee and Jochen Lorch talking about the moral consequences of personalized medicine. The cancer issue so thoughtfully explored how both health care professionals and patients see this new frontier as a bold shift away from the “one size fits all” cancer care of the past to focusing on both the individual and the individual’s DNA.

Building public trust and confidence is key to being able to collect the molecular data that is the foundation of personalized medicine, and to ensure that new health technologies are made available in a timely and equitable manner. This is the future every cancer patient and every oncologist wants. Pat Kelly, Asheville, N.C.

I was riveted by the clear, concise language in the cancer issue. For many of us, the word “cancer” itself generates fear and anguish. I read the words “non-Hodgkin lymphoma” and immediately think of my father who, 30 years ago this month, underwent his last chemotherapy treatment a month before slowly walking me down the aisle at my wedding; he passed away a year later. I think of my husband, diagnosed with the same type of cancer 12 years ago, receiving treatment in Manhattan. I remember finding parking early in the morning, and then driving him home in the dark after his long chemotherapy treatments. He’s well, and I’ve now mastered the art of alternate-side-of-the-street parking.

However, within the brief, precise descriptions of the various types of cancer and reading the excruciating yet hopeful stories of cancer victims and their families, I felt a sense of calm and empowerment. I realized that cancer itself doesn’t always mean suffering and death. It can also connote strength, bravery and hope. Anne G. Barretta, Cresskill, N.J.

“When Do You Give Up on Treating a Child With Cancer” is a remarkable story. This beautiful article reinforces the notion that people with cancer forever live with uncertainty, and hope should never be abandoned. In my practice as a psychiatrist, I witness many giving up hope prematurely based on demoralization from poor prognoses that are frequently defied. In Andrew’s case, the decision to switch to palliative treatment was the most humane choice at the time. Continued advancement of science and the artful application of it can keep curative hopes alive for children like Andrew. Jeffrey B. Freedman, New York


