


The Republican National Committee has named six people to its finance committee to help raise money for the party and for its presumptive presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, as it looks to raise roughly $1 billion over the next six months.

The financial vice chairmen include Woody Johnson, the New York Jets football owner, and former Ambassador Mel Sembler, of Florida, two major supporters of Jeb Bush’s failed presidential campaign. The other four are: Elliott Broidy, a California-based venture capitalist; Ray Washburne, a former R.N.C. finance chairman who raised money for Gov. Chris Christie’s presidential race; Diane Hendricks, the widow of the philanthropist Ken Hendricks; and Ronald Weiser, another former ambassador who also served as an R.N.C. finance chairman.

Mr. Trump is facing a well-financed opposition and has no donor network of his own to draw on. His national finance chairman, Steve Mnuchin, is a former Goldman Sachs executive who is working with the R.N.C. finance chairman, Lewis M. Eisenberg.

Mr. Trump met on Monday with Mr. Johnson, a longtime friend whom Mr. Trump nonetheless poked fun at for backing Mr. Bush early in the year. The two mended fences.

Individual donors and their ability to write large checks are themselves a significant force, but so are bundlers, who have wide networks of fellow wealthy donors to tap into. Mr. Trump’s campaign can only accept contributions of $5,400 until the party convention July 18-21 in Cleveland. After that, the campaign can only accept checks of $2,700.

On the list of bundlers who will be part of a “presidential trust” are Joe Craft, a Kentucky coal baron who met with Mr. Trump in his office a week ago, and his wife, Kelly. The list also includes former Ambassador Sam Fox; Diana and E. Llwyd Ecclestone; former Ambassador Howard Leach, an appointee under President George W. Bush; Dee and Andy Puzder, of California; and Wilbur Ross, of New York.

Mr. Trump will face resistance from some of the Republicans’ largest benefactors, who have deep networks of their own to turn to. Several of the party’s biggest donors, including the hedge fund executive Paul Singer and the businessman Bruce Kovner, have said they will not support Mr. Trump or raise money for him.

Others, including the energy executive Robert Murray, who has been critical of President Obama, said this week that he met with Mr. Trump and sees him as “the horse to ride.”


