


The watercolorist Lilias Trotter devoted her life to charity and missionary work, although her mentor, the philosopher and critic John Ruskin, advised her that she could become “England’s greatest living painter.” She met Ruskin in the 1870s, when she was in her 20s, and he lavished compliments on her delicate sketches of children, landscapes and flowers. When he learned that she preferred to help the poor, he warned her that her paintings were “gradually getting debased” and showing signs of “real vulgarity.”

She eventually disappeared from his orbit altogether, serving for decades as a Christian missionary in Algeria. She kept painting, but until this year the art world knew little about her output.

Miriam Rockness, an independent scholar and blogger in Mount Dora, Fla., discovered Miss Trotter’s Christian writings three decades ago and then set out to unearth her artworks, photographs, diaries and correspondence in scattered archives. Rediscovered journals, which have been repaired by the Conservation Center in Chicago, are on long-term view at Wheaton College in Illinois. Others will go on display June 2 at the new Storytellers Museum near Nashville, owned by the book and memorabilia collectors Brian and Sally Oxley. The Oxleys also were executive producers of a new documentary, “Many Beautiful Things: The Life and Vision of Lilias Trotter,” featuring the actress Michelle Dockery (Lady Mary on “Downton Abbey”) reading quotations from Miss Trotter’s writings.

Ms. Rockness said in an interview that Miss Trotter’s family did not understand why she abandoned a career that Ruskin would have fostered. “I think she had a freedom in North Africa that she would never have had in England,” Ms. Rockness added.

Miss Trotter, a daughter of a London stockbroker, met Ruskin in 1876 while they were staying at the same hotel in Venice. He was mourning the death of Rose La Touche, a young Irishwoman he had become infatuated with when she was around 10. After their meeting, he began to praise Miss Trotter’s artwork in his lectures as proof that “women can paint.” She visited him at his expansive home in Cumbria, in northwest England. Their affectionate correspondence lasted for two decades; he died in 1900 at age 80. Some have speculated that they were lovers.

In the 1880s, she began volunteering in London to help homeless prostitutes, among other downtrodden groups. He urged her to console him instead; “I’m bad enough” to need help seeking salvation, he wrote her.

In 1888, she set off for Algeria, where she helped set up schools and tended impoverished families and Sufi mystics. She learned Arabic and lived in mud-brick homes. She published religious tracts, and she incorporated snapshots and watercolors into her journals alongside rhapsodic descriptions of Algerian scenery. “The desert is lovely in its restfulness — the great brooding stillness over and through everything is so full of God,” she wrote in 1895.

In speaking about Christianity with Algerian Muslims, “She would find their common ground” rather than proselytize, Ms. Rockness said. Miss Trotter returned to Britain occasionally, to recover from episodes of exhaustion. In her last years, largely bedridden, she kept sketching in pencil.

After her death in 1928 at the age of 75, her relatives stored some of her artwork in boxes. (The Oxleys purchased part of that trove in 2013 while collaborating with Ms. Rockness on the documentary.) In the Ashmolean Museum of Art and Archaeology at Oxford, two dozen of her sketches and paintings are filed with Ruskin material. Papers and artworks that she left behind in Algeria, which were taken to missionaries’ offices in Britain in the 1980s, are now being transferred to the University of London’s library. (Miss Trotter’s watercolors have also appeared on the market, priced at over $1,000 each.)

Ruskin’s writings to her have recently surfaced at institutions, including the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin and Baylor University’s library.

The Oxleys’ museum, in Bon Aqua, Tenn., will also display their collections of Bibles and artifacts related to C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien and Johnny Cash. (The property formerly belonged to Mr. Cash.) Brian Oxley pointed out the odd coincidence that a few miles from Bon Aqua are the remains of the Ruskin Colony, a short-lived utopian socialist community founded in the 1890s and based on Ruskin’s writings.

Centennial commemorations of World War I have brought renewed attention to the German artist Käthe Kollwitz, who initially supported the war. Her younger son, Peter, who had enlisted in the German Army with her encouragement, was killed in 1914 on a Belgian battlefield. He was only 18. For the next three decades, her works reflected her grief, bitterness and antiwar stance.

A new book, “Käthe Kollwitz: The Sculptures — Catalogue Raisonné (Part One)” (Hirmer), by Annette Seeler, documents Ms. Kollwitz’s work in bronze, zinc, plaster, stucco and stone, including tableaus of fatherless children and of female mourners with fists skyward. In many cases, only photographs of the works have turned up; Ms. Kollwitz destroyed her own pieces out of dissatisfaction, and wartime bombings compounded the losses.

Through June 5, the Käthe Kollwitz Museum in Cologne, Germany, is displaying about 50 of her sculptures. In the galleries, mirrors and lights are angled so visitors can peer into the bronze castings’ hollow interiors. Other sculptures are on view at the Käthe Kollwitz Museum in Berlin. The online version of Ms. Seeler’s catalog of Kollwitz sculptures shows close-ups of deeply gouged surfaces. The artworks are at institutions like the National Gallery of Art in Washington, in private collections and at galleries, including Galerie St. Etienne in New York.

Ms. Seeler wrote about Ms. Kollwitz’s cemetery war memorials for the essay collection “Käthe Kollwitz and the Women of War: Femininity, Identity, and Art in Germany During World Wars I and II” (Yale University Press), edited by Claire C. Whitner, the senior curator at Wellesley College’s Davis Museum. The book is the catalog for a show last fall at the Davis Museum of Kollwitz prints, drawings and sculptures related to World War I, and for an exhibition through May 29 at the Smith College Museum of Art, “Mothers’ Arms: Käthe Kollwitz’s Women and War.”

Ms. Seeler said that the online catalog would be updated as new findings emerge.


