


Q. I vaguely recall an old political story that compared Franklin D. Roosevelt to the Staten Island Ferry. Could you tell me how it goes?

A. There are several versions of that story, but perhaps the most famous involves Hyman Schorenstein, a longtime Brooklyn Democratic district leader and the boss of Brownsville early last century. (A word about Mr. Schorenstein: After World War I, he helped keep Brownsville’s Jewish population firmly Democratic and away from the Socialists. For this he was put on the payroll as the county’s register of deeds, Elliot Willensky wrote in “When Brooklyn Was the World, 1920-1957,” published in 1986. Mr. Schorenstein could neither read nor write, but a challenge to remove him on those grounds failed when a judge ruled that he had been doing a fine job.)

A local Democratic candidate asked why he was getting no help with posters, lawn signs or anything else, when Mr. Schorenstein was plowing all the campaign money he controlled into the re-election of President Roosevelt, above. He explained it this way:

“Ah, you’re worried? Listen. Did you ever go down to the wharf to see the Staten Island Ferry come in? You ever watch it, and look down in the water at all those chewing-gum wrappers, and the banana peels and the garbage? When the ferryboat comes into the wharf, automatically it pulls all the garbage in, too. The name of your ferryboat is Franklin D. Roosevelt — stop worrying!”

That version came from “Jews in American Politics,” edited by L. Sandy Maisel and Ira N. Forman, who got it from Theodore H. White. Other versions have Mr. Schorenstein telling it when he was supporting Roosevelt for governor in 1928; still others say Mayor Jimmy Walker told it to Mr. Schorenstein.

But William Safire, in “Safire’s Political Dictionary” (2006), traces it back to the Republican National Convention of 1912, when supporters of former President Theodore Roosevelt and President William Howard Taft were battling. Columbia’s president, Nicholas Murray Butler, asked a Pennsylvania delegate how such a low class of people could have been selected to choose a presidential nominee. The delegate, Boies Penrose, supposedly replied, “Oh, those are the corks, bottles and banana peels washed up by the Roosevelt tide.”

Q. New York State has a Kings County (Brooklyn), a Queens County and a Dutchess County. Why doesn’t it have a Dukes County?

A. It used to, but Dukes County (comprising Martha’s Vineyard and the Elizabeth Islands to the northwest) is now part of Massachusetts.

In 1683, the royal counties of Kings (after King Charles II), Queens (after Queen Catherine of Braganza, his wife), Dutchess (after Mary of Modena, Duchess of York) and Dukes (after the Duke of York) were created as administrative entities of the province of New York. In 1685, the Duke of York was crowned King James II. That year he formed the Dominion of New England, which combined the Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth Colonies. Martha’s Vineyard was made part of the dominion, according to “The History of Martha’s Vineyard,” by Arthur R. Railton (2006). Squabbling continued for several years over which colony Dukes County belonged to, but Massachusetts won.


