


“Shuffle Along, or the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed” recently made a disappointing announcement: Because Audra McDonald, this Broadway musical’s biggest star, is pregnant, she will soon leave the cast. But tucked inside that bulletin was some potentially compensatory news: Savion Glover, the show’s Tony-nominated choreographer, will step in.

The trouble is that it’s not at all obvious where the show’s director and writer, George C. Wolfe, can put this virtuoso hoofer. “Shuffle Along” has no role for a star dancer.

[ Ben Brantley calls “Shuffle Along” “one of the season’s essential tickets” ]

That’s one way it differs from Mr. Wolfe’s 1992 musical, “Jelly’s Last Jam,” which starred the tap master Gregory Hines (with a plum part for the young Mr. Glover), and Mr. Wolfe’s 1996 production, “Bring in ’da Noise, Bring in ’da Funk,” which starred Mr. Glover (whose choreography won a Tony that year). More important, in those shows, tap — customarily used as Broadway shorthand for high spirits and razzmatazz — also expressed anger and pain. Most innovatively, it served as metaphor, expressing the productions’ ideas about African-American history with greater eloquence, subtlety and direct appeal than their sometimes tendentious scripts. The teaming up of Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Glover for the first time in 20 years raised the prospect that this dropped line of development might be picked up again.

The show does have stars who dance, an abundance of them. Its “making of” story requires four male leads: the composers, lyricists and comedians who created the original “Shuffle Along,” one of the first black musicals on Broadway. One distinct charm of the current production is how the highly talented actor-singers who play those roles strut a little stiffly or manage a nifty soft shoe as they deliver the old songs. And to see that Ms. McDonald, whose singing and acting have long been established as extraordinary, can also tap — with style, not faking, her rhythms secure, even when exposed — is a pleasure like a needlessly extravagant gift.

None of these fine performers, though, are great dancers, much less in the hall-of-fame ranks of Mr. Glover and Mr. Hines, who died in 2003. This is one way that the new “Shuffle Along” is true to the original. The cast of 1921 included a couple of tap specialists who played Uncle Tom and Old Black Joe, bit parts not reprised in the current production, but the leads and the secondary players who became stars (like Florence Mills) were comics and singers who could dance some.

The new “Shuffle Along” argues that one of the ways the original “changed Broadway forever” is that the chorus girls, in contrast to the promenading showgirls of white revues, really danced, throwing around their hips and feet in jazz rhythm. This holds water. Reviews of the first “Shuffle Along” — and of the many black musicals and revues that flooded Broadway in the wake of its success — habitually remarked upon the superiority of black chorus dancers. The verve and abandon of their fast and furious dancing made white versions look tame.

This is one argument that the current “Shuffle Along” makes by showing, rather than just asserting. Its chorus is as bursting with pep as the 1921 version was said to be. Its momentum is persuasive. And at the end of the first act, when opening night is recreated, and the talent keeps crashing forward in wave after wave — the chorus girls, the chorus boys, the barbershop quartet, the principals — you can imagine the impact of the original and what made it cross over.

It isn’t the original, of course. Mr. Wolfe chose not to use any of the old script (a convention-ridden comedy that even critics of 1921 complained about). Mr. Glover didn’t have a choice: The 1921 choreography is as forgotten as its choreographer, Lawrence Deas. Mr. Glover’s choreography, like the musical arrangements, isn’t punctilious about period style. It samples freely from “all that followed,” all that Mr. Glover inherited from older performers. But, as a vision of 1921 for 2016, it works.

What it doesn’t do, though, is extend the choreographic development of “Jelly’s Last Jam” and “Bring in ’da Noise.” Mr. Glover’s choreography for “Shuffle Along” is less ambitious and more derivative. In one number, Ms. McDonald’s character jazzes up a waltz by directing a chorus boy to tap some swinging rhythms for her. It’s O.K., but it pales in comparison with what Mr. Hines did in the very similar “That’s How You Jazz” number in “Jelly’s.”

In the second act, when the creative team has split into two rival shows, Mr. Glover stages an ensemble challenge dance. It gets the idea across, but it’s not much more than a shouting match, and it’s nowhere near the fusion of virtuosity and significance conveyed in the challenge dance between Mr. Glover and Mr. Hines in “Jelly’s,” a duet for a man and his younger self.

In the show’s best dance number, the chorus becomes the train on which they ride from town to town in a slogging series of one-night appearances. As their feet tap propulsive train rhythms, their bodies convey cramped discomfort, the determination and the arduous journey. But even this number ends before it can arrive anywhere new, and unlike Mr. Glover’s train solo in “Bring in ’da Noise,” it lacks poignancy, the sense of a black man leaving his Southern home for who knows what in the North.

The emotional range of the dancing in “Shuffle Along” is also narrower. There’s a lot of angry tap, especially in the weaker second act. In an absurdly premised number about how George Gershwin stole four notes from the composer William Grant Still (who played in the original “Shuffle Along” orchestra), the dancer playing Still taps an angry solo. It’s an idea that would work only as metaphor — standing for everything that white artists did steal from black ones — yet the dancing is too constricted to make the metaphor resonate. With Mr. Glover playing that tiny part, it would certainly have more power, but probably too much.

There isn’t a natural place for Mr. Glover in the “Shuffle Along” he has choreographed. There’s no dance equivalent of the tour-de-force emotional breakdown solos sung by Ms. McDonald and Billy Porter. And that absence speaks to what the dancing in “Shuffle Along” doesn’t do.

“Jelly’s” and “Bring in ’da Noise” had second-act problems, too, but the choreography had an understory that almost achieved through implication what the exposition missed. In the reviews of the new “Shuffle Along,” there has been an apparently similar but actually distinct idea: that even if the script has problems, the dancing carries the day. Critics said the same in 1921. It’s easy to understand where the compliment comes from. The pleasure provided by good dancing makes its own argument. But inside that praise is a kind of condescension — not to black artists, but to dance on Broadway and what it can be. There was reason to hope for more from Mr. Wolfe, and Mr. Glover.


