


Nothing says spring quite like a garden party with a dozen plutocrats, along with a handful of big stars. This was what happened two years ago when Madonna and Daniel Craig showed up to the Museum of Modern Art’s annual spring gala and rubbed shoulders with the financial world titans Michael R. Bloomberg and Henry Kravis.

But after a series of underwhelming auctions this winter and talk of a market correction, the crowd was a little more diffuse this year.

“The heavy hitters are not here like they usually are,” said Vanity Fair’s James Reginato, staring out into the crowd a little before 8 p.m. Wednesday. “It feels a little thin.”

It wasn’t a wash or anything. The collector Michael Ovitz was by the bar with his girlfriend, Tamara Mellon, who was posing for a selfie with Vera Wang. A few feet away was Chuck Close, having a cocktail. “What do you think it cost to raise this floor?” he asked rhetorically. “The first $500,000 in donations.”

By the step and repeat, Mark Bradford posed with his fellow artist Marilyn Minter.

At a pot-roast dinner inside the museum’s atrium, a jungle motif prevailed with greenery running down the walls.

Helen Mirren sat by Mr. Kravis. Near the makeshift stage, the photographers Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin greeted Brice Marden, who was being honored, along with his fellow artists Mr. Bradford and Huma Bhabha, as well as the collectors Sally and Wynn Kramarsky, and Amanda and Glenn Fuhrman.

Mr. Marden wore a black knit hat. And to the surprise of no one in attendance, he looked mildly uneasy with being the focus of so many congratulations. “I said ‘Why?’” he recalled. “Why me?” His speech was characteristically brief.

Few at dinner made it back outside for a late performance by Robyn, the Scandinavian disco diva.

The museum, it turned out, has good soundproofing, which meant that most did not hear the blare of the music and the screams of the venture capitalist types and their dolled-up girlfriends, who arrived during dessert for the after-party.

“We missed it?” said Fabiola Beracasa, walking outside just as Robyn finished her last song, “They should have announced it. Everyone would have come running out.”


