


HONG KONG — To buy a tiny but coveted apartment in the vertiginous towers of South Horizons, a middle-class housing development overlooking the South China Sea in the world’s most expensive real estate market, would cost a family about a million United States dollars.

These modest homes on Ap Lei Chau, Cantonese for Duck Tongue Island, are a reason that a seemingly far-off date — July 1, 2047 — is in fact pressingly close in Hong Kong. Under the Sino-British Joint Declaration governing the British colony’s return to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997, China agreed that Hong Kong would retain a high degree of autonomy, and its capitalist financial and legal system, for 50 years.

“The current social and economic systems in Hong Kong will remain unchanged, and so will the lifestyle,” the Joint Declaration said.

A simple calculation shows the problem: After July 1, 2017, a 30-year home mortgage cannot be paid off before July 1, 2047, when the declaration runs out and China’s promises expire along with it.

Hong Kong’s housing prices are as vertiginous as its towers, and many people struggle just to afford a mortgage — even the 30-year ones that banks increasingly offered as property prices rocketed over the past decade, said Lee Wing-tat, a former legislator and the chairman of Land Watch, a land and housing think tank.

“Now, if you do a 30-year mortgage arrangement, it’s from 2016 to 2046 — that’s still O.K.,” Mr. Lee said in an interview. But that could change, he said, predicting, “They will not lend out the money for a mortgage up to 2048.”

News outlets in Hong Kong have reported that most banks have yet to formulate policies for beyond 2047, and calls for the Hong Kong and Chinese governments to address the problem are mounting.

Adam Harper, a spokesman for HSBC, which was founded in Hong Kong in 1865 and prints most of the money in the territory, said the bank “monitors market and economic conditions carefully.”

Uncertainty is back, that bugbear of Hong Kong for decades amid the epochal changes surrounding the end of British colonial rule and today’s tensions over China’s plans for Hong Kong’s political future, which some say are too like the Communist system that is widely disliked here.

Just as in the 1980s, when the capitalist city looked nervously ahead to Communist rule, there is, once again, a focus on land and finance.

“The banking sector and the financial sector need clear certainties to invest in the Hong Kong market, in long-term infrastructure development and housing,” Mr. Lee said. “Unless in the coming five years Beijing has a clear policy for Hong Kong after 2047, if they can’t present a clear message, a safe message, there will be a negative effect on confidence.”

This time, though, land leases are a lesser cause for concern, he said. All land in Hong Kong is leased by the government to a buyer, a colonial government practice retained by the post-handover government.

As these leases expire, the government is already renewing beyond 2047, Mr. Lee said. “If you renew a lease today, they will extend to 2066.”

“It’s the usual practice,” he added. “It’s not 100 percent guaranteed.”

A spokeswoman for the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the city’s de facto central bank, wrote in an email that the Hong Kong government “has already indicated that it has constitutional rights to grant land lease with tenure beyond 2047.”

With regard to long-term mortgages, wrote the spokeswoman, who commented on condition of anonymity in keeping with the agency’s custom when stating official policy, “Banks should take into account the land tenure and other relevant factors.” She added, “Banks have not reflected any issues relating to land tenure to the H.K.M.A. so far.’’

“History repeats itself,” said Johannes Chan, a law professor at the University of Hong Kong. “In the 1980s, the banks were a prime driver for a solution.”

That demand for financial certainty led to the Joint Declaration and the legal framework, known as the Basic Law, that Britain and China agreed to for post-handover Hong Kong, which described the city’s rights for 50 years after 1997.

The Joint Declaration was the basis for the recovery of China’s sovereignty, and “it clearly stated that the Chinese policy was to let things go on for 50 years,” Mr. Chan said. “There is no promise for beyond 50 years. Thereafter it will relapse, because sovereignty has already been resumed.”

“The very basis of the Basic Law will be gone,” he said. “It could continue, or it could be changed.”

The decision is entirely up to China, he said. “At the moment I think it is fair to say that no one in the world knows what will happen in 2047,” Mr. Chan said.

And, without clarity, banks will quietly begin shrinking the time frame for mortgages, he predicted, “until the interest rates get too high with 15-year mortgages” and the risk of borrower default “is too great.”


