


MILAN — The common element to the eclectic group of works that Sam Havadtoy created for his exhibit “Only Remember the Future” at the Mudima Foundation here is not immediately noticeable to the eye.

Overpainted so it isn’t visible, lace envelops his paintings and sculptures like a delicately patterned second skin. It is a subtle reminder that despite a peripatetic life that at one point brought him to New York, where he was Yoko Ono’s companion for two decades after John Lennon’s death in 1980, Mr. Havadtoy’s roots are Hungarian.

In Hungary, Mr. Havadtoy said, “you find lace on the top of the TV, on the back of the armchair, on the sofa, everywhere. But once it gets soiled or ripped it gets thrown away” because it is seen as something of little value, a bit kitschy, rather than one of the earliest forms of female art and a time-intensive craft that dates back at least to ancient Egypt.

“I thought by putting it on canvases or statues, the viewer is confronted with something that they never knew as a source of beauty in their lives,” Mr. Havadtoy said during a stroll through the exhibit, which opened June 1 and runs through July 8.

Lace has become such a signature of Mr. Havadtoy’s work that visitors to his shows often bring him treasured lace heirlooms, so that they might live a second life in his art.

Mr. Havadtoy primes his canvases with handwritten personal stories that are then buried under layers of paint and lace so that they cannot be read. He described the process as a “confession that no one hears.”

“So the lace is a ritual, the final act of that story, moving on from that story,” he said.

As a storyteller, Mr. Havadtoy, 63, is at no loss for anecdotes. Born in London and raised in communist Hungary, he escaped through the Iron Curtain into Yugoslavia and on to Italy. From there he traveled to London. In the summer of 1972, he moved to New York to join a boyfriend and prospered as an interior designer until an encounter with Lennon and Ms. Ono steered his life in a new direction.

The couple came into the shop where he worked and selected two chairs. “I was included in the price,” he recalled with a laugh.

“I am the kind of person that if I see a door, I want to open it,” he said, walking around an installation titled “Doors,” a series of painted antique doors with the handles replaced by bulbous bronze self-portraits that he described as “my version of the 14 stations of the cross.”

It is a nod to the deeply rooted — if rarely followed — religious tradition of his newly adopted home, Italy, as well as a rumination on “the trials we go through in life.”

In this show, his own have been painstakingly written, concealed and consigned to posterity on canvases that pay a post-pointillist nod to Italian masters like Umberto Boccioni, Modigliani and Giorgio Morandi.

His association with Keith Haring, Andy Warhol and other luminaries of the New York art scene of the last decades of the 20th century might have informed his artistic development, but finding his own vision was complicated by his involvement with Ms. Ono, one of the world’s most recognized female artists. He only began making art full time in the mid-1980s, he said.

That said, Ms. Ono was an undoubted influence.

“Being with Yoko was like going through an extensive university course of life,” he said. “And I was the only student.”

“I may have taken too long,” he added. “Maybe I failed at many courses, but finally I graduated and came into my own. Like going to university, it’s a period that you would never replace with anything else, but there’s no point in going back to it, it’s done.”

After their breakup in 2000 — which he described as painful — Mr. Havadtoy moved to England and then back to Hungary, where he set up a studio in a town outside Budapest. Seven years ago he began visiting Italy more frequently, moving first to Liguria and then to Milan, where he now lives, commuting to Budapest.

“He’s authentic,” said Arturo Schwarz, an Italian art historian and curator.

“A real artist must be faithful to his inner self, and his art is very personal,” said Mr. Schwarz, who wrote an essay in the catalogue for Mr. Havadtoy’s show at Mudima. “It’s his own inner world; he’s sincere and truthful to himself.”

Since moving to Italy, Mr. Havadtoy said his mood — and his art — have become “happier” and his production has flourished. Just this year he will have shows in Milan, Budapest, Warsaw and Brussels. The Milan exhibition will travel to Budapest and Bucharest, he said.

Yet when he was asked when he thought he came into his own as an artist, Mr. Havadtoy laughed with gusto and said: “Any day now.”


