


The Iowa Supreme Court ruled in a split decision Friday that sentencing juveniles to life in prison without parole is unconstitutional because it amounts to cruel and unusual punishment.

In a 4-to-3 decision, Justice Brent Appel wrote that juvenile character is “a work in progress” and that courts should not preclude the chance for juvenile offenders to be released for good behavior by parole boards after they have fully matured. “We should not ask our district court judges to predict future prospects for maturation and rehabilitation when highly trained professionals say such predictions are impossible,” he wrote.

The ruling is the latest in a national trend away from harsh sentences for juveniles. The United States Supreme Court in recent years has banned the death penalty and mandatory sentences of life without parole for juvenile cases, and 16 states prohibit life-without-parole sentences for juveniles.

“The courts and state legislatures alike have agreed that life without any chance of parole is an inappropriate sentence for a child,” said Joshua Rovner, who focuses on juvenile crime for the Sentencing Project, a Washington-based nonprofit group that lobbies for reduced sentences in juvenile and drug cases.

“There is a widespread understanding now, with scientific research backing up our own common sense, that juveniles are not adults, and shouldn’t be treated that way,” he said. “Adolescence is not a permanent condition, and the courts are recognizing this.”

The Iowa case centered on Isaiah Sweet, who was 17 when he murdered his grandparents with an assault rifle. His conviction in 2012 was the first in Iowa after a Supreme Court decision, Miller v. Alabama, that declared that juveniles convicted of murder may not automatically be given life sentences, and that judges must take individual circumstances, including age and background, into account.

At sentencing, the judge in the Sweet case imposed the maximum penalty because the crime was “horrific and showed utter lack of humanity,” and said Mr. Sweet would probably pose a continued threat to society, according to the appeals court ruling Friday.

But a psychologist who testified at sentencing said that Mr. Sweet’s chances of rehabilitation were “mixed,” and that his prospects were not likely to become clear until age 30.

With such uncertainty, Justice Appel wrote, it is impossible “to determine whether the offender is ‘irretrievably corrupt’ at a time when even trained professionals with years of clinical experience would not attempt to make such a determination.” He said future parole boards would be better suited to make the determination.

In a dissenting opinion, Justice Edward Mansfield said the court was overstepping its role, writing that the “inherent uncertainty regarding future prospects for rehabilitation is simply an insufficient basis for supplanting the judgment of our elected representatives.”

Mr. Sweet’s case has been remanded to a lower court for resentencing.

Almost 40 other juveniles sentenced to life without parole in Iowa will also have their sentences reduced, said Shellie Knipfer, a lawyer who represented Mr. Sweet.

She said that in 20 years as a public defender, she had seen the law gradually move away from tough mandatory sentences and treating juveniles as adults.

“In the 1990s, we had this get-tough-on-crime idea, this idea of supercriminals,” she said. “Then we suddenly realized maybe it wasn’t the right way to approach it. We need to look at the circumstances and treat people as individuals.”


