


Fourteen Russian athletes who competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing are suspected of having used banned substances during the Games, the Russian Olympic Committee said Tuesday.

The International Olympic Committee announced last week that it had retested 454 doping samples from the Beijing Games, and identified 31 athletes from 12 countries in six sports with suspicious results. The 12 nations’ Olympic committees were to be notified in following days, the I.O.C. said.

On Tuesday, Russian Olympic officials said they had received documents from the I.O.C. implicating 14 of the country’s athletes who competed across three sports in Beijing, accounting for nearly half of the Olympians under new scrutiny for doping at the 2008 Games.

Olympic officials declined to identify the athletes until their additional samples from Beijing — stored separately, for quality control — had been checked and official disciplinary proceedings had begun.

On Tuesday, however, Russian state television named 14 athletes, including 10 Olympic medalists, whom it identified as the athletes in question: 11 track and field athletes, two weight lifters and a rower.

Earlier this month, Grigory Rodchenkov, the chemist who ran Russia’s antidoping lab for a decade, detailed an elaborate government-run doping program that he said he helped carry out to ensure Russia’s dominance in international competition.

According to Dr. Rodchenkov, top Russian athletes used performance-enhancing drugs leading to the Beijing Games and the Summer Games in London in 2012, and throughout the course of the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, which Russia hosted. He said he had developed a three-drug cocktail of anabolic steroids and liquor that Russia’s medal contenders used to help accelerate their recovery from grueling workouts.

At Sochi, Dr. Rodchenkov said, Russia focused its efforts not on masking the presence of drugs in an athlete’s system or evading detection through subtle chemistry, but rather on substituting urine samples, a more brazen way to beat the system. Each night, he said, he and a small team swapped out Russian athletes’ tainted urine for clean urine, collected from the athletes in the months leading to the Games and passed surreptitiously through a hole in the wall of the lab building.

Dmitry S. Peskov, a spokesman for President Vladimir V. Putin, has denied the allegations and called Dr. Rodchenkov’s account “slander by a turncoat.”

Russia’s sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, has also denied the allegations while expressing broad contrition. Mr. Mutko has acknowledged “serious mistakes,” but he has stopped short of specifying them or admitting to any state role.

In a statement on Tuesday, the sports ministry said it was “extremely disappointed to hear the speculation that Russian athletes are among those found to have violated antidoping rules at the 2008 Beijing Olympics,” adding, “We have taken numerous steps to eradicate the issue of doping, and understand that the roots of the problem, particularly in athletics, go back to the past.”

Last fall, Russian track and field athletes were banned from global competition after a report published by the World Anti-Doping Agency accused the country of widespread doping. In June, the sport’s governing body will convene to decide whether to lift that ban ahead of the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, which start on Aug. 5.

The All-Russia Athletics Federation, which oversees the country’s track and field athletes, posted a statement on its website Tuesday, noting that it would not allow athletes with a history of drug violations to compete at the Rio Games. Referring to its “uncompromising fight against doping,” the organization said its “tough decision” had been motivated by a single aim: “to do everything so that clean athletes could take part in the 2016 Olympic Games.”

Russia’s antidoping agency has been decertified by the World Anti-Doping Agency, as has the country’s testing lab, which was run by Dr. Rodchenkov until November, when he was forced to resign, he said. That month, he fled to the United States, and he has been living in Los Angeles since then.

The I.O.C.’s recent re-analysis of the Beijing samples was part of a broader retesting effort ahead of the Rio Games, and an additional 250 samples from the 2012 Summer Games in London — at which Dr. Rodchenkov said top Russian athletes took steroids — are expected to be retested before Rio.

WADA, meanwhile, has opened an investigation into Dr. Rodchenkov’s account of swapping out urine at the Sochi Olympic Laboratory, which he oversaw. The investigation is led by Richard McLaren, a Canadian lawyer who worked on last fall’s report on Russian track and field. WADA has said it expects to complete the investigation by July 15.

“It’s a lot of disasters if you dig deeper to other sports,” Dr. Rodchenkov said in Los Angeles this month. “I was upholding this system, established from Soviet times.”


