


Beyond the external elements — a light drizzle, creeping fog, a drooping temperature and some nebulous trace of pregame illness — Matt Harvey did not appear to have much in the form of opposition as he made his sixth start of the season Tuesday.

The Atlanta Braves would have to be considered in the flyweight class of hitting teams this season, ostensibly allowing Harvey an opportunity to sharpen his form after a bleak opening month. Although he had won his previous two outings, something still seemed amiss with Harvey, the Mets’ supposed ace — an absent gear that he used to attain continually.

But the Mets will need to keep waiting, and wondering about what issues might be chipping away at Harvey’s early form. His command wavered, and again, fatigue seemed to set in late in his outing. He ultimately surrendered three runs and eight hits in five and two-thirds innings, picking up his fourth loss in a 3-0 defeat at Citi Field.

The Mets’ offense did not help, managing only one hit and four base runners, none of whom advanced beyond first. Since homering three times in the first inning Monday, the Mets have been held scoreless in 16 straight innings.

But the primary concern was Harvey, whose lackluster appearance against a pedestrian Braves lineup heightened the alarm on a situation that already seemed fraught. Normally a dominant spring performer (before this season, his career record was 8-0 in March and April), his inauspicious start to 2016 has been baffling.

“Right now, I’m just not feeling good with my mechanics, not feeling good throwing the ball,” Harvey said. “It’s frustrating.”

The Braves made solid and consistent contact against him. That has not been said about the Braves very often this season. Entering Tuesday’s game, they sat last in the National League in runs, hits, extra-base hits and home runs — only five homers through 25 games, 12 fewer than the next-lowest team.

But having lost to Harvey, 6-3, on April 22, the Braves looked aggressive against him early in counts, and his once-dominant fastball command faltered. Atlanta threatened in the second inning, putting the first two runners in scoring position for the bottom of the order. But Harvey induced a short flyout by Erick Aybar and then forced out the runner on third, A. J. Pierzynski, via a rundown after an infield grounder by Matt Wisler, the starting pitcher. Harvey ended the threat by snaring a comeback grounder by Mallex Smith and tossing the ball to first.

He could not avoid damage in the fifth, however. Smith, a rookie center fielder, laced a line drive down the left-field line that was ruled a home run after a replay review. That put Atlanta ahead, 1-0.

In the sixth, Kelly Johnson led off with a single, stole second and scored on a double by Pierzynski. Harvey appeared to be running out of gas. Another well-hit ball by Reid Brignac to center field enabled Pierzynski to advance to third, and he later scored on a wild pitch. Harvey’s final pitch, his 100th, wound up in left field on a single by Smith.

Of the 18 earned runs Harvey has allowed this season, 13 have come in the fifth or sixth inning. Such midgame struggles have raised questions about whether Harvey is feeling the fatigue of a long playoff run last season.

“My body doesn’t feel bad,” he said. “I don’t feel tired or any downside from the workload last year. I think it’s just, right now, I’m in a funk with my mechanics.”

Manager Terry Collins has not ruled out fatigue as a factor, but he wants to wait and see before making any judgments.

“For some reason, in that 70-to-90-pitch range, he doesn’t make the quality pitches,” Collins said. “We don’t have an answer for you. I wish I did.”

Before the game, Collins said that Harvey had felt ill the previous night, and the team planned to use intravenous fluids in the afternoon to make sure he did not get too dehydrated. Harvey dismissed his sickness as an excuse for his performance.

“The biggest thing is feeling for my mechanics,” he said. “It seems like I’m feeling for every pitch.”

The damp and dreary conditions were not particularly conducive to dominant pitching, but Wisler seemed unaffected. He shut down the Mets through eight innings, surrendering only a fifth-inning single to Asdrubal Cabrera.

“We hit the ball pretty hard today, and they caught it,” Collins said. “Any one of those hits could have opened up a big inning for us.”

Collins said he was heartened by Harvey’s last showing, in Cincinnati. This one was not as encouraging.

“We expect perfection, and you’re not going to get it,” Collins said. “He’s going to be fine. It’s a work in progress.”


