


Ask Real Estate is a weekly column that answers questions from across the New York region. Submit yours to realestateqa@nytimes.com.

Pot-Smoking Teenager

I plan to sell my apartment in a small condominium. My neighbor’s teenage son smokes copious amounts of marijuana with his friends, presumably when his parents aren’t home. The scent is overwhelming and likely a big turnoff to prospective buyers. I cannot risk this happening when I am showing the apartment to a prospective buyer or holding an open house. I don’t want to rat the boy out — and the building is not smoke-free — but a major financial deal is at stake. What would you suggest?

TriBeCa, Manhattan

Even if you drench your apartment in air fresheners and make the teenager promise to abstain during the open house, whoever ultimately buys your apartment will certainly notice a cloud of pot smoke after moving in. And if it bothers the buyer, he or she might blame you for hiding the teenager’s habit.

“It’s an ethical issue, and it could turn into a legal issue,” said Steven D. Sladkus, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. “Someone could say that you intentionally hid something or misled them.”

Buyers’ lawyers frequently ask sellers to disclose any nuisances. If you remain silent on this issue, a disgruntled buyer could argue that you committed fraud in the contract by keeping mum about smoke and odors. To protect yourself, clear the air before you put the apartment on the market.

“Rat the kid out,” Mr. Sladkus said. “Try to resolve the problem, so it doesn’t exist anymore.”

Talk to the parents. Given pot’s distinctive scent, they might not be surprised to learn about their son’s activities. Nevertheless, parents can be sensitive and defensive when it comes to their children — and they may not object to his choice of entertainment even though recreational use of marijuana is still illegal in New York. (It has, however, been somewhat decriminalized.)

“The seller should call that parent and have an ‘I need your help’ conversation,” said Kathy Braddock, a managing director at William Raveis New York City. Gently inform your neighbor that your listing agent has advised you to address any potential problems before the apartment goes on the market. Explain that you want to get the best possible price for your home, which would benefit everyone in the building, and the aroma of lingering pot smoke will probably not help you achieve that goal.

You could also tell them that the odor bothers you and may bother whoever owns your apartment next.

As Ms. Braddock noted, “This is a real quality-of-life issue. If the seller asks for help from the parent, they will most likely get it.”

•

Locked Out

My mother moved out of her co-op and into an assisted-living facility. Her co-op is held in a trust of which she, my sister and I are trustees; my mother is the guarantor. In October, I sent a letter to the co-op board stating that my husband and two children were going to stay in the apartment for four days over Christmas. I didn’t hear back until January, when I received a letter from the managing agent denying us complete access to the apartment. It stated that if we attempted entry, we would be in default of the proprietary lease. Is the board permitted to do this? Who will maintain the apartment if not us?

Upper East Side, Manhattan

I can understand why you might want to stay at your mother’s apartment for a few days, even if she no longer lives in it. You are family. But co-op boards can be very strict about enforcing occupancy rules, and the trust, not you, owns the apartment. As far as the board is concerned, you are not a shareholder, but merely the guarantor’s daughter, said Slava Hazin, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.

Paul R. Gottsegen, the president of the Halstead Management Company, added that “boards don’t want shareholders determining who their neighbors are.”

A standard proprietary lease restricts how long guests can stay and usually requires a permitted adult to be present. In this case, that adult would be your mother, who, in all likelihood, cannot chaperone because she lives elsewhere. Boards may make an exception to such rules, but they are not required to do so, Mr. Hazin said.

Hire a lawyer to review the proprietary lease and any agreement between the co-op and the trust to determine your rights and ensure the board has not overstepped its bounds. If you find that you and your family have no legal right to stay, try to reason with management anyway. Explain that you need to clean and maintain the apartment. Presumably the board would like to see the property cared for, too.

With a little heartfelt pleading, the board might soften its draconian stance. If it holds firm, you could potentially sue for access. But that’s an expensive, lengthy and unpredictable process.

•

Missing Lockbox

My in-laws, who live in an assisted-living facility, signed an exclusive agreement with a broker to sell their co-op apartment. Last week, the broker called us asking if we had removed the lockbox, which contained a key so other brokers could show the apartment. When we went to the apartment, the box was indeed missing from the door. Now we’re not sure what to do.

Beechhurst, Queens

You need to start by figuring out what happened to that box. A call to the super or managing agent could shed light on the issue. If the building has a policy prohibiting such boxes, someone on the staff might have removed it.

If the mystery of the vanishing box is not resolved with a phone call, then you need to secure the property — and fast.

“The locks to the apartment should be changed immediately,” said Aaron Shmulewitz, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.

Once the property is safe, you or your in-laws should have a frank discussion with the broker. “My first question to the agent would be, ‘Why were you using a lockbox in the first place?’ ” said Robert Whalen, an associate broker at Halstead Property.

Brokers sometimes use these boxes to provide access to an apartment when they cannot be present, but that is obviously not a good system for this apartment, since no one is living in the apartment to monitor the condition of the box. A lockbox “might be O.K. if the agent has a scheduling conflict,” Mr. Whalen said, “but it should not be the normal practice.”

You and your in-laws need to know how the broker plans to proceed. Your parents-in-law should feel confident that the broker will give their property the attention it deserves and protect it while it is in his care.


