


LOS ANGELES — Throughout her whirlwind romances with some of the most famous men of her time, the Standard Oil heiress, socialite and fashion heroine Millicent Rogers was a mistress of reinvention.

She spent time in Austria, wearing traditional dirndls with her Mainbocher and Schiaparelli couture; in Hollywood, where she was dressed by the costume designer Adrian, her good friend; and in Taos, N. M., where she retreated in 1947 after a messy breakup with Clark Gable, only to fall in love with the Southwest aesthetic.

In Taos, she immersed herself in local culture, renovating an adobe home called Turtle Walk and collecting chunky silver and turquoise Native American jewelry, which she wore with broomstick skirts and peasant blouses she had made by Charles James in New York. Images of her Taos lifestyle that were featured in Vogue and Harper’s Bazaar caused a sensation in the fashion world that has reverberated in the work of Karl Lagerfeld, John Galliano and other current designers.

A less-known fact is that Rogers also designed her own jewelry, sketching neoprimitive pieces on yellow legal pads. And now, seven decades later, her great-granddaughter Sascha Mary Millicent Peralta-Ramos, 20, is continuing the tradition, with a collection of fine jewelry called Mary Millicent, Rogers’s full name.

Ms. Peralta-Ramos, whose great-grandfather Arturo Peralta-Ramos was the second of Rogers’s three husbands, grew up in Jackson Hole, Wyo. She moved to Los Angeles in 2011 to pursue acting, taking with her several pieces passed down from Rogers, including a silver and moonstone belt that closes to 22 inches and fits Ms. Peralta-Ramos’s tiny waist perfectly.

After reading “Searching for Beauty,” Cherie Burns’s 2011 biography of Rogers, Ms. Peralta-Ramos began researching her relative. She tracked down a copy of the Aug. 29, 1938 issue of Life magazine, with Rogers on the cover in a white bathing suit and sun visor.

“I fought the name Millicent my entire life, having to spell it for people since I was in kindergarten,” said Ms. Peralta-Ramos, who now divides her time between Jackson Hole and Los Angeles, where the collection is produced. “Eventually, I loved that I had it. Little by little, I started building the concept of a brand, and initially jewelry made the most sense.

“Of course we could have just thrown out a bunch of turquoise pieces,” she continued. “But we’re trying to reference her in a way that’s not so literal.”

The collection, which had its debut in June, features rose, yellow and white gold with pearls, rubies, diamonds, sapphires and Paraíba tourmalines. Some pieces, such as a double cross pendant, draw inspiration from Native American symbols. Puzzle rings are designed to be stacked, paying homage to Rogers’s habit of layering weighty necklaces and cuff bracelets, which according to family lore helped to control a tremor that was the result of childhood rheumatic fever.

Caroline Jean Fernald, executive director of the Millicent Rogers Museum in Taos, said, “Sascha’s jewelry is more delicate and feminine. And in miniaturizing Millicent’s designs, she brings it toward her own aesthetic.” The collection is sold in the shop at the museum, which the Rogers family established in 1956, three years after her death. It holds nearly 1,000 pieces of her jewelry, as well as her extensive collection of Native American art and artifacts. (The family also donated 600 gowns to the Brooklyn Museum, following Rogers’s own donations of gowns.)

In addition to nurturing the Rogers legacy, the new jewelry brand is trying to promote the very contemporary taste of Ms. Peralta-Ramos, something of a modern Millicent herself. She has nearly 300,000 Instagram followers who look at her hanging out with the singer Ariana Grande, a close friend, striking yoga poses and artfully arranging her vegan meals. Just as Rogers was instrumental in advocating for Native Americans — campaigning for the return of Blue Lake to the Pueblo people, for example — Ms. Peralta-Ramos’s passion is gender equality, a cause she came to espouse after meeting the transgender media personality Tyler Ford on the musical theater circuit.

Many of the pieces in the Mary Millicent collection are designed to be gender neutral, including brushed silver bangles with diamonds set in profile, and wedding bands adorned with graphic recessed squares. Ms. Peralta-Ramos designs the jewelry on a computer, her team in Los Angeles 3-D-prints waxes for casting and the pieces are then made by hand. “Millicent created pieces with beautiful lines that enhanced different parts of the body. I had a similar idea to make pieces for humans,” she explained. “We want to emphasize that it’s about adornment, however you see it.”

The brand is slowly gathering attention from celebrities. Ms. Grande wears Mary Millicent pearl studs surrounded by brilliant-cut diamonds in the current MAC Viva Glam campaign. The transgender performance artist Zackary Drucker wore the brand’s pink pearl earrings and stacked rings to the 2015 Emmy Awards and commented by email: “I can wear Mary Millicent without ever feeling over or under accessorized.”

Prices range from $100 to $27,200. In addition to the museum shop, the collection is sold on the brand’s website, at Goodie 2 Shoes in Jackson Hole and at Vintage Malibu, in California. Charlotte Glasser, creative director of Vintage Malibu, said she had been attracted to the collection because of Ms. Peralta-Ramos’s “social network, the legacy and history behind her designs and the unisex and all-inclusive” pieces.

Ms. Peralta-Ramos said she was focusing on building a bigger retail presence and expanding the business, which may include introducing other product categories. ‘If Millicent were around today, she would definitely have her own brand,” she said. “The way she designed her own clothes, and adapted them — she was so creative.”


