


LONDON — Zinedine Zidane, a player who scored majestic goals on all the world’s biggest stages, is now a game away from winning the Champions League just four months into his transition as a coach.

The job is not done yet. For the second time in three seasons, the final has come down to Atlético and Real Madrid. The first final between the two local rivals, in Lisbon two years ago, was won in extra time by Real; the second, in Milan on May 28, has no favorite.

Zidane’s Real Madrid suffered, to use his word, right through the two legs of the semifinal, squeezing through on the basis of a fluke goal — an own goal off a defender’s leg in the Bernabéu stadium on Wednesday night.

Atlético progressed to the final by virtue of organized defense and brilliant counterattacking to eke out wins against two of Europe’s finest teams, Barcelona and Bayern Munich, in the previous two rounds.

“It will be another derby,” said Dani Carvajal, Real’s galvanic right back. “That’s good for Spanish football and for the community of Madrid. One of the key factors behind us reaching the final is that we didn’t concede — I recall in the Décima year that we conceded very few goals at home, and that helped us greatly.”

Ah, the Décima.

The word means “tenth.” In its Madrid association, it crowned the 10th time that Real has won the European Cup or Champions League. It is built on the foundations of the fantastic Alfredo di Stéfano and Ferenc Puskas teams of the mid-1950s, and runs through the Real editions graced by Zidane and the Galacticos at the start of this century.

Now older and balder at 43, Zidane has been thrust into the coaching role right at the very top of his profession. After 24 games as what he calls the trainer, he is in another final.

And even as Zizou, as Zidane is known, talked of the suffering and the perfectly executed plan to get past Manchester City on Wednesday, his players were cavorting across the Bernabéu field.

They wore new T-shirts over their playing tops. Shirts that spelled out “Now for la Undécima!” The Eleventh.

How boastful. How presumptuous. And how provocative that is bound to read across the city to the neighbor, Atlético, which is driven by a hunger to be Europe’s champion for the first time.

The reality of what we saw in the semifinals is that there is very little margin of difference between the Madrid teams. “We know that Atlético performed well against Barcelona and Bayern,” observed Real’s German midfielder Toni Kroos. “But we’ve got more quality, and we’ve got to go out and show that we’re the better side.”

The jury will be out on that assertion until the night of the final.

Diego Simeone has coached Atlético into a battle-hardened team that no opponent, no matter how grand or how decorated in history, can take lightly. If, as Kroos says, Real has more quality, then it had better be prepared to prove it in Milan.

All that Real Madrid demonstrated against Manchester City was that it was prepared to slug out two games as negatively as anyone could imagine. Two games, 180 minutes between clubs that have amassed a billion dollars’ worth of players, neither daring to be adventurous or creative.

City created nothing, not even a hard-luck story. The only goal of two obdurate stalemates, in Manchester and Madrid, was an intended cross from Gareth Bale that skewed off the outstretched leg of City’s defensive midfielder Fernando and diverted into the net.

The rest suggested that City is a team, as well as a coach, that has run its course. Manuel Pellegrini, normally a progressive coach who likes his team to play creatively, has been undermined since the start of the year, when Manchester City confirmed that it would terminate his contract after this season.

Pep Guardiola, the successor, will have to do something he has not confronted in his coaching career. At Barcelona, he took forward (magnificently) a group already created around Lionel Messi, Andrés Iniesta and Xavi Hernández.

At Munich, Guardiola was handed a winning team and substantial money to add to it.

With City, there are more question marks than solid parts. The absence of the playmaker David Silva on Wednesday took out City’s most spontaneous player. Injury after just seven minutes to Vincent Kompany denuded it of its rock of defense.

But with Yaya Touré a shell of the giant he once had been, and with the core of the club aging, this was a City team too meek, almost cowed, in the arena of Real Madrid. For its part, though Bale did strike the crossbar with a header in the second half, Real offered poor fare for a club that aspires to dominate Europe, and the world.

“It was a busy game,” concluded Cristiano Ronaldo, who lasted the whole night despite being out for the past two weeks with a hamstring injury. “The team did well. We controlled the game and had more opportunities. We are facing Atlético again, and I’m happy.”

The superstar was then prompted by the media to give his endorsement on his coach. “Zidane is doing a fine job,” Ronaldo replied. “He is helping us, and we are happy with his work. I admire him as a coach and as a person, and I hope that he stays with us.

“We have always been with him. He is a humble person, he likes to learn and listen to the players, and it is very easy in this sense.”

What greater testimony could Zidane ask? The team, now 10 straight victories in the Spanish League, and through to the final of the Champions League, has done this the hard way — almost the Atlético way of putting results before performance.


