


OTTAWA — After taking a helicopter tour of fire-ravaged Fort McMurray, Alberta, on Friday, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau credited firefighters for saving much of the city.

An official count found that 2,432 buildings were destroyed and 500 were damaged. About 25,000 buildings are “still standing” but may have smoke damage.

“I don’t think Canadians yet understand what happened here,” Mr. Trudeau told firefighters and rescue workers after touring the city. “They know there was a fire. They’re beginning to hear the wonderful news that so much of the town was safe. They don’t yet understand that this wasn’t a fluke of wind or rain or luck, that this was the extraordinary response by people such as yourselves — the work you did to save so much of this community.”

It was Mr. Trudeau’s first visit to Fort McMurray since 88,000 people were forced to evacuate the area on May 3 when a wildfire, which continues to burn, swept into the city, which is the hub of Canada’s oil sands region.

Accompanied by Rachel Notley, Alberta’s premier, Darby Allen, the regional fire chief, and others, Mr. Trudeau viewed from a military helicopter the wide blackened trail left around and through the city by the wildfire. Later, while walking through one of the residential neighborhoods leveled by the fire, he paused and picked up a Mason jar from rubble near the ruins of one house. The heat of the fire had melted it into a surrealistic shape.

At a news conference later in Edmonton, Mr. Trudeau talked about seeing a child’s abandoned scooter looking “sad and forlorn” on a sidewalk in an otherwise burned-out neighborhood.

“That little plastic scooter, whatever little boy or girl was using that before the evacuation, they’re safe, they’re alive,” he said. No one is known to have died directly because of the fire.

Because firefighting is primarily a provincial and municipal responsibility in Canada, the federal government’s role in dealing with the disaster has been comparatively limited so far. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police is Fort McMurray’s law enforcement service, under a contract with Alberta. The military has provided logistical support, including helicopters and a heavy-lift airplane.

A special emergency response team from the Canadian Forces is helping the province’s health ministry open a temporary medical center. While firefighters were able to divert the blaze away from the city’s hospital, it has extensive smoke damage and problems with its heating and air-conditioning.

But while the province has not needed to call on many federal resources, Mr. Trudeau’s government is likely to take on an increasingly important role as the fire threat recedes and officials move toward allowing residents to re-enter the city — something that is probably still weeks away — and planning Fort McMurray’s reconstruction.

Figures vary wildly about the cost of the fire but it will certainly be in the billions of dollars and far beyond the means of Alberta, which has been struggling financially because of the collapse of oil prices.

The federal government will reimburse Alberta for 90 percent of its costs. But after other recent Alberta disasters, including floods three years ago, the province and the federal government became mired in protracted negotiations over what costs were eligible.

Mr. Trudeau said that his government would move more quickly than the previous Conservative government to provide “significant federal moneys” to Alberta.

The federal government has already accelerated the process for making unemployment insurance claims for Fort McMurray residents left jobless by the fire.

The bulk of the oil sands projects, which provide the basis of Fort McMurray’s economy, lay north of the city. While operations were shut down or severely curtailed at the height of the blaze, most are now slowly resuming. The police have reopened the only highway through Fort McMurray to allow workers to travel to company work camps. The government is also inviting store and business owners to return to the city to assess their ability to reopen.

About 1,000 workers are also in the Fort McMurray area, repairing damage to electrical wires and components, and aboveground equipment for pipelines.

The fire has prompted an exceptionally large flow of donations from Canadians. The Canadian Red Cross, which governments have designated as the primary relief agency, had raised 86 million Canadian dollars, or about $67 million, from a population of 36 million as of Friday afternoon.


