


Mayor Bill de Blasio’s press secretary will leave her post next month, the latest sign that the administration is continuing its long struggle to control and disseminate its own message.

The press secretary, Karen Hinton, sent a letter of resignation last month, a person familiar with the matter said; Ms. Hinton is expected to depart after the budget is made final, most likely in June, roughly a year after she was hired.

In his two and a half years as mayor, Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, has often lamented that his liberal policies have not been clearly conveyed to New Yorkers, pointing to those challenges as an explanation for the criticism that has buffeted his administration. The press office has undergone shifts in personnel and new hirings, including at least two rounds of changes since last May, when Ms. Hinton was brought in — filling a post that had been empty for three months.

The administration’s inability to define itself has been highlighted by the weeks of unforgiving headlines that have accompanied news in at least five investigations, including inquiries by the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York and the Manhattan district attorney’s office. Ms. Hinton’s letter to the mayor, dated April 6, came before the revelation of most of those investigations.

Ms. Hinton confirmed her resignation on Thursday afternoon, which she said was motivated, at least in part, by a desire to spend more time with her daughter, a junior in high school.

“For the past year, I have had the privilege of being part of Mayor de Blasio’s efforts to build affordable housing, prevent homelessness, educate pre-K students and support the mentally ill,” she said in a statement to The New York Times. “The mayor’s commitment and tenacity have turned progressive values into everyday realities for so many New York City families. I am proud to have been part of that effort and look forward to continuing to support the mayor’s future successes.”

When she was appointed, Mr. de Blasio described Ms. Hinton as a “battle-tested communications professional” and highlighted their work together at the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development when Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo was President Bill Clinton’s housing secretary. Ms. Hinton is married to Howard Glaser, a former top Cuomo aide.

But Ms. Hinton, 57, who early in her career was a reporter in Jackson, Miss., and became communications consultant for Democrats and high-profile officials, never fully assimilated into the core group of mayoral aides and City Hall decision makers. In some cases, she was not informed of important decisions until just before they were to be announced.

Her influence as the top spokeswoman appeared to diminish after a senior de Blasio aide, Phil Walzak, who was the former press secretary, issued a rare rebuke over comments by Ms. Hinton critical of Albany last August, saying they did not reflect the views of the administration.

That early stumble occurred during a moment of feuding between Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo, who was said to have privately bristled at someone as close to his orbit as Ms. Hinton taking the job with the mayor.

Lately, the mayor has appeared to struggle with how to respond to the spate of inquiries, which have centered on whether his fund-raising activities — aimed at pressing for his liberal agenda or at getting Democrats elected to the State Senate in 2014 — went beyond the boundaries of the law. Prosecutors are looking both at campaign finance violations and, separately, at whether any favorable municipal action was taken on behalf of contributors.

At one point last month, Mr. de Blasio said he would no longer take questions on the investigations. Two days later he decided to address the inquiries again. Since then he has spoken on a number of occasions, repeating that he holds himself and the administration “to the highest ethical standards.”

After he delivered a brief statement last week, television cameras followed and reporters lobbed questions as he walked to his sport-utility vehicle, infusing a routine mayoral appearance about immigration with the high drama of a media frenzy.

On Tuesday, Mr. de Blasio changed tack again: For nearly 20 minutes after a news conference on crime statistics and plans for a new police precinct in Queens, he sat alone behind a blue curtain-draped desk and answered questions from reporters who traveled from City Hall to the precinct, near the city’s eastern border.

City Hall officials have not named a replacement for Ms. Hinton, whose resignation was not among the series of changes to Mr. de Blasio’s communications staff announced this week, including the hiring of a social media director and a new speechwriter.

Ms. Hinton said she planned to return to her work as a spokeswoman for Ecuadoreans in their legal fight against Chevron over contamination in the Amazon rain forest.

In a statement on Thursday, Mr. de Blasio praised Ms. Hinton’s work for the administration in helping “us inform New Yorkers about our vision” and said she “will be missed.”

“I thank Karen for her service, and I know she will remain a source of trusted advice for me and our team,” the mayor said.


