


Mount Sinai Beth Israel, an 825-bed hospital that has served downtown Manhattan for more than 125 years, will close and be replaced by a much smaller building, hospital officials said on Wednesday.

Mount Sinai Health System, which runs Beth Israel and six other hospital campuses in the New York City area, said that it would be four years before the hospital closed and that its primary specialties, behavioral and outpatient surgery services, would be expanded over that time.

The move adds Beth Israel to a list of 19 other hospitals in the city that have either closed or overhauled how they operate since 2000, a reduction in services that has hit Lower Manhattan especially hard. The decision also reflects broader trends at a time when hospitals across the country are struggling financially.

At its core, health care was just too costly, said Dr. Kenneth L. Davis, president and chief executive of the Mount Sinai Health System.

“We have the macroeconomics of health care — which is that it is unaffordable for everyone,” Dr. Davis said in an interview on Wednesday. Beth Israel, he said, stood to lose $2 billion in the next 10 years because of changes in federal reimbursement structures alone. Last year, the hospital had an operating loss of $115 million.

Dr. Davis said large hospitals were also no longer the most efficient vehicles for delivering care, in part because of medical advances. Not long ago, for instance, surgery to replace a hip or knee would require a long hospital stay. A patient undergoing such a procedure now can often go home the same day.

The plan for the new Beth Israel building calls for breaking ground in 2017. Once that is completed, the existing building, at 16th Street and First Avenue, will be sold, with the proceeds helping to offset the costs of the change, hospital officials said.

The new building will have about 70 beds with an emergency department several blocks away, officials said. It will also include expanded outpatient facilities at three sites with more than 35 operating and procedure rooms and 16 physician practice locations to be used by over 600 doctors.

The Mount Sinai system, the largest private employer in the city, said in a statement that it would invest $500 million in changing the way it delivered health care and that it was “committed to retraining and placing” as many of its current employees as possible elsewhere in the system. Dr. Davis said every union job had been guaranteed.

While the move may make financial sense for Mount Sinai, given the changing economics of the hospital industry, it is politically delicate, especially for Mayor Bill de Blasio. A central part of his 2013 campaign for mayor was his opposition to the closing of hospitals in the city.

Mr. de Blasio joined protests against the closing of Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, getting arrested in the process in hopes of drawing attention to the issue.

He also excoriated one of his main opponents in the Democratic primary, Christine C. Quinn, then the speaker of the City Council, for not doing more to fight the closing of St. Vincent’s Hospital Manhattan in Greenwich Village in 2010. The 150-year-old institution at 12th Street and Seventh Avenue was subsequently demolished to make way for the development of condominiums.

On Wednesday, Mr. de Blasio suggested in a statement that the city would monitor whether adequate health services would be available in the area amid the shift to a smaller version of Beth Israel.

“While it is good to see that layoffs of unionized staff will be avoided and some important investments made,” he said, “Mount Sinai must work with the community to ensure that the inpatient and emergency care needs of local residents are met.”

Beth Israel has been a part of the fabric of the Lower East Side since its founding in 1889. Its Hebrew name translates as “House of Israel,” and it was initially founded to serve the swelling Jewish immigrant population that had settled in the area. As the surrounding neighborhood changed and grew over the years, the hospital served new waves of immigrants from around the world.

Dr. Davis said in a statement announcing the move that it had been planned for a long time.

“For several years, we have been transforming the Mount Sinai Health System toward a new model of care, where we focus on keeping entire communities healthy and out of the hospital,” he said. “Mount Sinai Downtown is a dramatic next step that will enable us to improve access and increase quality by providing care for residents of downtown Manhattan where they live and work.”

Though the change had been the subject of wide speculation, it nonetheless came as a blow to those who have watched nervously as the city lost hospital after hospital.

Earlier this month, as rumors swirled about the future of Beth Israel and The Villager newspaper reported that it might close, a group of lawmakers, including Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a Manhattan Democrat, and several council members, warned of the dangers of such a move.

“Beth Israel has been a constant presence and resource for the entire city, and the East Side of Manhattan in particular,” they wrote. “Any downsizing or closure at Beth Israel threatens to further strain an already overburdened network of health care providers in Manhattan, reduce health care options and curtail services in the immediate neighborhood, and eliminate jobs.”


