


“President Petro O. Poroshenko” of Ukraine was not the first political leader to briefly persuade The New York Times that he was who he wasn’t. In 2008, for instance, “Mayor Bertrand Delanoë” of Paris had a letter published in The Times.

The hoaxes were quickly revealed.

But The Times has never acknowledged being taken in — twice — by the independent presidential campaign of “Yetta Bronstein” of the Bronx, who led the Best Party ticket in 1964 and 1968.

Mrs. Bronstein was a fiction. She was the work of Jeanne Abel and her husband, Alan Abel, a serial hoaxer whose premature obituary ran in The Times in 1980.

In 1964, when Mr. Abel was the host of a live radio call-in show, “Table Talk,” broadcast from the Playboy Club in Chicago, Mrs. Abel would call the show and identify herself as Yetta Bronstein, a housewife who was campaigning independently for the presidency.

Mr. Abel told the story in his 1970 memoir, “The Confessions of a Hoaxer”:

Mr. Abel then decided “to find out if America was ready for a Jewish mother in the White House.”

He distributed leaflets, sent out press releases and painted “National Headquarters for the Best Party” on the door of a third-floor storage closet at 507 Fifth Avenue that was always locked. Reporters left their cards under the door, and Mrs. Abel called them back, in character.

One of the reporters who called was Ben A. Franklin of The Times.

(Pause here to consider what would happen when Mr. Franklin, whose beat was the Mid-Atlantic States, stayed overnight in Philadelphia. News clerks in our Washington bureau were compelled to telephone the Benjamin Franklin Hotel and say, in all earnestness, “This is The New York Times, trying to reach Ben Franklin.” Just imagine the response.)

Mr. Franklin’s take was droll but sincere: “There appears to be no national consensus for bingo, and Mrs. Bronstein, a New York City housewife, may fail to carry a single precinct.”

Prescient enough. She was not on any ballot anywhere.

Four years later, William H. Honan, a freelance writer who later became The Times’s culture editor, seemed to fall a good deal harder for Mrs. Bronstein’s candidacy. So did the Sunday Magazine, which ran his article under the headline, “If You Don’t Like Hubert, Dick or George, How About Lar, Yetta or Eldridge?”

“Mrs. Yetta Bronstein, a Bronx housewife, is aiming to do her housekeeping at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue,” Mr. Honan wrote. The candidate, he said, rattled on in a “rich” Bronx accent:

The Abels were very pleased. “She gave him one of her best performances,” Mr. Abel wrote in his memoir. “His story ran with a photograph of Jeanne passing out literature in New York’s Bryant Park. Times photographer Sam Falk had taken the picture on assignment without being aware that Mrs. Bronstein was a spoof.”

There was a deadly serious plank in the Best Party platform, however. Mrs. Bronstein told Mr. Honan that she was opposed to the Vietnam War.

“I would withdraw,” she said. “It won’t get any better even if we win, you know.”


