


Marissa Ashley Evans, a daughter of Dr. Carla H. Ginsburg of Weston, Mass., and William D. Evans of Aventura, Fla., was married May 14 to Benjamin Todd Alden, a son of Anne Ehrich Alden and David N. Alden of Bloomfield Hills, Mich. Judge Colleen McMahon of the Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated at Crystal Springs Estate in St. Helena, Calif.

The bride, 32, works in Brooklyn as the chief executive of Sawyer, an app she co-founded that allows parents to locate the best activities for their children. She graduated from Cornell and received an M.B.A. from Harvard.

Her father owns MRXX Corporation, a rail car leasing company in Boston. He is also a former guard for the New York Nets of the American Basketball Association, having played for the team in the 1969-70 season. The bride’s mother is a gastroenterologist at Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Newton, Mass.

The groom, also 32, is the general counsel for Betterment, a financial-services firm in Manhattan. He graduated from Cornell and received his law degree from Stanford.

His mother is a private parenting coach in Bloomfield Hills. His father, who works in St. Clair Shores, Mich., is a chairman/coach who leads advisory groups for chief executives and business owners at Vistage, a leadership development company in San Diego. Until March 2010, he was the president of the Southeast Asia division of the Ford Motor Company in Bangkok.

Though the couple were in the same 2006 graduating class at Cornell and studied abroad at the London School of Economics in their junior years, they did not meet until November 2011, at a celebration the night before a mutual friend’s wedding in Washington.

Mr. Alden was looking toward the bar when he caught a glimpse of Ms. Evans — a member of the wedding party — and had what he described as a “flash of recognition.”

“I knew I had seen her,” he said. “She was so pretty, and I admired the way she carried herself with confidence. When she laughed, she lit up everyone around her. I really wanted to speak to her.”

As he slowly began “leapfrogging from mutual friend to mutual friend in her direction,” as he put it, he did not know that Ms. Evans had already gotten the jump on him.

“I noticed him first,” she said. “I was talking with a few friends and was like ‘Oh my gosh, who’s that handsome guy, and when is he going to come over here?’”

He eventually leapt in front of her, and they struck up a conversation that he described as “effortless,” and that she described as “delightful banter.”

They learned that they lived about a mile from each other in Manhattan — she in SoHo and he in the Flatiron district — and that Ms. Evans was the chief executive and founder of a company called Go Try It On, which created a photo-sharing app that allowed members to upload photos of their outfits so that other members could provide feedback and fashion advice. But they also learned that they were dating other people, though neither had brought a date to the wedding, so they parted ways without exchanging contact information.

The next month, Ms. Evans was sitting on her couch monitoring her app when she viewed a posting that she said “put a huge smile on my face.” It was an uploaded photo sent by Mr. Alden, who sought fashion advice for an outfit he wore that included a blue V-neck sweater, bluejeans and a pair of green Toms shoes.

“I was sitting with my sister and I got so excited, I just started shouting, ‘That’s the guy from the wedding!’” Ms. Evans said.

She responded with what became a series of texts during which they discovered that they were now unattached.

They agreed to meet for dinner a few weeks later, but not before agreeing to what Ms. Evans described as a “pre-dinner meeting” the night before, at a Dunkin’ Donuts in Lower Manhattan.

“We hadn’t seen each other in a while, and all we had been doing was texting,” Ms. Evans explained. “I thought we could kind of reintroduce ourselves before going out on a first date.”

She walked into the Dunkin’ Donuts and found him standing there in a suit “looking as handsome as the last time I had seen him,” she said. “I just looked at him and said, ‘It is you, you’re real.’”

They spoke for 15 minutes and confirmed their date at a Manhattan restaurant for the next night.

“We had a great time and realized that we’re both professionally driven, very family-oriented people who love to laugh,“ Mr. Alden said. “We see the world the same.”

The world, yes, but maybe not Mr. Alden’s wardrobe.

Wondering what to wear before their first date, he had uploaded another photo to Ms. Evans’s app, a practice he had started in large part to support her business.

“She responded the same way she did before most of our dates,” Mr. Alden said, laughing. “She told me to wear something else.”


