


METROPOLITAN

A theater review in some editions last Sunday about “The Forgotten Woman” misidentified the actor who delivered a comical critique of opera. He is Darren Goldstein, not Mark Junek.

SPORTS

An article in some editions last Sunday about Creator’s victory in the Belmont Stakes misattributed, in some copies, a quotation regarding the performance of Exaggerator, the Preakness Stakes winner who finished 11th. It was Kent Desormeaux, the horse’s jockey — not Keith Desormeaux, his trainer — who said, “I put him down for a mad drive and said, show me your stuff, but there was nothing there.”

•

A picture caption last Sunday with an essay about the death of the hockey great Gordie Howe reversed the identities of Howe’s sons shown with him and his wife, Colleen, during a Houston Aeros practice in 1974. Mark is at the left and Marty is second from right.

•

An article in some editions last Sunday about the Detroit Tigers’ 6-1 victory over the Yankees referred imprecisely to the record of Tigers pitcher Justin Verlander at Yankee Stadium. Until his victory on Saturday, Verlander had never won a game at the new Yankee Stadium, which opened in 2009; it is not the case they he “had never won a start at Yankee Stadium.” (Verlander won his only start at the old Yankee Stadium, in 2007.)

•

The Keeping Score column in some editions last Sunday about the possibility of Andre Iguodala’s repeating as the most valuable player of the N.B.A. finals misstated, in some copies, the number of games that had been played in the finals at the time. It was four, not five.

ARTS & LEISURE

An article on Page 8 this weekend about J. T. Rogers’s account of how his new play “Oslo” evolved misstates the circumstances under which he conceived the project. It was during a meeting with Terje Rod-Larsen, then a United Nations special envoy, who had been involved in the making of the Oslo Accords; it was not with Mr. Larsen and Mona Juul, an ambassador and representative to the United Nations Norway Mission. (Ms. Juul, who is married to Mr. Larsen, joined the project later.) A revised version of the article, in which Mr. Rogers clarifies his dealings with the diplomats, can be found at nytimes.com/arts.

•

An article last Sunday about “Oslo,” a new play by J.T. Rogers, referred incorrectly to one of two diplomats who set in motion the back-channel dealings that led to what became the Oslo peace accords. One is a woman; they are not both men.

•

An article last Sunday about the Broadway musical “Hamilton” misstated the point at which the show’s performers began collectively pressing for profit-sharing. It was in August 2015, as the Broadway production was opening, not before the Off Broadway production opened.

TRAVEL

The Bites column last Sunday, about the Amsterdam restaurant Instock, using information from a founder, referred incorrectly to its leftover food. The food either goes to make biogas, is used in staff meals or is donated; none of it is thrown away.

BOOK REVIEW

A roundup review of cookbooks on June 5 misspelled the surname of the co-author who wrote “Flavorwalla” with Floyd Cardoz. She is Marah Stets, not Stetts.

SUNDAY REVIEW

An Opinion article on June 5 about opioids and depression incorrectly described the approved uses of buprenorphine. It is F.D.A.-approved for the treatment of acute and chronic pain as well as opioid addiction; it is not approved only for the treatment of opioid addiction.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.comor (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


