


JAKARTA, Indonesia — Indonesia’s national medical association has told its members not to cooperate with a presidential decree authorizing the country’s courts to punish convicted child molesters with chemical castration, escalating a nationwide debate over the legality, medical ethics and efficacy of the procedure after a series of recent rapes and murders.

In chemical castration, drugs are used to reduce a man’s sex drive. Despite widespread skepticism about its effectiveness, a number of countries have employed it as a punishment for convicted sex offenders and pedophiles, in many cases in exchange for more lenient prison sentences. They include Australia, Russia, South Korea and the United States.

But the Indonesian Doctors Association, in a statement late last week, rejected the procedure as superfluous.

“Based on science and scientific proof, chemical castration doesn’t guarantee the loss or reduction of desire and potential sexually violent behavior,” the organization said.

Dr. Prijo Sidipratomo, the organization’s ethics council chairman, said on Wednesday that the appropriate punishment should be longer prison sentences.

“That is our message” to the Indonesian government, he said, referring to the organization’s rejection of the decree by President Joko Widodo.

“If you do chemical castration, for how long?” Dr. Prijo said. “If you do it for a long time, it causes health complications, such as weakening muscles. It causes osteoporosis. Slowly, the person will die.”

“Based on the oath of medical doctors, we cannot do that — it’s against our oath. Secondly, it’s against our ethical principles, and this is not just in Indonesia but universally.”

With its defiance, the organization has created an unlikely alliance against Mr. Joko made up of medical professionals, women’s and human rights groups, and legal experts.

On May 25, the president abruptly announced that he had signed the decree authorizing chemical castration as well as doubling sentences and even permitting the death penalty for sexual assaults on children, amid public uproar over the brutal gang rape and murder in April of a 14-year-old schoolgirl on the island of Sumatra.

Seven teenage boys were each sentenced to 10 years in prison for the crime, which revived calls for chemical castration as an appropriate punishment in such cases.

Mr. Joko’s decree amended a 2002 law on child protection to enable judges to hand down the punishment at their discretion.

But the decree itself prompted an outcry.

“The chemical castration penalty, in our view, will not reduce sexual violence against women, since violence against women is born from the viewpoint of demeaning women, placing women as sexual objects,” said Azriana Rambe, chairwoman of Indonesia’s National Commission on Violence Against Women.

“Sexual violence against women is not always the case because of the encouragement of sexual desires, but also because of the desire to subjugate, humiliate or even for revenge against women,” she said.

This is not the first foray into legal controversy by Mr. Joko, who took office on October 2014 on a wave of a populist rebellion against the country’s political elite.

Last year, Indonesia executed 13 convicted drug traffickers by firing squad, including 12 foreigners, saying it was facing a “drugs crisis,” despite widespread condemnation abroad that the trials did not meet international standards. The government has announced plans to execute more people convicted of drug offenses after the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan in early July.

This time, Mr. Joko said sexual assaults, in particular those against children, would be handled “in an extraordinary way,” although he did not offer any data that such crimes had increased significantly.

Critics say the new policy is nothing more than a stunt to mollify and distract an anxious public.

“Women’s rights organizations are in line with the views of human rights organizations in terms of punishment,” said Devi Asmarani, chief editor of Magdalene.co, an online publication based in Jakarta, the capital, that focuses on women’s issues.

“It’s a knee-jerk reaction of the government with what happens in the moment,” she said. “There was no thought put into it.”

Indonesia’s minister of health, Nila F. Moeloek, declined to comment on Wednesday on the medical association’s declaration, saying instead that she would hold private talks with its leaders to resolve the issue, according to one of her senior aides.

Kartono Mohamad, a former chairman of the association who remains an adviser to it, said judges in Indonesia’s legal system, which analysts have long accused of being corrupt and incompetent, should not have unchecked power to unilaterally hand down chemical castration penalties.

“If it’s just a punishment without any medical investigation and does not follow medical procedures, it’s not ethical,” he said. “The court must give the doctor the sole authority to determine whether medically it’s correct.”

Indonesia’s Institute for Criminal Justice Reform lauded the association for refusing to carry out chemical castrations without further research.

Human Rights Watch released a statement on Wednesday in which it denounced “castration, chemical or otherwise, as a cruel and degrading form of corporal punishment.”

“Both the Convention Against Torture and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,” the statement went on, “both ratified by Indonesia, prohibit cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”

Refly Harun, a constitutional law expert at Gadjah Mada University in the Indonesian city of Yogyakarta, in Central Java, asserted that the country’s constitution forbids “cruel punishments” for lawbreakers.

“The problem is that sometimes lawmakers don’t realize the constitutional provisions when they draft laws on certain issues,” he said.

“Sometimes we have irrational thinking in Indonesia, like a quick response to a sudden phenomenon,” Mr. Refly said, referring to the gang rape and murder of the schoolgirl in Sumatra and the similar rape and murder of an 18-year-old factory worker in Tangerang, just outside Jakarta, in May.

“The public mood right now is a little bit in favor of this law,” he said.


