


Jahmal Lightfoot’s suffering did not end with a brutal beating at the hands of Rikers Island correction officers who wanted to teach him a lesson.

He was falsely accused of going at the officers with a weapon he had stashed in his waistband, and disregarding their orders to drop it, according to Bronx prosecutors. As punishment, he was sent to “the box” — a section of the jail where inmates were confined to their cells for 23 hours a day — for nearly four months.

“So you were placed for 110 days in lockdown for something you didn’t do?” Lawrence Piergrossi, a prosecutor, asked Mr. Lightfoot on Wednesday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx.

“Yes,” Mr. Lightfoot, 31, replied.

He was testifying for a third day in the criminal trial of nine current and former correction officers who have been charged in what prosecutors have described as an orchestrated beating of Mr. Lightfoot and attempted cover-up in July 2012. A tenth officer, who has medical problems, will be tried separately.

The most serious charge against the officers is attempted gang assault in the first degree, which carries a sentence of up to 15 years in prison. Other charges include attempted assault, tampering with physical evidence, falsifying business records and official misconduct.

Prosecutors argue that Mr. Lightfoot was unarmed and did nothing to provoke being beaten in a small cell by five members of an elite correction squad. Instead, prosecutors said the beating was ordered by Eliseo Perez Jr., an assistant chief for security, and Gerald Vaughn, a correction captain, after Mr. Perez reportedly decided that Mr. Lightfoot “thinks he’s tough.”

Defense lawyers countered that Mr. Lightfoot was restrained by officers who were simply doing their job. As cross-examination of Mr. Lightfoot began on Wednesday, Raymond Aab, a lawyer for Mr. Perez, picked through Mr. Lightfoot’s earlier testimony in a bid to undermine his credibility.

Mr. Aab suggested that Mr. Lightfoot hoped to benefit financially from a pending lawsuit against New York City. “This is what this case is about, to make a lot of money,” Mr. Aab said.

Mr. Lightfoot testified that he was incarcerated in 2010 for robbery after stealing a woman’s pocketbook. He acknowledged in court that he had been involved with the Bloods gang from 1999 to 2005, and had been arrested for possession of marijuana and crack cocaine, criminal trespass and other minor offenses.

At Rikers, he continued to get into trouble, racking up five infractions in 22 months, including being caught with a weapon that he fashioned out of a battery. Mr. Lightfoot said there were people in the jail that he knew from his days on the street. “Just in case I ran into them, I could protect myself,” he said.

Nonetheless, Mr. Lightfoot insisted that he did not have a weapon the night he was beaten, and prosecutors pointed out that he had been strip searched and had passed through two metal detectors.

At an internal disciplinary hearing shortly after the beating, Mr. Lightfoot said he had been shown a picture of a crude, U-shaped piece of metal that was said to be his weapon. He was told he was being charged with assault on staff, and refusal of a direct order. He was found guilty and sentenced to time in the box.

Mr. Lightfoot, who sustained fractures to both of his eye sockets in the beating, testified earlier that he suffered for months afterward. His eyes hurt and his vision was blurry when he tried to read, and he got headaches and spit up blood, he said. He was released from state prison on parole in 2014 and is unemployed.

Mr. Perez retired in 2013, and Mr. Vaughn in 2014. The seven others on trial — Officers Harmon Frierson, Dwayne Maynard, Tobias Parker, Jose Parra, Jeffrey Richard, Alfred Rivera and David Rodriguez — were suspended in June 2013, but recently returned to work on modified duty with no contact with inmates.


