


It’s rare that President Obama and Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chairman, agree. In recent weeks, they both have said that the presidential nominating process is not rigged.

They are right. But that hasn’t stopped those displeased with the results — not only establishment Republicans but also Democrats who support Senator Bernie Sanders — from insisting on changing the rules for the next election.

Some tweaks are always in order, but both sides are trying to craft procedures that would have benefited them this time. As with generals fighting the last war, experience shows this rarely works and often backfires.

“Every time someone tries to game out this system,” said Benjamin Ginsberg, a leading Republican election lawyer, “the great law of unintended consequences rears its head.”

For the 2016 elections, Republicans wanted to compress the initial primaries and limit debates so that an establishment favorite — Jeb Bush, for most — could wrap up the nomination early. Concurrently, conservatives insisted on the early Southern contests to better ensure victory for an ideologically suitable candidate.

The result was that the debates and calendar helped nominate the most nonconservative candidate in ages: Donald J. Trump.

Democrats changed the rules after their 1968 debacle to take control away from party bosses. That helped George McGovern win the 1972 nomination — he then lost in a landslide to Richard Nixon — and in 1976, paved the way for Jimmy Carter, the former governor of Georgia, not a favorite of the reform crowd.

The legitimate tension in the current debate is between those who want to empower the political parties, which are often stabilizing institutions for governance, and those who want to give more say to voters. This friction goes back more than a century, as chronicled in Geoffrey Cowan’s “Let the People Rule,” about Theodore Roosevelt’s effort in 1912 to topple an incumbent Republican president and the party establishment. That marked the beginning of presidential primaries; it also made clear that the courts give broad discretion to the political parties to set their rules (to the discomfort then of Mr. Roosevelt).

In today’s debate, there are two overriding issues for both parties: The role, or existence, of superdelegates, or elected officials who automatically have status as convention delegates and aren’t bound to any candidate; and whether primaries should be open to all voters or limited to members of the party. These two concerns present an inherent conflict.

Mr. Sanders raises objections to the superdelegates, most of whom, in the Democratic presidential contest, are supporting Hillary Clinton, though it’s worth noting that his chief strategist, Tad Devine, wrote a 2008 column defending the concept. Some conservative Republicans, such as Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who finished second to Mr. Trump, as well as some Democrats, argue for closed primaries so that independents and others can’t game their contests.

There should be a sensible middle ground. Both parties could have superdelegates: at a minimum, all members of Congress, governors and state party chairmen and chairwomen. These are politicians that a president deals with and their inclusion is good for subsequent governance. And it’s much better for Democrats and Republicans to hold primaries open to all voters to increase participation and enthusiasm, as Mr. Trump and Mr. Sanders did this time.

Before the contests in California and New Jersey this week, the preferences of voters are clear. Mrs. Clinton has received almost 13 million votes, or three million more than Mr. Sanders. Mr. Trump has racked up 11.5 million, or four million more than Mr. Cruz.

Those who protest that the system is rigged are reminiscent of Lester Maddox, the former Georgia governor who once said that the problem with his state’s prisons was that they needed a better class of inmates.

Similarly, the solution for critics of the presidential system today would be a better class of voter.


