


What appeared to be a random slashing of a 16-year-old girl last year was an orchestrated attack meant for a different teenager who had had a sexual relationship with a Queens man, the authorities said on Thursday.

The man, Wilson Lai, 25, of Oakland Gardens, had a one-year relationship starting in June 2013 with a girl who was then 14, Richard A. Brown, the Queens district attorney, said in a statement.

An indictment announced on Thursday alleged that Mr. Lai conspired with another man, Devon Berkley, 36, of Allentown, Pa., to assault the girl.

Mr. Berkley ran up to a girl in the Whitestone section of Queens as she walked to school at the private Whitestone Academy on Dec. 16, according to the district attorney’s office. Mr. Brown said the girl, an exchange student from China, was slashed in a case of mistaken identity, noting that she lived in the same home as the intended victim and happened to be the same age.

In an interview in February, the girl who was slashed, Jia Jia Liang, described turning to look behind her as she heard footsteps. But the assailant, who was wearing a surgical mask and gloves, slashed her twice.

Two scars mark the left side of her face, one running from the top of her cheekbone under her eye to her jawline, and the other starting closer to her ear and running to her jaw.

Ms. Liang came to New York in 2014, hoping her studies at the Whitestone Academy would prepare her to apply for admission to an American college.

The indictment offered no motive for the attack, and the district attorney’s office did not elaborate. It was not clear on Thursday if the men had lawyers.

The indictment also alleges that Mr. Lai and two unindicted co-conspirators punctured the tires and damaged the body of a vehicle belonging to his intended victim’s family in January. A note left on the vehicle stated that the wrong girl had been attacked and that the intended target was next, the district attorney’s office said.

Mr. Lai and Mr. Berkley were charged with assault, conspiracy, endangering the welfare of a child and criminal possession of a weapon. Mr. Lai was also charged with rape, criminal sexual acts, criminal mischief and related charges. If convicted, Mr. Berkley faces up to 25 years in prison; Mr. Lai faces up to 32 years.

Mr. Lai appeared in State Supreme Court before Justice Gregory L. Lasak, who ordered him held without bail pending an arraignment on Tuesday. Mr. Berkley was arrested on Thursday in Allentown, and was being held there pending the outcome of an extradition hearing.


