


A Queens lawyer was accused on Wednesday of stealing nearly $600,000 from a deceased client’s estate, including profits from the sale of the Slave Theater in Brooklyn, a significant venue among civil rights activists.

The lawyer, Frank Racano, 54, was charged with one count of grand larceny for allegedly writing himself checks from the estate of the client, a longtime Brooklyn civil court judge, John L. Phillips Jr., who owned the Fulton Street theater before his death in 2008.

Judge Phillips bought the theater, a former vaudeville and movie house, in 1984 and filled it with murals of black leaders like Marcus Garvey and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. After a black man was killed in Howard Beach, Queens, in 1986, activists including the Rev. Al Sharpton began to organize rallies and other events at the Slave regularly.

At a time when Harlem was still the traditional center of New York’s black community, the Slave became a touchstone of black activism in Bedford-Stuyvesant. Now, like much else in Brooklyn, it is scheduled for redevelopment.

In 2010, prosecutors said, Samuel Boykin, Judge Phillips’s nephew by marriage, became the administrator of his estate. Mr. Boykin hired Mr. Racano to assist in the sale of the judge’s real-estate holdings, including the theater and a lot behind it at 10 Halsey Street. In 2012 and 2013, prosecutors said, a buyer placed more than $700,000 into Mr. Racano’s attorney trust checking account.

Over the next two years, prosecutors said, Mr. Racano wrote and cashed 300 unauthorized checks to himself from the account in sums ranging from $45 to $7,500, until it was depleted. “We will now hold him accountable for these shameful acts,” Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, said in a statement on Wednesday.

Shortly before Mr. Thompson’s statement was released, Mr. Racano was arraigned in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, where he pleaded not guilty. He was ordered held on bail of $250,000, and he is scheduled to return to court on Aug. 10.


