


On Sunday, about 700 congregants of the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Sava attended a festive Orthodox Easter celebration.

They brought brightly colored eggs and heard a plea from the altar to contribute to the continuing renovation of their beloved church, a majestic stone structure on 25th Street between Broadway and Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan that New York City made a landmark in 1968.

But on Monday, worshipers began a sad pilgrimage to the church. Instead of taking their place in its pews, they leaned against police barricades and gazed upon the historic building, which was gutted by a raging fire on Sunday night.

“It’s a very emotional experience,” said Velimir Sabic, a Serbian immigrant and longtime congregant of St. Sava, who stood with his wife and their three young children at a barricade.

The vaulted roof, which had been renovated several years ago, was reduced to a charred, spindly skeleton. The roof of the apse in the rear section was a shambles. The once-grand stained-glass windows were now gaping chasms. The cause of the fire remained under investigation on Monday.

Mr. Sabic said his family had watched the 19th-century church burn on the evening news, as the blaze quickly tore through it, devastating the pitched roof. The footage reduced his two young sons, both altar boys at St. Sava’s, to tears.

He said he brought his family from their home in the Bronx to pay respects to the church, for decades the spiritual pillar of the Serbian community.

“For Serbs, this was our main church in New York,” said Nick Zelenovic, a retired textile manufacturer from Middle Village, Queens, who said his two children were christened there.

“For every Serb, there is a lot of sadness today,” said Mr. Zelenovic, who added that, within days of arriving in New York from Serbia in 1972, he began attending Mass at St. Sava.

The church had been a spiritual destination for Serbs living in the region, including many from Queens neighborhoods like Glendale, Maspeth and Ridgewood.

It was a journey that required Mirjana Jovanovic, of Glendale, to take three trains and a bus to attend the Easter service, all while carrying the dozen colored eggs she had made.

Ms. Jovanovic said she began attending services there almost immediately after immigrating to New York from Serbia in 1986. She was married in the church in 2002, she said on Monday after talking her way past police lines so she could take snapshots of the building, “just to remember.”

Besides news reports, word of the fire spread by word of mouth and over the church’s website, which alerted parishioners with a simple headline: “Our Church Has Burned Down.”

Flames first began appearing out of the top edges of the front double doors, and within minutes, the circular stained-glass window higher up on the facade shattered, and “a big tongue of fire came jumping out,” said Herman Tulp, a Dutch tourist staying across the street at a hotel.

“It was apocalyptic,” he said.

Firefighters responded to the blaze around 7 p.m., which grew and required roughly 170 department personnel to curb, a Fire Department spokesman said.

Investigators have not labeled the fire suspicious, the spokesman, Frank Dwyer, said, adding that the blaze may have been made worse by the age of the church and its wooden interior.

“It’s a very large structure with lots of voids where heat and smoke can gather, and lots of combustible material,” Mr. Dwyer said.

He said that firefighters continued to put out small pockets of flames until Monday afternoon, and that there were no reports of major injuries.

On Monday, amid the destruction, the church’s two stone crosses still stood high atop the front and rear of the structure, and the American and Serbian flags flying outside the front entrance still waved, only slightly torn.

“If the stone is strong enough,” Mr. Zelenovic said, looking upon the church, “maybe we can rebuild.”


