


Eugenio Suarez and Adam Duvall hit three-run homers in the sixth inning as the Reds finally broke through against the Cubs’ dominant pitching, beating Chicago, 13-5, in Cincinnati on Saturday.

A victory would have given the Cubs (13-5) their best start since 1907, the year they won the first of their back-to-back World Series titles. A four-homer splurge ended Chicago’s domination of its National League Central rival.

Suarez’s homer off John Lackey (3-1) put the Reds up by 5-3 and started a seven-run inning. Duvall connected off Trevor Cahill, and Scott Schebler followed with a solo homer. The Reds had not hit three homers in an inning since 2012.

Joey Votto later hit a two-run shot on a night when the Reds gave away Votto superhero bobbleheads. The four homers were a season high for Cincinnati, as were the 13 runs.

NATIONALS 2, TWINS 0 Washington scored two runs in the first inning and its pitchers held Minnesota at bay the rest of the game, earning 18 strikeouts.

Pitcher Tanner Roark (2-2) had a career-high 15 strikeouts and allowed two hits over seven innings. Three relievers followed and pitched every bit as effectively, giving up no further hits.

ASTROS 8, RED SOX 3 Colby Rasmus hit a tiebreaking grand slam in the fifth inning to lead Houston to a win at Boston, ending a four-game skid.

Rasmus drove in a fifth run with a double in Houston’s three-run eighth, the most R.B.I. he has had in a game since compiling six on June 2, 2011.

WHITE SOX 4, RANGERS 3 The slumping Jose Abreu hit a run-scoring single with one out in the bottom of the 11th inning, leading host Chicago over Texas.

After Texas tied the score in the ninth on a sacrifice fly by Elvis Andrus, the White Sox went on to win for the fourth time in five games.

DODGERS 4, ROCKIES 1 Kenta Maeda held the Rockies hitless into the sixth inning, A. J. Ellis lined a two-run homer, and Los Angeles won at Colorado.

Maeda (3-0), a right-hander from Japan, allowed three hits — all in the sixth — and no runs in six and a third innings. He struck out eight and lowered his E.R.A. to 0.36.

ORIOLES 8, ROYALS 3 Chris Davis homered and had four hits, Manny Machado extended his hitting streak to 16 games, and visiting Baltimore beat Kansas City.

Davis, who led the majors with 47 home runs last season, hit his sixth homer in the second inning and had a run-scoring single during the fourth, tying a career high for hits.

DIAMONDBACKS 7, PIRATES 1 Chris Herrmann drove in four runs with a home run and a double, Rubby De La Rosa gave up three hits over six-plus innings, and Arizona won at home against Pittsburgh.

Herrmann, a backup catcher who had batted 1 for 20 entering the game, had a run-scoring double in the second and hit a three-run homer off A. J. Schugel in Arizona’s five-run eighth.

INDIANS 10, TIGERS 1 Cleveland’s Yan Gomes homered and drove in five runs, and pitcher Corey Kluber (1-3) happily accepted the offensive output to earn a win at Detroit, his first victory of the season. He struck out 10 and gave up two hits in eight innings.

Kluber, the 2014 American League Cy Young Award winner, went 9-16 last year. The Indians had backed him with a total of three runs in his first three starts this season.

BLUE JAYS 9, ATHLETICS 3 Troy Tulowitzki hit two solo home runs, Josh Donaldson added a three-run blast, and Toronto beat visiting Oakland, ending the Athletics’ six-game winning streak.

J. A. Happ (3-0), a left-hander, allowed three runs and seven hits in seven innings to win his third straight start. PHILLIES 10, BREWERS 6 Maikel Franco hit his third homer in two days, Odubel Herrera homered and reached base five times, and Philadelphia won at Milwaukee.


