


In a classical-music-comedy market (yes, there is one) buoyed by social media, the German female quartet Salut Salon has developed a loyal following. The group’s performance style mixes the virtuosic silliness perfected by the duo Igudesman & Joo with the high-octane performance style of the rock-cover specialists Two Cellos, but adds lavish doses of whimsy and sex appeal. A video clip of the violinists Angelika Bachmann and Iris Siegfried, the cellist Sonja Lena Schmid and the pianist Anne-Monika von Twardowski engaged in competitive instrumental acrobatics during a medley of Vivaldi, Mozart and Weill has drawn over 20 million clicks on YouTube.

On Sunday the ensemble made its New York debut at the Schimmel Center at Pace University, with the violinist Meta Hüper replacing Ms. Siegfried, who is on maternity leave. The performance cemented Salut Salon as something like the Charlie’s Angels of comedy chamber music. But the show, “A Carnival of the Animals and Other Fantasies,” also highlighted some of the difficulties inherent in translation — from one culture or language to another, and from the quick-gratification medium of video clips to an evening-long live performance.

The musicians’ technical chops are unassailable. All four moved freely between classical showpieces like Saint-Saëns’s “Fossils” or Rimsky-Korsakov’s “Flight of the Bumblebee” and arrangements like their own clever mash-up of the “Jaws” theme with Weill’s “ Mack the Knife.” They show breathtaking versatility in their ability to sing, to switch over to instruments like the xylophone, accordion or musical saw as needed, and to bow strings to comic effect.

But however finely honed the ensemble’s physical comedy, some of the spoken introductions linking this loose collection of animal-theme music fell flat. It seems churlish to find fault with the women’s English when they recently completed a tour of France with a French version of the same program, and when their lineup includes songs in Swahili and Finnish. Even so, linguistic stumbles and slips were a distraction.

Some of the humor, too, threatened to go under in an American context. A sketch purporting to show the work of a Chinese Mardi Gras planning committee named “Bling Bling” — if I correctly understood the garbled introduction — earned just awkward giggles. So did attempts to point out individual audience members for their resemblance to pachyderms and possums. That sort of cabaret-style tease works best in a clublike setting: an intimate space like the Hamburg salon that gave birth to the group in 2002. A byproduct of YouTube fame may be the temptation to perform in spaces that are ultimately too large to allow Salut Salon’s goofy charm to resonate without strain.

Still, the four women’s self-deprecating humor and vivacious performance style is hard to resist, and the bow-to-bow combat of their Vivaldi contest — here offered as an encore — is a masterpiece of classical comedy.


