


Back in the days when mixed martial arts was still a vaguely disreputable spectacle that had not yet moved toward the sports mainstream, its biggest star was a former professional wrestler, Brock Lesnar. Now after an absence of almost five years, he is returning to the sport, at least for one night.

Lesnar brought the sport some razzle-dazzle from World Wrestling Entertainment, where he had been a star after an N.C.A.A. champion amateur wrestling career at the University of Minnesota.

Though his W.W.E. fame would have been enough to earn him a mixed martial arts career, he turned out to be an accomplished fighter in the Octagon, winning the heavyweight title in his third Ultimate Fighting Championship bout over the legend Randy Couture. His success in a sport that was not fixed struck a blow for wrestlers as legitimate athletes, not merely bulked up showmen.

Lesnar defended his title twice, but his career was derailed by bouts of diverticulitis. He lost the U.F.C. title to Cain Velasquez in 2010, then after a year away lost a comeback fight to Alistair Overeem. He immediately announced his retirement and soon returned to the colorful, and predetermined, world of professional wrestling.

But “that decision has haunted me,” Lesnar told ESPN on Monday. “I never lost to an opponent; I lost to diverticulitis.”

So Lesnar will return to face Mark Hunt as part of the U.F.C. 200 card in Las Vegas on July 9, he announced Monday.

(A reporter for mmafighting.com, Ariel Helwani, broke the news of Lesnar’s return on Saturday and was later ejected from a U.F.C. card at the Forum in Los Angeles. A U.F.C. spokesman told The Los Angeles Times that reporting the news was not the only factor in Helwani’s ejection and said he should have sought a comment from the U.F.C. on the story. Helwani tweeted, “Did nothing unethical. I reported fight news. That’s it.”)

Lesnar was always a huge draw for the U.F.C., whose fans are often followers of professional wrestling as well. His title defense against Frank Mir in 2009 remains the biggest selling pay-per-view in U.F.C. history. Though champions like Daniel Cormier and Miesha Tate are on the July 9 card, Lesnar is likely to drive sales again, despite his long absence.

Lesnar is 38, but mixed martial arts has often been kind to older fighters. The current heavyweight champion, Stipe Miocic, is 33, and the light-heavyweight champ, Cormier, and the new middleweight champ, Michael Bisping, are both 37.

Hunt, Lesnar’s opponent, is even older, at 42. He is ranked eighth among heavyweights, with a U.F.C. record of 7-4-1, and brings a reputation as a hard hitter. In contrast, Lesnar is better wrestling on the ground. The contrast in styles could add more intrigue to the bout.

For now, Lesnar’s return is just for one fight, with permission of the W.W.E., which still has him under contract. Lesnar was noncommittal about future U.F.C. appearances, but did admit to ESPN, “I’m making a boatload of money.”


