


Growing up in the shadow of a famous novelist would probably deter most people from pursuing a career as a fiction writer. It had the opposite effect on Emma Straub, daughter of the best-selling horror and suspense writer Peter Straub.

“I always wanted to be a novelist,” she said.

She was so determined to write for a living that she kept at it, even after the first four novels she had written were turned down.

“They all got rejected by every single person in publishing, in the world,” she said, with what she insists is only a touch of hyperbole. “It’s still true that I will go to a publishing party or event, and the first thing I will think of is, ‘I know who you are, you rejected novels 2 and 4.’” Those days are over. This month, Ms. Straub is releasing her fourth published book, “Modern Lovers,” which is shaping up to be one of this summer’s must-reads. The novel centers on two middle-aged Brooklyn couples whose marriages are in crisis. In a recent telephone interview Ms. Straub, 36, spoke about it. Below are edited excerpts from the conversation.

“Modern Lovers” falls into a crowded literary subgenre of novels about Brooklynites. What made you choose Ditmas Park as a setting?

I wanted to stay as far away from the quote-unquote Brooklyn book as I could, while still having a book take place in recognizable Brooklyn. I didn’t want a book jacket with a row of brownstones. Brooklyn wasn’t the point.

I thought, where can I put them? If I put them in Ditmas Park, they can have lawns and big houses with staircases and driveways and garages, and I thought there could be people playing music in garages, which seems like the most romantic thing in the world to me.

I love that one of the main characters, Elizabeth, is a real estate agent.

One of the things that people mentioned often in reviews of “The Vacationers” [Ms. Straub’s previous novel] was that the people seemed too upper crusty, so I wanted to make sure in this book that the people really had jobs and were seen doing their jobs. Having one character as a real estate agent made sense on a lot of levels. Looking at real estate is all about fantasy and imagination and picturing how your life could be different, and presenting you with all these choices at once.

One notable feature of many of your characters is that they often go to great lengths to avoid conflict.

I am extremely conflict-averse. It really wasn’t until I started dating my husband that I learned it was possible to have an argument with someone and have everyone be O.K. afterwards.

Do you and your dad swap tips?

My dad is probably my toughest critic. When I gave him my new book, he read it and would text me or call me and say he was really enjoying it, and he also told me what he thought was wrong with it. And I was like, “Dad, it’s too late. You’re holding the galley.”


