


FRONT PAGE

An article on April 23 about an executive order issued by Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia that expanded voting rights for convicted felons, using information from the governor’s office, overstated the law’s effect on African-Americans. A subsequent analysis by the governor’s office showed that 45 percent — not a majority — of those affected were African-American. This correction was delayed because the error was not brought to the attention of editors until Thursday.

BUSINESS DAY

A headline on Friday for an article about Exelon’s plans to shut two nuclear power plants referred incorrectly in some editions to the timing of the closures. As the article correctly noted, one of the plants will be closed in June 2017 and the other in June 2018; they have not already closed.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the new oil minister in Saudi Arabia, Khalid al-Falih, misstated the time period during which the country issued a directive to diversify its economy. It was in April, not last month.

SPORTS

A picture caption in some copies last Saturday with an article about the Dodgers’ starting pitcher making his major league debut against the Mets misstated his surname. As the article correctly noted, he is Julio Urias, not Arias.

•

An article on Monday about Shelby Rogers’s upset of Irina-Camelia Begu at the French Open misstated the set in which Rogers broke Begu when she was serving at 4-5. It was the second set, not the third. (As the article correctly noted elsewhere, they played only two sets.)

WEEKEND

An article on Friday about Edgar Feuchtwanger, author of the memoir “I Was Hitler’s Neighbor,” misstated Hitler’s address in Munich when he moved into Mr. Feuchtwanger’s neighborhood in 1929. It was 16 Prinzregentenplatz (Prince Regent Square), not 16 Prinzregentenstrasse (Prince Regent Street).

TRAVEL

An article on Page 12 this weekend about a family-friendly trip to New Orleans misstates part of the name of a green space in the French Quarter. It is Jackson Square, not Jackson Park. The article also refers incorrectly to a sightseeing carriage. It is led by a mule, not by a donkey. In addition, the article misstates part of the names of two streets. They are Frenchmen Street, not Frenchmen’s Street, and Washington Avenue, not Washington Street. And the article misidentifies the departure location for a jazz cruise. It is the Toulouse Street Wharf, not Canal Place. (The errors about Jackson Square, the carriage and Frenchmen Street also appear in an accompanying article on Page 11 about five vacation alternatives to Disney World.)

REAL ESTATE

The continuation of a cover article this weekend about deciding whether to buy a home or rent appears twice in some copies, on Pages 12 and 13. Because of that error, the Ask Real Estate column was omitted in those editions. The column can be found at nytimes.com/realestate.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


