


The jazz violinist and mandolinist Aaron Weinstein is an entertainer of almost as many parts as a Rube Goldberg contraption. A major musical talent with a sideline in comedy, Mr. Weinstein presents himself as a highbrow dandy in the tradition of Jack Benny, Victor Borge and Oscar Levant. And at his show “Violinspiration” at Pangea on Thursday evening, he expertly played off the various sides of his personality.

The verbal part of his show was a series of feints and parries, delivered with a deadpan earnestness subtly tinged with sarcasm that kept the audience off guard until a nonsensical tangent revealed it was all a joke — or was it? His comic set pieces were sandwiched between his superb performances of standards accompanied by the pianist Tedd Firth playing in a more earthy style than usual.

From a jazz historical perspective, Mr. Weinstein is an heir of Stephane Grappelli and Joe Venuti with a sensibility rooted in the American songbook. When not improvising in extended virtuosic riffs, he pays close attention to the lyrics of the songs he plays. And on Thursday, he infused standards like “Ain’t Misbehavin’” (sly and teasing) and “Just One of Those Things” (cheerfully blasé), and show tunes from “Gypsy” (an exquisitely tender “Small World”), with suggestions of a story line.

Especially outstanding was a rendition of “Georgia on My Mind,” in which he used enhanced vibrato and ornamentation to convey a wailing soulfulness. It was an atypical move for a musician who shies away from expressive extravagance.

Comedically, Mr. Weinstein is a hyperarticulate wit. One of the show’s funniest monologues was his recitation of a lengthy, fictional music review, replete with academic jargon and bogus literary allusions that sounded authentic until it morphed into pretentious absurdist nonsense. It was delivered with uncanny poise by a musician who, at 30 and professionally active for more than a decade, still has the mystique of a wunderkind.

Mr. Weinstein had two special guests. The singer Janis Siegel offered adventurous jazz renditions of “Jeepers Creepers” and “Last Night When We Were Young,” backed by Mr. Weinstein and Mr. Firth. The journalist and sometime performer Michael Musto, who declared Mr. Weinstein his second favorite musician, after Diana Ross, delivered a scathingly amusing parody of Ms. Ross’s upbeat rendition of “I Loves You, Porgy.”


