


For Kara Walker and her father Larry, art has always been a family affair — and a longstanding one. “The intent to become an artist was there early on, from about age 7 or 8,” Larry explained of his own creative development earlier this week, sitting next to Kara, who has curated a show of her father’s work that opens today at Sikkema Jenkins. As a teenager, Larry visited MoMA on Sundays; he remembers, too, being transfixed by his brother-in-law’s glass paintings displayed in his family’s sixth-floor walk-up apartment off 145th Street in Harlem.

Much later, when Larry was a professor at Georgia State and also immersed in making his own art, a young Kara would sometimes sit in his lap and watch. “I just re-read my diary from 1983, and it’s very interesting,” said the younger Walker, who grew up deeply influenced by her father’s work. Organizing the exhibition also helped her understand her own artistic motivations better: “There’s a daughterly intention to understand connections that I lived around and reacted against,” she said. The 38 mounted flat works, which span 50 years, examine a variety of personal and political relationships that trace Larry’s trajectory through the eyes of his child, one of America’s preeminent contemporary artists. With father-daughter ribbing on full display, Larry and Kara Walker sat down in Sikkema Jenkins’s large white middle gallery to chat about the exhibition.

What inspired you to curate a show of your father’s work?

KARA: It seemed like an easy one in a way. Part of the 80th birthday present was hiring an archivist to help collate my dad’s work. It seemed like a nice idea to see if we could organize a show.

LARRY: Interestingly enough, she came up with this idea. From her perspective, she could see the relationship between this series and that series and how one influenced the other. When she started making the selections of the pieces ...

KARA: You were annoyed!

LARRY: I became convinced there were relationships that I had not seen. She had lived with some of them hanging on the walls in the house growing up.

In what ways has your father influenced your work?

KARA: It’s very rare to have an artist parent who also encourages the art of his children. I spent a lot of time with my dad growing up, hanging around the university art department and accidentally watching life-drawing classes for adults, which I was embarrassed about!

Larry, has Kara influenced your practice?

LARRY: Yes, in a variety of ways. The whole idea of art for young people was an important thing and Kara reinforced that. I could see right there that something was happening with her work. In fact, we have a few of her pieces that go back to when she was 3 years old.

KARA: I don’t think I was that kind of prodigy! But I like that you framed that work anyway. Abstract paintings from when I was 3!

LARRY: Plan A was for her to be a cartoonist.

KARA: Yeah, I merged those two worlds, I think.

What themes did you come upon as you were working through curating the show?

KARA: I think there’s figurative work that has a spiritual component, then there’s landscape work that has a figurative component; and there’s social commentary in the abstract wall works that have landscape in them. It’s interesting to me that you work in series, because that creates a separation. I kind of dissolve some of those barriers.

Is there a piece in the show that represents your practice?

LARRY: Jesus, I don’t know if that’s feasible. You find one?

KARA: The one straight ahead. What’s it called?

LARRY: It’s a part of the “Metamorphic Series,” and you may be right. The “Metamorphic Series” seems to be culmination of a lot of the other things I’ve been doing. The piece, “Children of Society 1,” it was done around 1968. It’s got an exterior-interior space and positive and negative form. The piece next to it to the left, “Gist Invasion,” came out of a very personal trauma. I had a GIST tumor and a short time after that, I started this series of drawings, as though the body was being invaded.

KARA: That’s the thing that unifies your work for me and was a jumping-off point for thinking about historical and personal trauma in my work. There’s a kind of interior-exterior tension that results in some tertiary quality.

Has this show revealed something about your relationship?

LARRY: It showed me she cared enough about me and my work to express it externally.

KARA: There’s this heaviness in the work that is really affecting. It’s affecting for me as an artist because I know what I go through in the studio to realize the work. So seeing my dad as just not my dad but as an artist who is struggling with mortality is humanizing and scary.

LARRY: Art should have something to do with human feeling. It should have something to do with an expression with mankind in general, and that has always been a background for the work.

This interview has been edited and condensed.


