


GOTHENBURG, Sweden — The Belarussian writer Svetlana Alexievich said she had spent her life asking one big — and very Russian — question: Why doesn’t people’s suffering translate into freedom? It’s a question that lies at the heart of her five encyclopedic volumes of oral history of postwar Russia. When she won the Nobel Prize in Literature last year, those books were barely known in the English-speaking world.

That is now starting to change. Next week, Random House is releasing “Secondhand Time: The Last of the Soviets,” her 2013 oral history of post-Soviet Russia, in English translation for the first time, to be followed by two more of her books by 2018. Already hailed as a masterpiece across Europe, “Secondhand Time” is an intimate portrait of a country yearning for meaning after the sudden lurch from Communism to capitalism in the 1990s plunged it into existential crisis.

A series of monologues by people across the former Soviet empire, it is Tolstoyan in scope, driven by the idea that history is made not only by major players but also by ordinary people talking in their kitchens. With every page, the book makes clear how President Vladimir V. Putin manages to hold his grip on a country of 143 million people across 11 time zones.

“In the West, people demonize Putin,” Ms. Alexievich, who turns 68 later this month, said in a recent interview here, speaking Russian through a translator after a conference on her work at the University of Gothenburg. “They do not understand that there is a collective Putin, consisting of some millions of people who do not want to be humiliated by the West, ” she added. “There is a little piece of Putin in everyone.”

Not that Ms. Alexievich is a fan. On the contrary, after winning the Nobel Prize in October, she said in a daring news conference in Minsk, Belarus, that she loved the Russian world of the humanities but not the Russian world “of Stalin or Putin.”

A diminutive woman with a kind, round face and eyes that show empathy and humor, Ms. Alexievich returned to live in Minsk in 2011 to be near her daughter and granddaughter after a peripatetic decade in exile in Europe. She had left to protest the regime of the Belarussian president Alexander Lukashenko, who has been in power since 1994 and curtailed press freedom. She said she planned to remain in Minsk and hoped the Nobel would give her some protection and freedom to speak her mind.

Her 1997 book, “Voices From Chernobyl” (published in English in 2006), about the 1986 nuclear disaster in Ukraine, was banned for years in Belarus, which absorbed the brunt of the radiation. Mr. Lukashenko’s government, though, has never allowed the extent of the damage to come to light. “A totalitarian power is mainly busy in keeping itself alive,” Ms. Alexievich said. The book is now imported to Belarus from Russia, she said, but at high prices that few can afford.

Like all her works, “Voices From Chernobyl” is nonfiction, based on years of interviews, but it has sophisticated literary qualities. The people with whom she speaks try to make sense of radiation — invisible and powerful, almost like God — and of the disintegration of their bodies and the poisoning of their land. The catastrophe becomes a metaphor for the implosion of the entire Soviet project.

Ms. Alexievich discussed her approach in her Nobel Prize lecture. “I collect the everyday life of feelings, thoughts and words,” she said. “I collect the life of my time. I’m interested in the history of the soul. The everyday life of the soul, the things that the big picture of history usually omits, or disdains.”

She returns to her interlocutors again and again, often for years, to get to the essence of their stories. “You suddenly feel when the temperature gets higher, when you get deeper into something,” she said. She edits the conversations heavily, until the narrative flows. She cites “Shoah,” Claude Lanzmann’s 1985 Holocaust documentary, as an influence.

“Secondhand Time” includes testimonies by the friends and family of a teenage suicide, a onetime Kremlin official, Gulag survivors, witnesses to ethnic sectarian violence in the Caucasus, anti-government demonstrators in Moscow and Belarus, a Tajik laborer. “Russians don’t just want to live,” one person says in the book. “They want to live for something.” There is plenty of misery, but there are also jokes.

Bela Shayevich, the book’s English translator, said “Secondhand Time” was “an update of 19th-century Russian literature for the 21st century.” People read Russian novels not for the happy endings, she added, but “because there is great catharsis in great pain and then something that is sublime.”

“Secondhand Time” is Ms. Alexievich’s fifth book. Her first, “War’s Unwomanly Face” (1985, with an expanded edition in 2002), was about Russian women who had combat roles in World War II, only to return home to be shunned. Random House is to release it next year in a translation by Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky, whose work has breathed new life into Russian classics. (In 2018, Random House will release the couple’s translation of “The Last Witnesses,” Ms. Alexievich’s 1985 book on memories of Russians who were children during World War II.)

When it first appeared in the 1980s, “War’s Unwomanly Face” caught the attention and the praise of Mikhail Gorbachev, then the Soviet leader. A few years ago, Ms. Alexievich met Mr. Gorbachev for the first time. “He said, ‘You’re so small, how can you write such big books?’” she recalled with a smile. “You are not a giant either,” she said she told him. “But you could destroy an empire.”

She was put on trial on charges of defaming the Soviet Army with her third book, “Zinky Boys” (1992), about Soviet soldiers in Afghanistan, some thousands of whom were sent back home in zinc coffins. The testimonies eroded notions of military heroism. She was acquitted.

Ms. Alexievich was born in Stanislav (now Ivano-Frankivsk), Ukraine, to a Belarussian father who never gave up his belief in Socialism (but thought Stalin had ruined it) and a Ukrainian mother. Both were teachers. One in four Belarussians died in World War II. The scars of history shaped her. She studied journalism at the University of Minsk at a time when students had to ask permission to read Nietzsche and Freud — her request was denied — but she was also influenced by war stories told by her grandmother.

Of the thousands of stories she’s heard, she said, a few have affected her deeply. One is that of a woman she talked to for “War’s Unwomanly Face” who said she wasn’t afraid of combat but hated having to wear men’s underwear as part of her uniform. “We were prepared to die for the Motherland, but not in those underpants,” Ms. Alexievich recalled the woman telling her.

Another is that of a woman in “Voices from Chernobyl” whose husband died of radiation sickness after clearing debris. By the end, when he is screaming in pain, the woman says she has two strategies: to pour vodka into his feeding tube or to make love to his ravaged body. When Ms. Alexievich first published this account, she left out the woman’s name, to protect her privacy, only to get an angry phone call from her. “And she said: ‘No. I suffered so much. He suffered so much. I want my last name and his name in the book,’” she said.

These testimonies have an indelible emotional impact on readers, as well as on the writer. “Sometimes I have pauses, and I don’t listen to anything,” Ms. Alexievich said. “Especially now, because what people are telling now is really horrible.”

Weary of war stories, Ms. Alexievich is working on two new collections — on aging and on love — and is preparing to travel across the former Soviet Union to gather material. She has never considered writing fiction. “No,” she said decisively. “Life is much more interesting.”


