


At the 2016 Venice Architecture Biennale, Australia’s canal-side pavilion has been turned into a public swimming pool — and drawn in titans of the industry for a paddle. Stepped bleachers line one wall, locker-room benches another; and the walls are dappled with soft reflections from the pool’s rippling surface.

“It has a calming quality,” says the urban strategist Michelle Tabet, one of the creative directors of the Pool project, alongside Isabelle Toland and Amelia Holliday of Aileen Sage Architects. “You feel like you want to relax — there’s a real change in how people behave.” While clever lighting gives the illusion of depth, the water in the pool is only knee-high; but guests are welcome to dip their toes in the water or even get in and cool off. “We want to invite people to interact with it,” says Tabet. “I think even Richard Rogers put his feet in!”

The hard concrete corner of the swimming bath that juts into the center of the pavilion is an architectural reference to ocean pools on the coast of New South Wales: safe swimming areas in waters notorious for their poisonous jellyfish and healthy shark population. Gouged into the coastal rock, Tabet regards these pools as fantastic feats of engineering. “Most were built between the wars as public works,” she explains.

The Pool (and an accompanying volume, “The Pool: Architecture, Culture and Identity in Australia”) looks beyond the structure and design of Australia’s public baths to explore their social importance. “The swimming pool is a very Australian public space,” explains Holliday. “It’s our version of the piazza or square, so we wanted to pull architecture into conversation with non-architects.” Prominent Australian figures — including the authors Christos Tsiolkas and Anna Funder, the environmental advocate Tim Flannery and the designers behind the fashion label Romance Was Born — have contributed to the pavilion by way of sharing their swimming-pool stories, told as oral histories transmitted from portable radio sets dotting the bleachers and illustrated in a newspaper available poolside.

For Hetti Perkins, an eminent curator of indigenous arts, the swimming pool is a key site of social integration. Her father, the Australian aboriginal activist Charles Perkins, led the Freedom Ride of 1965 that exposed embedded racism in towns around New South Wales. Perkins identifies her father and the Freedom Riders’ decision to visit the artesian baths in the town of Moree as an event that “really crystallized the intent of the Freedom Ride. Indigenous children were not allowed in the pool. My father, a big fan of swimming pools himself, went to take a few of the kids in and of course they were barred from entry.” This enforcement of official segregation was the catalyst for a demonstration at the pool, later regarded as a turning point in the Australian Indigenous civil rights movement.

One design feature that has caused confusion among Italian visitors is a sign painted on the wall reading “Aqua Profonda.” To local eyes, it appears misspelt (“aqua” is the Latin spelling, “acqua” the Italian), but its presence in the pavilion has specific cultural significance. In the early 1950s, the manager of Melbourne’s Fitzroy Baths found himself constantly fishing children, who had recently migrated from Italy, out of the deep end of the pool, and the sign was his misspelt attempt to alert them to danger. Uncorrected for over six decades, Aqua Profonda has become part of local lore, appearing most recently as the title to a track by the Grammy-winning singer songwriter Courtney Barnett.

“The pool and what it represents is woven into Australian identity and culture,” explains the five-time Olympic gold medalist Ian Thorpe, who also contributed a story to the project. Visiting the pavilion in Venice, Thorpe was particularly struck by the scent design (created by the Sydney-based parfumier Elise Pioch with the artist duo Lyn & Tony), which he found powerfully evocative of outdoor Australian pools. “There are two smells,” he explains. “One that you’d associate with fresh rain: the slight smell of eucalyptus and decaying plant matter that you’d find in a wet natural environment. The other is the smell of smoke that you’d get after a bush fire, a smell we commonly associate in Australia with summer. The pool I swam in when I was training and where I put in most of my hours was right across the road from the national park — the smell of cut grass and rain and smoke took me right back.”


