


BOSTON — For more than three weeks, the Yankees had been searching for a breakout offensive performance, the kind with hits and runs stacked up so high that the pitchers would not have to fret over their work, and victory was virtually ensured.

During that time, dating back to April 9, the Yankees never scored more than six runs, and they reached that plateau only once. Most of the time, they had to settle for two or three runs, and their record reflected that pitiful production.

Sunday was different. On Sunday night, through a steady rain and chilly winds, the Yankees’ offense finally materialized, thanks mostly to Alex Rodriguez. They scored seven runs, a total greater than the sum of their runs in their four previous games, and a confidence-building win seemed within their grasp.

But on a night when the Yankees finally hit and scored in volume, the pitching squandered it all. Nathan Eovaldi, the starter, gave up two leads and six runs, and Dellin Betances gave up a two-run home run to Christian Vazquez in the seventh as Boston won, 8-7, to complete a three-game sweep.

Manager Joe Girardi said this loss was harder to accept than previous losses because of how the offense had finally clicked into motion. More pressing, the loss dropped the Yankees to 8-15 as they consolidated their position in last place in the American League East, while the streaking Red Sox vaulted into first in the first game of May.

While most in the Yankees clubhouse continue to stress how early it is in the season, some are starting to acknowledge a mounting urgency. The Red Sox moved to five games over .500 for the first time since 2013, when the won they World Series, and the Yankees are seven games under .500 for the first time in Mark Teixeira’s eight-year tenure with them.

“It’s small sample size right now, but it’s getting bigger,” said Teixeira, who had a single and a run batted in. “We don’t want to keep blaming it on bad luck or ‘it’s just one month.’ We need to start winning games.”

Rodriguez spent time before the game discussing his theory that the Yankees’ offense should strive to score five runs a game, a tactical outlook he notes has served the team well over the years. For example, in 2009, the Yankees averaged 5.64 runs per game in the regular season, and they won the World Series.

“I feel like our responsibility is to go out and try to score five runs,” he said. “Anything over that is a bonus; anything under it is just not good enough.”

About an hour later, Rodriguez was in the batter’s box trying to prove his theorem single-handedly. He hit a two-run homer and a two-run double, both off Red Sox starter David Price, and scored a run on Teixeira’s single in the Yankees’ three-run fifth.

That gave the Yankees a 6-4 lead, but in the bottom of the fifth, Eovaldi surrendered a two-run homer to Travis Shaw, and the score was even again. Eovaldi also gave up a 3-1 lead in the third.

“The most frustrating part for me is that we kept scoring tonight and I wasn’t able to hold the lead,” Eovaldi said.

The score remained even until the seventh, when Betances grooved a 97-mile-per-hour fastball straight down the middle to catcher Vazquez with a runner on base. Vazquez put a perfect swing on the ball and sent it screaming clear over the Green Monster and onto Lansdowne Street, giving Boston an 8-6 lead.

The Yankees scored a run in the top of the eighth when Starlin Castro doubled off Koji Uehara, took third on a groundout and came home on a wild pitch. But Uehara struck out Carlos Beltran to end the eighth, and Craig Kimbrel locked down the ninth for his eighth save.

Vazquez’s blast was the second significant home run that Betances gave up in this series. On Friday, David Ortiz’s two-run homer off Betances in the eighth inning decided the opening game of the series. That one came on a breaking ball that hung up in the strike zone, but the homer by Vazquez was a fastball on a platter. Betances has now given up home runs in his last three outings.

“I pretty much lost two of these games,” Betances said. “I’ll take responsibility on myself. I know there’s better days ahead.”

Price, who signed a seven-year, $217 million contract with the Red Sox in the off-season, did not have a particularly good outing in his 31st start against the Yankees. Like Eovaldi, he surrendered six runs. But he was the pitcher of record when Vazquez homered, so he improved to 4-0, with an unsightly 6.14 E.R.A.

The Yankees had been six games under .500 for the first time since Girardi took over in 2008. The last times they were that far under .500 were in 2005 and 2007, under Manager Joe Torre. They were eight games under .500 in 2007 (21-29), and as in 2005, they still made the playoffs under Torre, then in his last season with them.

“One of the things that Joe Torre always advocated in our clubhouse — and I think about this often — is, think small and big things will happen,” Rodriguez said. “That’s, I think, where we are today.”

Where they really are is last place.


