


Three New York men were accused on Tuesday of selling over 100 illegal assault weapons from a shop near Rochester in what the authorities said was the largest gun seizure made by the state attorney general’s office since the SAFE Act was passed by the State Legislature after the 2012 mass shooting at a Connecticut school.

The owner of the gun shop, Kordell Jackson, 40, of West Henrietta, was arrested on charges including three counts of first-degree criminal sale of a firearm, the authorities said. Also arrested were two shop employees: Joshua Perkins, 28, of Irondequoit, and Ken Youngren, 30, who the authorities said was a part-time police officer in the villages of Andover and Belmont. They face charges similar to those brought against Mr. Jackson.

When reached by phone on Tuesday before he was arrested, Mr. Youngren declined to comment. Attempts to reach Mr. Jackson and Mr. Perkins by phone were unsuccessful.

The investigation began in 2014, when agents with the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives noticed “irregularities” in the records of the store, Jackson Guns and Ammo in Henrietta, and alerted the State Police, according to a joint news release from the state attorney general and the State Police superintendent.

According to the release, investigators began tracking weapons sold from the store and found that more than 100 were illegal under the SAFE Act, which is formally the Secure Ammunition and Firearms Enforcement Act of 2013. About 10 of the weapons would have been illegal even before the laws went into effect.

Among the weapons seized were two Bushmaster XM-15s, part of the same line as one of the guns used by Adam Lanza in the shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn.

“New York has enacted some of the toughest, most sensible gun safety laws in the country, and with today’s arrests, we are sending a message that these laws will be vigorously enforced,” the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, a Democrat, said. “The tragedies in Orlando, Newtown, Aurora and communities across the country are clear signs that we need to get our national gun violence epidemic under control.”

Thousands of people have been charged under the new laws, which went into effect shortly after the shootings in Newtown. A majority of charges have been for criminal firearm possession, which was elevated from a misdemeanor to a felony.

Mr. Jackson owned a second gun shop in Scottsville but closed both stores in January 2015, saying the assault weapons ban as well as other regulations and taxes had hurt his business.

“We catered to the assault rifles and once that was out, it kind of hurt us,” Mr. Jackson told Time Warner Cable News in Rochester at the time. “You can’t stay in business with all this going on.”

The SAFE Act was denounced by gun-rights activists and has been deeply unpopular in parts of upstate New York.


