


FRONT PAGE

A map in some editions on April 25 with the continuation of an article about a report by an international panel of investigators that details the abduction of 43 missing Mexican students in the city of Iguala in September 2014 located incorrectly a town that is near Iguala, called Cocula. It is in Guerrero State, in southwest Mexico, as is Iguala; the Cocula that was labeled on the map is in Jalisco State, northwest of Guerrero.

•

An article on March 4 about President Xi Jinping’s remedy for China’s economic gloom, which has echoes of Reaganomics, misstated part of the name of an American credit-rating agency that lowered its outlook for China from stable to negative earlier that week. It is Moody’s Investors Service (not Investor). Although the error was corrected online shortly after publication, editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on March 14 about an attack by Al Qaeda’s North African affiliate that killed 16 people at three beach resort hotels near Abidjan in Ivory Coast referred incorrectly to Abidjan. It is the economic capital of Ivory Coast and its largest city — not the political capital, which is Yamoussoukro. Editors were alerted to the error the day of publication but failed to follow through promptly with online and print corrections.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Tuesday about proposals to require mandatory training for physicians who prescribe opioids misstated a summary by Dr. Darrell G. Kirch, president of the Association of American Medical Colleges, of the fears of medical school leaders. They feared that the federal mandate could lead to the imposition of additional legislative agendas that were not in the interest of patient care; they did not say the reverse, that such agendas were in the interest of patients.

•

The Mediator column on Monday, about Stephen Colbert’s efforts to find his footing as host of “The Late Show” on CBS, rendered part of a headline on the website Daily Kos incorrectly. The headline, as it appeared on the website, said “Calling Jon Stewart: America Needs You Now More Than Ever.” (Not “American.”)

SPORTS

An article last Wednesday about the effect of aging on elite runners misidentified the marathon at which Steve Spence won a bronze medal. It was the 1991 world championships, not the 1992 Olympics.

THE ARTS

Because of an editing error, the byline was omitted for an article on Tuesday about Scott Rothkopf, chief curator of the Whitney Museum of American Art. The article was by Robin Pogrebin. In addition, the article misidentified the institution where Yve-Alain Bois, Mr. Rothkopf’s thesis adviser at Harvard, is now an art history professor. It is the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J. — not Princeton University.

•

A music review on Monday about concerts at Carnegie Hall by the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra and Chorus and by the Utah Symphony referred incorrectly to the music director of the Utah Symphony at one point. He is Thierry Fischer and thus is Mr. Fischer, not Mr. Thierry.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Tuesday about the artist Marisol misstated the given name of an artist with whom she studied. He was Yasuo Kuniyoshi, not Kazuo. The obituary also misidentified the location of El Museo del Barrio, where the exhibition “Marisol: Sculptures and Works on Paper” was presented. It is in Manhattan, not in the Bronx.

DINING

The Pour column last Wednesday, which recommended 20 wines costing less than $20, misstated the vintage of the Domaine Michel Brégeon par Frédéric Lailler Muscadet Sèvre et Maine Sur Lie. It is 2013, not 2014. In addition, an accompanying picture was published in error. It showed a 2014 Domaine de la Bregeonnette (not the 2013 Domaine Michel Brégeon par Frédéric Lailler) Muscadet Sèvre et Maine Sur Lie.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


