


LONDON — Dinosaurs make for good box office. Steven Spielberg’s 1993 “Jurassic Park” and its three sequels have become the tyrannosaurus rex of movie franchises, grossing more than $3.7 billion, and there are people of a certain age who cannot forget the sight of a pterosaur carrying off Raquel Welch in the 1966 kitsch classic “One Million Years B.C.”

But has the popularity of these cinematic creatures boosted the market for the fossilized remains of their real-life predecessors? A combined live and online sale on May 28 of fossils and minerals at Auctionata in Berlin, which included a 150-million-year-old skeleton of a stegosaurus valued at 2.4 million euros, or about $2.69 million, certainly generated plenty of publicity.

The near-complete late Jurassic skeleton, discovered in Wyoming in 2010, was one of the 90 lots in the sale, all of which were supplied by Redgallery, a specialist dealer in Hamburg.

“This was our first dedicated auction of fossils and minerals,” said Leon Dammann, the director of private and gallery collections at Auctionata, which was founded in 2012. ”We think it fits well into our portfolio of categories.”

The German firm is one of a number of companies seeking to reach new buyers over the internet. Auctions are streamed daily, and the company has an inventory of about 25,000 objects in an online shop, with fixed prices.

But media interest can be one thing, consumer spending another. During the May 28 auction, just 22 percent of the lots attracted bidding. There were no bids on the stegosaurus. The total from confirmed and “conditional” sales (in which bidders on lots that failed to meet reserve have an option to buy) was just €36,325 as of Thursday. Two lots of Jurassic snail-shaped ammonites were among the confirmed successes with prices of €3,000 each with fees.

“We wanted to find out how the new media would open up new markets for rare fossils,” said Andreas Guhr, the founder of Redgallery, who has been dealing in fossils and minerals for more than 40 years. “The result was disappointing. The market is still very specialized.”

Mr. Dammann attributed the underwhelming performance of the sale to uncertainty surrounding Germany’s proposed Cultural Heritage Protection Law, which would regulate the export of artifacts bought in the country, and a dearth of Russian bidding following the fall in the price of oil. Dealers also noted that the herbivorous stegosaurus lacks the “wow” factor of a meat-eater like tyrannosaurus rex.

Back in October 1997, when “Jurassic Park” was still the highest-grossing movie of all time, Sotheby’s auctioned the fossilized skeleton of a tyrannosaurus rex called Sue that had been the subject of a legal battle after being excavated in 1990 in South Dakota by the fossil dealer Peter L. Larsen. The skeleton sold for $8.4 million to the Field Museum in Chicago, and it remains the highest price for a fossil at auction.

“The movie certainly gave a shot in the arm to the dinosaur market,” said James Hyslop, a specialist at Christie’s, which holds hybrid “Travel, Science and Natural History” sales twice a year at its South Kensington location.

But blockbuster auction prices like that have become a thing of the past. Sotheby’s last specialist “Natural History” sale was in Paris in 2014 and brought in a total of €1 million. Bonhams holds three such sales a year in Los Angeles; in January, an iridescent ammonite with blue coloration — the sort of fossil that also appeals to interior decorators — brought a top price of $43,750.

“Because the oil money has dried up, and museums have experienced catastrophic funding decreases over the last 10 years especially, there is less demand except for the finest and most rare stuff,” said Lowell Carhart, a co-founder of the 22nd Street Mineral and Fossil Show in Tucson.

An American rival to Fossilworld Munich in October, Mr. Carhart’s event last year attracted 41,000 visitors. He said most rare fossils were sold privately to preferred clients by specialist dealers and trader-collectors, who are now responsible for more than 90 percent of excavations.

Some museums are buying fossils discreetly from dealers, rather than pay for expensive digs. In December 2014, the Natural History Museum in London put on display a well preserved skeleton of a stegosaurus it had spotted for sale at the 2012 Tucson Gem, Mineral and Fossil Showcase. The purchase price was £3 million, or about $5 million, according to two specialists with knowledge of the matter who declined to be named because of client confidentiality protocols.

When asked to confirm the price, Murray MacKay, a public relations officer at the Natural History Museum, said, “We don’t tend to disclose the size of donations for these kinds of specimens.”

Funding came from 70 donors, with most of the money provided by Jeremy Herrmann, a hedge fund manager based in London.

Some benchmark auction values should at least be established on Tuesday and Wednesday when Summers Place Auctions in Sussex offers, without reserves, the fossil collection of Emmen Zoo in the Netherlands, which has relocated and evolved into an adventure park.

The 180 lots include a near complete skeleton of a harpocrasaurus, a late Cretaceous duck-billed herbivore. Rupert van der Werff, a specialist at Summers Place, said the skeleton had been bought by the zoo in 1992 from a dealer for about $600,000. It carries an estimate of 50,000 pounds to £80,000, or about $73,000 to $117,000.

The sale, which includes lots estimated at as little as £30, also features a late Pleistocene era skeleton of a saber-toothed cat — exactly the sort of animal that might have provided the fur for the bikini Ms. Welch modeled in “One Million Years B.C.” The skeleton is valued at £6,000 to £10,000.

Mr. Van der Werff, who has been holding natural history auctions at Summers Place since 1998, acknowledges that fossils remain modestly priced and their market stubbornly small.

“We’ve never made the breakthrough to getting broader appeal,” he said. “People see them in museums and think they should be in museums.”

Mr. Carhart, the Tucson show organizer, said that large fossils’ relative illiquidity and the difficulty in moving them — the stegosaurus offered by Auctionata weighed in at about 1,900 pounds and was nearly 19 feet long — mitigate against their popularity among a wider group of collectors.

“Dinosaurs are free,” Mr. Carhart said. “What a buyer is actually purchasing is years of unreimbursed search time and thousands upon thousands of skilled hours of preparation time.

“This is why common items stay in the ground,” he continued. “Too little demand and too much preparation time make them unprofitable to excavate.”


