


Emmanuelle Charpentier — one of three scientists credited with starting the gene editing revolution — willingly turned her life over to science. For 25 years, she was a scientific nomad, working at nine institutions in five countries, scrambling for research funds, paid so little she barely scraped by. Now, at 47, with her gene editing discovery, her life has changed.

The process involves a bacterial system, Crispr/cas9, that can be used to add or delete genes in any type of cell. The discovery has sparked a scientific revolution with a seemingly endless list of applications.

Dr. Charpentier would like to see it used, for instance, to remove the mutated gene in blood cells of people with sickle cell disease and to replace it with a normal gene, curing the disease. Other uses include making insect pests unable to reproduce and plants that naturally resist disease.

Dr. Charpentier, now a scientific superstar, was appointed director of the Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology in Berlin and is a founder of two biotech companies.

We spoke while Dr. Charpentier was in New York to receive an honorary degree from New York University. This is an edited and condensed version of our conversation.

You say you always loved science. But why such an itinerant life?

It was the career I chose to have. What was important to me was to tackle different fields and see different institutions, different environments, learn different techniques, see different approaches. And in Europe, it is not easy to have a permanent position, especially when you are a foreigner in that country.

I chose that science would be the main focus of my life. It is a little bit like entering a monastery. This is really the thing that drives you. You tend to be focused and obsessional — you need to be a bit obsessed.

Tell me about your big Crispr discoveries. What was it like for you in the moments when your students told you that crucial experiments worked?

There were two moments. First, there was an experiment that was very critical. It showed that Crispr/cas9 consisted of a protein and two RNA molecules. There are different Crispr systems, and I understood right away that the system I was working on was definitely the minimal system and that it would be very attractive to harness.

I was in Umea in Sweden, and my students were in Vienna. That evening, one wrote me an email. I was alone in my office, but at some point, I walked out and there was a colleague of mine there.

I said, “I have very good news and I am very happy.” Then I went back and spent a lot of time writing an email to my students with the series of experiments that had to be done next.

The second moment was even more exciting. We did an experiment that showed Crispr/cas9 was cleaving DNA. This was really, really critical. It was the same story. My student wrote me an email. I called him right away.

This time, it was again in the evening and I was in my office, but there were other people in the lab. I ran out and told the others in the lab. Then I sat down and wrote down what to do next.

Is it difficult being a woman in science?

It’s harder for those women with a family. I am under the impression that many female scientists, four or five years after their Ph.D., give up. They have difficulty projecting that they will have a family life when they will be on the road, moving from lab to lab, for the next 10 to 15 years.

I also felt that to enter the game as a woman in science, you always feel some colleagues are commenting. Let’s say it is like no one will forgive you — the fact that you may not fail, but you may have a phase that is a little bit down. You feel that as a woman, you have to really make sure you are on the money.

Do you still do experiments? What does your work consist of?

I am not doing experiments but I am running a lab, so I am very close to the projects. I also travel once or twice a week, in Germany or abroad. Right now, my work is a lot of replying to email requests, and there are a lot of documents — I need to take care of a lot of paperwork. I also write articles and reviews.

Tell me about the biotech companies you co-founded, Crispr Therapeutics and ERS Genomics. Why two companies?

I had the hope I could use Crispr for human genetic disorders. Crispr Therapeutics is working first on cystic fibrosis and sickle cell disease, and certain types of eye disease. These are more amenable because they involve gene in blood cells and cells of the eye, which are more accessible for targeting.

The other is ERS Genomics, which is a company that is a licensing platform to allow other companies to go ahead and have access to the intellectual property.

What is your life like now?

I like to start early but I also work late. I am rarely in bed before midnight. Right now, I have a very bad tendency to wake up in the middle of the night and work. Sometimes, I then go to sleep again for an hour. I don’t have time to have a social life or even a cultural life.


