


PITTSBURGH — The Mets arrived at PNC Park on Tuesday ranking fourth in the majors in home runs. Yet without many other ways to score, they stood fourth from the bottom in runs per game. Their pitching props them up.

“We’re keeping ourselves in games because we pitch,” Manager Terry Collins said. “We knew going in our pitching was going to make a big difference, and it has.”

It has, just not every day. Only flawless pitching could have saved the Mets from a doubleheader sweep, and they did not get it. They dropped both games by 3-1 scores, managing just nine hits across 18 innings.

The Mets are missing three everyday players — catcher Travis d’Arnaud, first baseman Lucas Duda and third baseman David Wright, who are all on the disabled list. They started seven of the same position players in both games, switching only the catchers. What failed at 4 p.m. also failed at night.

Their tormentor in the opener was familiar: the left-hander Jonathon Niese, who spent his first eight major league seasons with the Mets. He tossed seven scoreless innings to beat Steven Matz, who lasted just five.

In the second game, the Mets could not put a runner on base until the fifth inning against Juan Nicasio. They scored once then, but not at all against four relievers. Mark Melancon saved both games; fittingly, he struck out the side in the nightcap, ending by getting Neil Walker looking. The Mets fanned 14 times in the second game.

Niese was traded last December for Walker, the second baseman who returned to cheers in his hometown, saluting the crowd at the start of both games. Walker has been excellent for the Mets, and Niese improved to 6-2 for the Pirates.

He retired 11 of his first 12 hitters, until Walker singled with two out in the fourth. Soon the bases were loaded and Niese was facing Michael Conforto. He had struck him out earlier and did so again, swinging on a 2-2 fastball.

Conforto made a dynamic impression as a rookie last year, with an .841 on base plus slugging percentage in the regular season and two home runs in Game 4 of the World Series. He sizzled this April, earning the No. 3 spot in the lineup and hitting .365 for the month, but is batting just .160 (17 for 106) since then.

His two strikeouts against Niese both ended innings and stranded four runners in all. The Mets wasted another chance in the fifth, when Matz tripled — the first Met pitcher to do so since Dillon Gee, nearly three years ago — and the top of the order could not bring him in.

The Mets grounded out twice then, as they did against Niese for most of the afternoon. He struck out no hitters besides Conforto, but got the Mets to bury into 14 ground outs. He said he tried to keep his pitches at or below the knees, and it worked.

“One thing Jon Niese can do: he can get ground balls,” Collins said. “If you don’t have a plan of using the field and you keep trying to pull him, he’s going to get easy outs.”

All those outs lowered Niese’s E.R.A. to 3.93, almost precisely the same as his mark for the Mets, which was two points lower. Niese, in other words, has performed for the Pirates as advertised, and his best was good enough to stifle his old team.

“I definitely miss ’em, but I’m enjoying my time here,” Niese said. “It’s a lot of fun.”

Nicasio had fun, too. Nicasio, the former Colorado starter who mostly relieved for the Dodgers last season, fanned seven in five innings, blowing 95 mile-an-hour fastballs past the middle of the Mets’ lineup.

Conforto doubled off him in the fifth and scored on a single by Kevin Plawecki. But the Mets never moved a runner to third against the Pirates’ bullpen.

The Pirates had knocked around Matz for eight hits, including three by Josh Harrison, and they had six hits in six innings off Jacob deGrom in the second game. A couple of infield hits hurt deGrom, but the Pirates had some hard hits, too, including doubles by Sean Rodriguez and John Jaso.

Rodriguez and Jaso were out of the lineup for Game 1, but made a big impact in Game 2. Collins had fewer dependable options to mix and match, and his offense slumbered all day.

INSIDE PITCH

With Steven Matz and Jacob deGrom both working on Tuesday, the Mets will startLogan Verrett in Milwaukee this weekend, likely on Saturday. Verrett tossed six scoreless innings in each of his first two spot starts this season, but was hit hard in his last, on May 14 in Colorado. … The Pirates’ Jameson Taillon, the No. 2 overall pick in the 2010 draft, will make his major league debut on Wednesday against the Mets. The Pirates, who want the struggling Francisco Liriano to throw an extra bullpen session, will get their first look at Taillon, who missed two full seasons because of Tommy John surgery in 2014 and sports hernia surgery last year. “That may be a hidden lining, that he didn’t pitch for some time,” Manager Clint Hurdle said. “He’s got a full gas tank.”… The Baseball Hall of Fame announced that it will display the jersey Mike Piazza wore on Sept. 21, 2001, when he hit a thrilling home run in the first New York game after the attacks on the World Trade Center. The jersey will be part of a new Cooperstown exhibit, “Baseball After 9/11,” that opens on June 18. The Mets had sold Piazza’s jersey to a private collector, and it was then purchased at auction in April — for $365,000 — by three minority owners of the team. The Hall of Fame said the jersey would be on loan from Anthony and Carmela Lauto,Anthony Scaramucci and Jim McCann.


