


When the body of the man with the tattoo of the Virgin Mary spread across his back was found on the shore in Brooklyn, his face was wrapped in duct tape and his feet were encased in concrete, the police said.

“This individual was wrapped in black plastic bags and his arms were tied behind him,” Robert K. Boyce, the chief of detectives for the New York Police Department, said at a news conference in Queens on Tuesday. “His feet were submerged in poured concrete, obviously a homicide.”

The unidentified man’s body was found around 10:30 a.m. on Monday by a student at Kingsborough Community College who was walking on the campus shoreline along Sheepshead Bay, the police said. The student notified a nearby Fire Department marine unit, which alerted the police, Chief Boyce said.

The medical examiner will determine how the man died and how long he had been in the water.

Chief Boyce said the police would release a sketch of the man and his tattoo of the Virgin Mary holding a rose.

The victim’s hands were also wrapped with duct tape, the police said. He was wearing gray sweatpants, blue boxer shorts and a black jacket.

It is not uncommon for bodies to float to the surface or wash ashore in New York City. In the spring, rising temperatures help speed decomposition, which produces gases that make a body buoyant enough to float to the surface.

The body of Anthony White, 21, who was wanted in the stabbing death of his roommate in an East Harlem homeless shelter was found floating in the Hudson River in March. That was almost two months after his roommate, Deven Black, 62, was killed.

But rarely have victims been found with concrete around their feet, an old-fashioned technique rumored to be a favorite of mob hit men with plenty of patience. Concrete takes hours to harden.

In August 1964, the body of Ernest Rupolo, a 52-year-old triggerman turned informant, was found in Jamaica Bay with two concrete blocks tied to his legs.

Before Mr. Rupolo, several mobsters and gamblers and at least one rumrunner were believed to have been encased in or weighed down with concrete. Some of them have never been found.


