


WELLINGTON, New Zealand — Los Jaguares Coach Raúl Pérez is quickly finding out about the need to rest and rotate players as his Argentine team circles the globe in its first Super Rugby season.

The Jaguares, the only team in Super Rugby based in the Western Hemisphere, started the season with two matches in South Africa. After a bye week, they played two games in Buenos Aires before traveling to New Zealand for matches against the Blues, the Hurricanes and the Crusaders. After that came a long flight north for Saturday’s approaching game against the Japanese expansion franchise, the Sunwolves, in Tokyo.

Then there is a flight back to Argentina and a match against the league’s third expansion team, the Southern Kings of South Africa.

By their second bye in Week 11 in early May, Los Jaguares will have clocked more than 35,000 miles in the air.

“We’re not used to traveling so much, so we are a bit tired,” admitted scrumhalf Martín Landajo after his team lost to the Hurricanes, 40-22, here on April 9.

To keep some of his players fresh, Pérez opted to leave 10 of them in Argentina, taking 26 for the first two matches of the New Zealand and Japan trip.

Those left behind included the captain Agustín Creevy, who also leads the Argentine national team, and veteran international players like Juan Martín Hernández and Lucas González Amorosino.

“It is difficult,” said Landajo, who was captain in Creevy’s absence. “Some of maybe our best players stayed in Buenos Aires.”

Those 10 players arrived in New Zealand just before the match against the Crusaders, with nine others returning to Argentina to rest and prepare for the Week 10 match against the Kings.

It is a balancing act for Pérez, who wants to get results while ensuring his players do not burn out. Many of his players will also play test rugby for the national team, the Pumas, in the June international window and again in the Rugby Championship.

Managing player workloads is something Super Rugby coaches in New Zealand, Australia and South Africa have grappled with for a long time. While travel works both ways — teams have to fly to Argentina and deal with the jet lag — Los Jaguares spend more time traveling than nearly every other Super Rugby club. (The Sunwolves, who play some home games in Singapore, will rack up frequent-flier miles jetting between Japan, Singapore, Australia and South Africa.)

While teams regularly rotate players, it is rare to see what Los Jaguares have done, resting many front-line players at once.

“It was part of our strategy to have a balance,” Pérez said after the game against the Hurricanes. “We are going to arrive in Buenos Aires after the next two games on a Tuesday, and we have to play against the Kings on Saturday.”

In addition, the fledgling franchise is trying to develop the younger and less experienced players on its roster — many of whom are playing professional rugby for the first time — so it can build the depth that is needed before becoming a title contender.

After seven games, Los Jaguares are sixth in the eight-team South African Group, with one win and six losses, including an early 4-point loss to the Sharks and a 5-point loss to the Stormers.

But their most recent defeats, when they were without many of their senior players, have been rougher: 24-16 against the Blues and 40-22 against the Hurricanes, then 32-15 on Friday against the Crusaders.

“We have 19- and 20-year-old boys who have never played in the national team. They have never played against professional players,” Landajo said. “They are playing in their first professional tournament.

“It’s good for Argentina. We are growing them up. These losses hurt, of course, but I think they will make us better.”

Los Jaguares are certainly playing with plenty of ambition, looking to counterattack and take advantage of their speed. But their skills do not always match their ambitions.

While formidable in the scrums, in the driving maul and at the breakdown, Los Jaguares still turn the ball over too much.

Landajo believes improvement, and victories, will come.

“It’s going to take experience and to be mature in some parts of the game,” he said. “We have the players but we have to adjust a bit.”

Hurricanes Coach Chris Boyd cautioned against taking Los Jaguares lightly.

“Anybody who disrespects that side will pay for it,” he said.

The Hurricanes’ captain, Dane Cole, added, “They were definitely like the Pumas team,” referring to the Argentine national team. “They play with the same intent. They probably weren’t at the tempo that the Pumas have, but they definitely do have major trends like throwing the ball around.”


