


SYDNEY, Australia — An Australian businessman who was jailed in China after a dispute over his company there has been granted early release from a prison in Australia, 19 months after being returned to his home country to complete his sentence, under a treaty between the two countries.

The businessman, Matthew Ng, was released from a Sydney prison on Wednesday afternoon, said Tom Lennox, a lawyer who had campaigned for his release. “It is very good news,” Mr. Lennox said by telephone. “He’s out. It’s just great.”

Mr. Ng was sentenced by a Chinese court in 2011 to more than 12 years in prison on bribery and fraud charges. Mr. Lennox has said the case was fabricated to allow a Chinese state-owned company to confiscate Mr. Ng’s travel business.

Australia’s justice minister, Michael Keenan, said in a statement on Wednesday that he had approved Mr. Ng’s early release “based on his exceptional family circumstances.” Since his arrest, Mr. Ng’s eldest daughter has died and his wife learned she had cancer.

Mr. Ng’s troubles in China began when he tried to sell his travel company, Et-China, based in the southern city of Guangzhou. While building the company, he had bought a majority stake in a subsidiary of Lingnan, a hotel and travel conglomerate owned by the Guangzhou government.

In 2010, after the Swiss travel company Kuoni offered to buy Et-China for $125 million, Lingnan demanded to buy back the shares of its subsidiary at the original selling price, and Mr. Ng refused.

He was arrested later that year and jailed for 13 months before being brought to trial. He was convicted of misappropriating company funds, misstating his company’s registered capital and bribing a director, charges that his trial lawyer described as ridiculous.

In 2013, he was stripped of his business assets in a civil case.

Lingnan eventually acquired Et-China’s assets, according to a businessman who managed the company after Mr. Ng’s arrest.

Mr. Ng’s family life spiraled into tragedy after his arrest. His 15-year-old daughter fell into a deep depression, developed anorexia and died. His wife, who learned she had breast cancer, was harassed by the Chinese authorities and forced to bring her three youngest children back to Australia without their father, according to Mr. Lennox. Since then, tests showed she had bone cancer, Mr. Lennox said.

In 2014, Mr. Ng became the first Australian to be returned under a prisoner exchange treaty with China that allows people to serve prison terms in their home countries. Since then, Mr. Lennox, who said Mr. Ng had been convicted of offenses that would not be crimes in Australia, has campaigned for Mr. Ng’s release. He appealed to Mr. Keenan and to Attorney General George Brandis to pardon Mr. Ng and to let him resume life with his family in Sydney.

Under the terms of the treaty, prisoners are supposed to serve their full sentences in their home countries. But Mr. Lennox had argued that an early release for Mr. Ng on certain grounds, including compassion, would not violate the accord. He also said that Mr. Ng might have become eligible for parole in August.

A spokesman for China’s Foreign Ministry, Lu Kang, expressed disappointment that Australia had granted Mr. Ng early release, suggesting that it violated the treaty.

“It is hoped that Australia can properly handle the issue according to the treaty and the understanding reached by both sides,” Mr. Lu said on Wednesday at a regularly scheduled news briefing. “After all, it is only when both sides abide by the consensus reached that they will have the mutual trust for further cooperation.”

Mr. Lennox said the conditions for Mr. Ng’s early release included reporting regularly to a parole officer and some restrictions on travel.


