


David Wright’s winsome smile after a clutch hit, Matt Harvey’s snarling intensity and Jacob deGrom’s zipping fastball are trademark characteristics that have been missing from three of the Mets’ marquee players this season.

Wright felt slighted Saturday when, in the bottom of the ninth with two runners in scoring position and one out, the Milwaukee Brewers intentionally walked Curtis Granderson to load the bases and face Wright in a tie game at Citi Field.

In a modicum of payback and a reassuring sign for the Mets, Wright slapped a 3-0 pitch from Michael Blazek into right field for a game-winning single, sealing the Mets’ 5-4 comeback.

The game-ending hit was the ninth of Wright’s career, the most for any Mets player. Granted an advantageous count, Wright did not even check with Manager Terry Collins for permission to swing away.

“I didn’t want to look just in case he didn’t give me the green light,” Wright said, smiling. “I learned a long time ago it’s better to ask for forgiveness than permission sometimes. I’m just glad that ball found some open space.”

Wright has struggled mightily this season, trying to push his body through the effects of spinal stenosis. With a batting average of .223, only nine R.B.I. and visible difficulties at third base, Wright has known few moments of personal enjoyment this season.

A similar loss of ability has plagued Harvey, who threw a simulated game before deGrom’s start on Saturday.

Three hours before deGrom’s first pitch, Harvey was trying to rehabilitate his Dark Knight persona by pitching to the first-base coach Tom Goodwin. In a silent stadium, the main spectators were the pitching coach Dan Warthen, the bullpen coach Ricky Bones and Collins.

Occasionally, Harvey would stop his motion before his release and look back to Warthen for advice.

There was no confetti released, nor even a hearty backslap after the session. But Collins said after the game that Harvey “looked very good,” with better arm angles, velocity and movement on his pitches.

“He’s confident,” Collins said of Harvey. “He feels good about what happened today.”

The Mets hope Harvey regains his bravado on Tuesday, when he will pitch against the first-place Washington Nationals, looking to improve on his 3-6 record and 5.77 E.R.A.

DeGrom, another pitcher expected to perform like an ace entering this season, looked to debunk theories that he, like Harvey, could be feeling the effects from last year’s heavy workload.

But deGrom had his shortest outing at home this season, allowing a season-high four runs.

DeGrom opened strong; according to MLB.com, all 15 of his first-inning fastballs were recorded at 94 or 95 miles per hour, a peak in velocity he has struggled to reach in his first six starts and during spring training. DeGrom struck out seven, but he walked three batters, the third time he has done so this year.

DeGrom was also unable to sustain the zip on his fastball. All four of the Brewers’ run-scoring hits came on fastballs 2 to 3 m.p.h. slower than the ones in deGrom’s first-inning range.

“What we’re trying to do is work those guys that pitched all those innings last year and get them back in sync,” Collins said.

DeGrom and Harvey both threw a career-high 216 innings between the regular season and the playoffs last year.

Last season, the mere mention of the phrase “six-man rotation” around Queens produced a reaction that resembled hearing nails running across a chalkboard. But this season, it could reduce the workloads on arms unaccustomed to their high usage — arms that the Mets are trying to protect from injury.

Bartolo Colon, unflappable in his first two years with the club, has also shown traces of wearing down as he approaches his 43rd birthday.

Steven Matz returned Friday, after missing his previous start with a sore left forearm. Noah Syndergaard has pitched the best, and for now must be regarded as the team’s ace, but even he recently visited a doctor to have his right elbow examined in a precautionary move.

At least so far, Collins does not plan to employ a six-man rotation. Instead, he preaches patience.

That strategy paid off Saturday with Wright. With the crowd standing on its feet through the rain, many of the Mets sensed that he would come through. Yoenis Cespedes, who hit a tying two-run homer in the sixth inning, ran so quickly out of the dugout that Wright said he saw him sprinting in his periphery, almost beating him down to first base.

“That’s one of the best feelings in baseball, for sure,” Wright said.

INSIDE PITCH

LUCAS DUDA was scratched from the lineup with a lingering back injury. Duda had missed two games earlier in the week with back stiffness. TERRY COLLINS said the recurrence was “pretty concerning” and that Duda would have further testing after seeing a doctor. … WILMER FLORES, who has been out with a strained hamstring, is scheduled to begin a rehab assignment.


