


Puerto Rico may be in an economic tailspin, but the 59th annual Puerto Rican Day Parade was a moment to celebrate the island’s joys.

Pint-size drum majorettes, dancing girls dressed as rain-forest frogs and thumping reggaeton music coursed through a canyon of Puerto Rican flags along Fifth Avenue in New York City on Sunday. In the wildly cheering crowd, there was a sense that the parade was in part a pep rally.

“It’s full of life,” said Miriam Rodriguez, 63, a bookkeeper from the Bronx. “We feel if we’re here, present, we’re somehow supporting the island,” she said, a sentiment underscored by the harsh realities of life there.

Two of her nephews left Puerto Rico in the past year, she said, after finding it impossible to find jobs. “It’s a sad situation,” Ms. Rodriguez said from under her white fedora. “The doctors are leaving the island, the teachers are leaving the island.”

Classic cars carried superstars of Puerto Rican descent like Carmelo Anthony of the New York Knicks. Scantily clad women on stilts draped in red, white and blue passed by, followed by floats celebrating Goya products and prominent Puerto Rican achievements like the Arecibo Observatory, where one of the world’s largest radio telescopes is.

William Alexis Bruno brought a squad of 22 children who were dancers from Manati, in the north of Puerto Rico, each dressed elaborately as one of the island’s best features. El Yunque, the rain forest (a young woman covered in leaves), stood on 44th Street before the parade started, chatting with the beaches (a girl clad head to toe in shells and a skirt of ocean water). In glittery eye makeup, with a miniature representation of a 16th-century tower atop her head, the San Felipe del Morro Castle, which is in San Juan, gamely posed for pictures.

“We can show the people no matter what is happening, we can show the world that we are talented, we like art, so people don’t see Puerto Rico just for its bad economic status,” Mr. Bruno said.

The island has been struggling with more than $70 billion in debt. On Saturday, President Obama pushed for passage in the Senate of a rescue package that would help ease the island’s debt, of which it owes $2 billion to its creditors next month.

As Santos Seda, the mayor of Guánica, in southern Puerto Rico, stood near floats getting ready to stroll down Fifth Avenue, he said he believed there was an answer to the island’s economic woes: full statehood. “It’s time for us to get out of this ambiguity,” Mr. Seda said in Spanish. “It’s time to define ourselves.”

This year’s parade was the first time that Puerto Rican gay pride was officially a part of the celebration, with the honoring of Pedro Julio Serrano, an advocate for human and gay rights. Puerto Rico allowed gay people to marry this year. News from Orlando, Fla., of a mass shooting at a gay nightclub in the early hours of the morning that killed 50 people also shivered along the parade route. The nightclub catered to Latin Americans, and many of the victims were of Latino heritage.

“That’s scary because that’s not what America is supposed to be like,” said Al Amaro, 70, an actor from Manhattan, on a side street as costumed performers mustered for the parade around him. “Hatred does not give fruit to anything wonderful.”

And yet the parade was not somber, unfurling under an unblemished sky, before a crowd that cheered and shimmied for all things Puerto Rican along the avenue. And the pride did not, it seemed, depend upon whether the revelers themselves were Puerto Rican. Clarence White, 44, a delivery man from Laurelton, Queens, cheered loudly for Puerto Rico — in a thick Jamaican accent.

“I have many Puerto Rican female friends!” he said.


