


The Yankees have not been a dominant team for a while now, but it is still noteworthy that they are currently in the grips of a five-game losing streak, are an unsightly 8-15 on the season and are firmly in last place in the American League East. It is as bad a start as the storied franchise has had for some time.

Their April record of 8-14 was the first losing mark in that month since 2008 and left them in the cellar at the end of the month for the first time since 2007. To find a worse April record for the team, you have to go back to 1991, when the Yanks started 6-11. Seven games under .500 is also a worst for the team under Joe Girardi, the manager since 2008.

Excellence, of course, has been expected of the Yankees for just about forever. Their last full-season losing record was 1992. They have not completed a year last in their division since 1990, and finishing in the basement then was a bigger embarrassment than it would be now, since in 1990 there were seven teams in the American League East instead of the current five.

The reasons for the Yankees’ slow start are varied; the most glaring involve the offense and starting pitching. Of their regular position players, only second baseman Starlin Castro has a particularly impressive batting average, with a .314 mark. Carlos Beltran, Mark Teixeira and Alex Rodriguez, the somewhat elderly middle of the batting order, are hitting .250, 225 and .203. That is not very good, although all are batting much better than Chase Headley (.156).

The veteran Andrew Miller has been flawless as the closer, but the Yankees’ rotation has a 4-10 won-loss mark. Masahiro Tanaka has begun well, but the other four starting pitchers all have E.R.A.s over 5.00. The Yankees are surrendering 4.9 runs a game, which was the second-worst figure in the league entering Monday, when the Yankees were idle.

In particular, the Yankees have struggled against good teams: Their record against .500 teams or better is 3-11, which was the third worst in baseball before Monday’s games.

Still, they have played only 23 games. And if nothing else, the Yankees’ record is better than that of the Houston Astros, whom they lost to in the wild-card game last season, and the Minnesota Twins. In the National League, the Braves are worse than the Yankees with a 6-19 mark after Monday’s loss.

Oddsmakers say the Yankees are 6 to 1 to come back and win the division, and a credible 28-1 to win the World Series, putting them just about in the middle of the pack. (Atlanta is in a much more hopeless position, at 500 to 1.) But odds are little consolation when you are in last place, and the other team in town, the Mets, is doing just fine.

The Yankees’ current predicament is sort of amusing to Yankee haters, and none of it is that surprising to those who have watched Yankee greats like Mariano Rivera, Andy Pettitte and Derek Jeter retire in recent seasons, and other stalwarts, like C. C. Sabathia, start to fade. New stars have not exactly taken their place And while the buzz around the team has been limited over the last three seasons, the Yankees managed at least 84 wins in each of them and did get into that one wild-card game, as futile as it turned out to be.

The slow start this season may end up being an aberration. But the current numbers suggest that the good times in the Bronx may be on hiatus for a while.


