


By design, what you’re supposed to notice about all the employees of the Giuseppe Zanotti store is their shoes. A woman with a hard bob and a black suit looked as if she’d dipped her feet in honey, then went for a walk on a broken mirror. A young man in quiet black wore the company’s quietest black sneakers, still 50 degrees hotter than the rest of his outfit.

One recent afternoon, though, I was drawn to the employee whose hair was louder than his shoes, both because he stood out and because of what he was doing with his time.

He was polishing.

I can’t say if it was love, or a commitment to process — which is, let’s face it, a kind of love — or a fear of failure, or a strategy of moving just deliberately enough that every second of the day will be filled with a task that requires presence but not attention.

Whichever it was, it was mesmerizing — both for him, and to observe. And I’ll be damned if everything in the store didn’t just gleam. He used the same chamois cloth for the gold shoe stands and for the shoes themselves, which sparkled intensely, as is the Zanotti way. Glass and gold-trimmed shelving and mirrors alike were buffed to a sense of moral purpose.

Others may have been catering to customers, fetching boxes from down below and handing out compliments to the Real Housewives of the East 60s, but it was this gentleman who epitomized what Zanotti is selling: razzle-dazzle, glitz, the hope that we may one day wear clothes that shout and wink on our behalf.

Or return to the ethos of the ’80s, which could happen. Zanotti specializes in a brazen, sexy vulgarity that was most at home back then, and that the company continues to add kerosene to, year after year. Its logo is a spiky signature, jammed onto handbags and belts, often rendered in gold. The stilettos are perilously high neon cages for the calf and foot. The sneakers are encrusted or inflated or riddled with zippers.

It’s the sneakers that have turned Zanotti into something of a global pest in recent years. At this point, the luxury sneaker has become almost trite, and that’s partly because of Zanotti’s success. Liberated from the need to make sneakers performance objects, Zanotti has long used them as sites of play: gold buckle clasps, tiered outsoles, so many zippers.

Not surprisingly, the visual tweaks are beginning to trickle up to actual athletic companies — or in at least one case, the exchange is reversed, with Zanotti’s fake Yeezy 750 ($895).

But there is no sport here. All of the sneakers I tried on had the first-wear inflexibility of shoes, and the leather began to visibly crack with the first steps. I very much liked a pair of lemon yellow mid-tops, one zipper on either side of the tongue ($695), and I very much admired the gall it takes to make a pair of high-top sneakers secured only with one oversize puffy Velcro strap ($995). Both were like wearing huge pieces of candy on your feet. I would say they’d enliven even the dullest outfit, but they’re appropriate only when worn with the very opposite.

Which is why, on the men’s side, there were a few items of shiny but underwhelming clothing. A silver moto jacket in, I was informed, “python print” ($3,295), which made me breathe a sigh of relief for all the pythons allowed to slither on with their lives, but also explained the jacket’s cardboardy texture. On the next hanger was a pair of leather pants with horizontal slashes every few inches, and a GZ logo next to one slash, like a doctor who tattoos you after cutting you open ($1,995).

The store is split down the middle: men’s on the right, along with women’s sneakers; women’s high heels and sandals on the left; bags and other ephemera between the sections. Though this newly expanded space is twice as big as the old one at the same location, it still feels modest given the pomp of the shoes. You expect 30-foot ceilings, a water feature with laser lights, a statue built from shards of “Miami Vice” VHS tapes spray-painted glittery gold.

But what the space lacks, the shoes deliver, time and again. There are high-tops with gold flames on either side ($1,250), flip-flops with chain accouterments, espadrilles with enough armor to render them beach-irrelevant. The flames on the men’s sneakers were echoed on a particularly impressive set of heels, with four pairs of flames shooting up to the sky, or at least to the knee ($1,595).

And even the most modest woman’s option here was a playhouse — a humble Teva-like sandal slapped onto a thick saw-toothed sole, with gold clasps astride it. It shined so brightly, even though no one asked it to.


