


CHICAGO — As soon as Charna Halpern walked backstage at the iO theater here, the 20 or so comedians in the room got quiet, their eyes focused on her. They were about to perform for a full house, but she was the only audience that mattered.

Every year, Ms. Halpern, 63, the co-founder and owner of the iO, sees hundreds of performers do five minutes before she picks 15 to present to the producers of “Saturday Night Live” in a summer showcase. Getting to this final 15 is the golden ticket of Chicago comedy, and there are many stories of unknowns, like the current cast members Cecily Strong and Vanessa Bayer, cashing it in for stardom. Ms. Halpern, wearing a blue shirt with slits down the arms and comfortable slippers, told the comics to not be nervous, then asked for questions. Silence. Walking out the door, on her way to her front-row seat, Ms. Halpern described what she just saw with characteristic bluntness: “Young and afraid.”

The name Del Close is better known, and Second City here and the Upright Citizens Brigade in New York get the lion’s share of attention, but Ms. Halpern is the overlooked powerhouse of improv, the woman who with little fanfare has played a major role in shaping the current comedy boom. She provided a launching pad to some of comedy’s most famous names — she introduced Tina Fey to Amy Poehler, who took her first improv class from Ms. Halpern — and helped transform improvisation from a marginal art form into a bustling business (with five theaters in New York alone devoted to it and thousands of students taking classes around the world) and cultural force that rivals stand-up.

Adam McKay, the director and former improviser who thanked Ms. Halpern when he won an Oscar for “The Big Short,” compares her to the producers who brought hip-hop to the mainstream. “In the early days, it was an art in the neighborhoods, but you needed entrepreneurs like Russell Simmons to provide a framework for it to explode,” he said. “That’s what Charna did for improv.”

Yet outside Chicago, Ms. Halpern remains an obscure figure, overshadowed by Mr. Close, who died in 1999. The subject of many books, a new documentary and countless apocryphal-sounding stories, Mr. Close has become mythic, the Che Guevara of comedy. The Upright Citizens Brigade, whose original members, like Ms. Poehler, got their start at iO, begins its annual Del Close Marathon on June 24. “U.C.B. really pushes him, but you don’t hear about Charna,” said Megan Gray, artistic director of Magnet Theater in New York. “Del makes for a better image in part because he’s not around.”

Improv comedy had long been a male-dominated field, and Mr. Close had a reputation for sexism, one Ms. Halpern disputes. But part of the reason she remains obscure may be because their relationship tracked a certain gender stereotype: The man as genius guru supported by the tough woman who does the less glamorous behind-the-scenes work.

“She was not the artist that Del was, nor did she pretend to be,” said Ms. Strong, whom Ms. Halpern encouraged to audition for “Saturday Night Live.”

“She’s great at choosing the right people and creating this home,” Ms. Strong added.

Ms. Poehler described her as an inspirational model of female leadership. “At iO, there were a lot of funny, powerful women onstage, and Charna was running the joint,” Ms. Poehler said, adding that when Ms. Poehler started the Upright Citizens Brigade, she gained a new appreciation for Ms. Halpern. “It’s incredibly hard to maintain the longevity she has. People come and go, but she stays and cleans up the mess, literally and figuratively.”

It’s a sign of the complexity of her public profile that Ms. Halpern is seen by some as a godmother of the current explosion of women in comedy, but a symbol of its sexism by others.

Ms. Halpern stopped improvising years ago after experiencing hearing loss — she wears two aids — but offstage, she performs the part of the gritty old-school producer with brio and charm. Bring up New York comedy with Ms. Halpern in an interview at the iO, and she says with swagger, “If you want to get good, you come to Chicago: This is Mecca.”

The first time I heard from her, it was via a January email chastising me for not mentioning her in reviews of the Improvised Shakespeare Company and “TJ and Dave,” two inspired iO shows. After I defended myself, she playfully wrote, “You can now say you are one of the many to get yelled at by Charna Halpern.”

A week later, however, Ms. Halpern did receive publicity, though not the kind she wanted. A comedian in a private Facebook group for women said that she had been sexually harassed by James Grace, at the time the artistic director of iO West, in Los Angeles, and that Ms. Halpern responded by offering her free classes. Ms. Halpern, who denied doing so, responded on her Facebook page, saying falsehoods hurt real claims of harassment, adding, “There are times when women just like to either cause trouble or get revenge or just want attention, so they make up stories.”

This comment set off a ferocious backlash in the comedy world that migrated from her page to the news media and theaters across the country, where a discussion about sexism had been moving into the open. “As long as I’ve been in Chicago, the conversation about creepy dudes at iO has been a constant,” Julia Weiss, a comedian, said in an interview. “Charna pretends she had no idea. Ridiculous.”

Susan Messing, a former student and improv teacher and performer here, offers a slightly more sympathetic view: “Charna comes from a world of ‘Suck it up,’” she said, sitting in the lobby of Second City. “She trusts her employees, and when you run a $7 million theater and want to think the best of people, you get selective hearing.”

At first, Ms. Halpern stood by Mr. Grace, who has denied the accusations, but as more women came forward with stories about being harassed by him, she reconsidered, fired him, apologized for her initial comment and created a new system to field accusations of harassment.

Among other things, the episode illustrated the challenge of transforming a scrappy comedy clubhouse into a huge institution that now includes a new complex with four theaters, event spaces and beer garden. “She did not have the human resources department or the management, which results in the problems they had,” said Andrew Alexander, chief executive and executive producer of Second City. Ms. Halpern said, “People felt scared to come to me — that broke my heart,” adding that the claims of sexism surprised her. “When I started, we never thought of that. I never thought about men, women. I was never harassed or assaulted or mistreated. But I see it now.” She also said, speaking of the backlash: “As horrible as it was for me, in the long run, something great came out of it. In L.A., everyone is much happier.”

Improvisation is as old as creativity itself. But the modern improv theater began in a very specific place and time: 55th Street on the South Side of Chicago in 1955, when the Compass Players put on a cabaret revue. After Second City opened, it dominated the scene. By the 1980s, the Second City style focused on short scenes and using improvisation as a tool to make sketches. Del Close, who joined the Compass Players at 23, had a more ambitious vision: that improvisation could lean on longer narratives, take on more elements of theater and stand alone as a distinct art form.

While he dabbled in the 1960s in the Harold — the long-form structure of interweaving scenes that is a foundation of improv today — he didn’t test his theories until he paired up with Ms. Halpern in 1982. “I told him I thought it was the future,” she said.

Together they brought structure to the Harold, adding an element from a short-form game called Time-Dash that moved scenes forward or backward in time. “We came up with the idea,” Ms. Halpern said, “that three time-dashes would be the body of the Harold.”

Ms. Halpern, who grew up in a lower-middle-class Jewish home in the West Rogers Park neighborhood of Chicago, started producing shows as a kid in her backyard. She knew parents would pay the quarter ticket price if their children were involved, so she hired a big cast. After a stint teaching juvenile delinquents — where, she said, she learned improvisation by dealing with students — she took an improv class from the teacher Jo Forsberg in the 1970s and became inspired.

Even then, Mr. Close had a storied reputation as a teacher of John Belushi and Bill Murray. A former drug addict, Mr. Close had fallen on hard times, estranged from Second City and living in an apartment with no electricity. Ms. Halpern suggested they go into business together. She took classes from him, found him a new place and helped him open a bank account. While they were never romantically involved, he called her his old lady and acted like a jealous boyfriend when she brought dates around. “I had someone who told me you will never have a boyfriend as long as Del is alive,” said Ms. Halpern, who is not married.

In the early years, Ms. Halpern ran a school at the iO (known as the ImprovOlympic before the International Olympic Committee threatened litigation), taught classes and was one of the few female improvisers. Mr. Close was the face of the theater, the resident genius, while she was the approachable one. “Del was a curmudgeon while Charna explained things to you,” said Rachel Dratch, who studied and performed at the iO before being cast on “Saturday Night Live” in 1999. “Charna was warm and human. Del was on a cloud.”

Ms. Halpern encouraged Mr. Close to codify his theories and write them down. When he refused, she took the initiative and wrote the first draft of “Truth in Comedy,” the first long-form-improv bible. It explained basic improv concepts like agreement (known as “Yes and”).

“In Chicago, when that book came out, there was a lot of criticism, that it name-dropped celebrities and this and that,” Mr. McKay said. “But I remember going to Dallas and seeing an improv troupe doing a damn good Harold based purely on that book.”

The year after the book was published, in 1994, Ms. Halpern opened her first permanent theater space, which became a magnet for talented performers like Mr. McKay, Ms. Fey, Ms. Poehler and David Koechner (“Anchorman”). Ms. Halpern still considers this her golden era, and when Mr. Close died in 1999, the same year the Upright Citizens Brigade opened its first permanent space in New York, she worried her teachers and audience would vanish. They didn’t.

“One thing I learned early on: It’s not about money. It’s about your army — and that’s where I was strong,” she said. “Even when I was thrown out of a place in the early days, Andy Richter would call and say: ‘Where are we going? I got the set and the truck.’ Sometimes I felt: We’re going where? I’m the leader. Wait for me!”

Last month, Ms. Halpern received the ultimate honor in comedy, a reference on “The Simpsons.” During our interview, an employee from the iO’s financial division, a former boyfriend, handed her a screen shot of Homer Simpson holding a copy of “Truth in Comedy,” with her byline displayed. Yet only Del Close’s name was mentioned. “It bugs me a little,” she said, sighing. “Nothing I can do about it.”

A pioneer benefiting from and occasionally haunted by the demons of her charismatic former partner, Ms. Halpern can at times evoke a certain presidential candidate. And while she rejects the idea that gender has held her back, when the subject turns to the double standard facing Hillary Clinton, she nodded her head, telling a story about a female improviser who thought her notes were meanspirited, but accepted similar ones from a male competitor. “I was a bitch, and he was the genius who inspired her and told her things she just would not hear from me,” Ms. Halpern said. Her eyes glassy, she added that she understands this comes with the territory.

What she’s more worried about, she said, is how her intimidating reputation could affect her performers. That’s why, she said, she goes backstage before shows, to put performers at ease. “People are scared because I can make decisions about who can get up in front of Lorne Michaels, but that doesn’t work,” she said, pausing before driving home a point. “There’s no place for fear onstage.”


