


With the rise of the art market and the power of the auction world over the past several years, the medium of drawing can often feel lost in a conversation dominated by wall-power paintings and room-filling sculpture. But over roughly that same period, the Menil Collection in Houston has been developing a center devoted exclusively to modern and contemporary drawing, and last year it broke ground on a free-standing building for the Menil Drawing Institute, founded in 2008.

On Thursday, the museum announced one of the largest donations of artworks in its history, a collection of 110 drawings from the holdings of two trustees that will serve as the backbone of the new institute and make Houston one of the most important cities for seeing drawing, especially that of 20th-century titans like Jasper Johns, Jackson Pollock and Robert Rauschenberg.

The drawings, from the collections of Janie C. Lee, a former art-gallery owner and curator, and Louisa Stude Sarofim, a prominent Houston arts patron and chairwoman of the Menil’s board, include 15 by Mr. Johns alone, representing every decade of his career, and significant work by Philip Guston, Eva Hesse, Agnes Martin, Claes Oldenburg and Ellsworth Kelly.

“I’ve never been a collector with a capital C,” Ms. Sarofim said in a telephone interview. “It’s just been a matter of looking, and loving art.” She met Ms. Lee decades ago and began buying works from her gallery, she said, and built her drawings collection under the guidance of Bernice Rose, the former drawings curator for the Museum of Modern Art and organizer of the seminal 1976 show there, “Drawing Now: 1955-1975.”

Ms. Lee said she began collecting drawings primarily because they were what she could afford. “But then I began to realize how important drawing has been to artists, in fact a crucial part of many artists’ work,” she said. “And I began to realize that there was not a place where one could go exclusively to see and study drawing, a place dedicated to it. And that’s how conversations about the institute began.”

Along with a bequest of 17 drawings that went to the Menil in 2005 from the curator and collector David Hay Whitney, the new works will give the institute — expected to open next year — a history of the medium sweeping all the way from Cézanne to living artists like Mr. Johns, Robert Gober and Rachel Whiteread.

“Drawings often show the mental process that goes into art making,” said David Breslin, the drawing institute’s chief curator. “And when we’re so accustomed to celebrating the masterpiece, it’s amazing to go back to see the daily work of being an artist.”


