


NEW HAVEN — After a career of more than 70 years and on the cusp of his 92nd birthday, the French singer-composer-actor Charles Aznavour is taking on his first American musical.

Of course, the subject is French: the artist Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec cavorting in the scandalous Montmartre district of Paris. And the show’s music brings the sound of Gallic authenticity.

But there are also major Broadway names attached to the work, titled “My Paris,” which opens at the Long Wharf Theater here this week, after a workshop production last year at Goodspeed Musicals.

Mr. Aznavour, a global star who wrote the score to “Lautrec,” an unsuccessful West End musical, 16 years ago, is joined this time by a fresh team of Tony-winning talent. Chief among its members are the director-choreographer Kathleen Marshall (“Anything Goes,” “The Pajama Game”) and the librettist Alfred Uhry (“Driving Miss Daisy” and the musicals “Parade” and “The Robber Bridegroom”). Jason Robert Brown (“Parade,” “The Bridges of Madison County”) has provided English lyrics and the musical arrangement.

From a downtown hotel room here, where he was staying during previews, Mr. Aznavour — dapper and diminutive — said creating a musical was no different from writing songs for himself.

“Writing is writing,” he said, giving a small shrug. “I can write on any subject. Just give me the first line, which is the most important.”

Mr. Aznavour was first approached to write a musical decades ago by the producer David Merrick, who asked him to compose the score for a show called “Moulin Rouge.”

But he said he “was not ready” to write a musical.

Years later Mike Merrick — not related to David Merrick — approached Mr. Aznavour to write the score for the musical “Lautrec,” also centered on the Moulin Rouge, the Belle Epoque nightclub.

“Moulin Rouge was in the head of everybody,” said Mr. Aznavour, who agreed to use the colorful dance-hall setting only if the show was about Toulouse-Lautrec.

“Lautrec” disappeared after its West End closing in 2000, but five years ago, Michael Sukin, a lawyer for Mr. Aznavour who also works with the George Gershwin Family Trust, was taken by the music and brought the project to the attention of the producer Scott Landis during the making of the Gershwin musical “Nice Work if You Can Get It.” (Mr. Landis was one of that show’s producers; Ms. Marshall, his wife, was its director-choreographer.)

The pair fell in love with Mr. Aznavour’s music, and with Mr. Sukin as co-producer, they began to assemble a dream team to reshape the material. About five songs remain from “Lautrec,” according to Ms. Marshall; Mr. Aznavour wrote the rest of the score over the past few years.

Mr. Aznavour’s website says that he’s written more than 600 songs and sung in eight languages. Yet he said he always started a composition with the lyrics and then found the melody to fit. The words, not the rhythms, make chansons françaises distinct as an art form and make a song last, he said.

“In America, it’s the music,” he said. “In France, it’s the lyrics.”

Ms. Marshall called his melodies “so astonishing, so beautiful, so French — and not the ersatz French of Cole Porter or Jerry Herman. It’s just French.”

But Mr. Aznavour has learned to adapt to the demands of a show that aspires to Broadway. Of “Mother and Father,” a song written last week, he said, “They told me what they wanted, and at that moment, I become a tailor, doing a button here, a button there.”

“Mother and Father” came about during tech rehearsals after Mr. Uhry added a scene that deals with Toulouse-Lautrec’s parents. (The Tony nominee Bobby Steggert plays Toulouse-Lautrec, alongside Mara Davi, Tom Hewitt and Josh Grisetti.)

Mr. Aznavour’s parents were Armenian refugees who escaped the Turkish genocide. Unable to emigrate to the United States because of quotas, they settled in Paris. Between other jobs, they produced entertainments for their immigrant friends, giving Mr. Aznavour an early introduction to the business.

Though Mr. Aznavour’s fame has come largely from his work as a singer-songwriter and actor — he has appeared in more than 60 films, including Francois Truffaut’s “Shoot the Piano Player,” in which he played the title role, and the French-language version of “Up,” in which he did the voice of the curmudgeon widower — he has a lifelong fondness for stage musicals. (“I have 150 American musical albums,” he said.) And his plans on this trip include taking in “Hamilton” with his 38-year-old son, Nicolas, a neuroscientist.

In 2006, he announced that he would scale back on his performing, and marketed those shows as part of a farewell tour. But 10 years later, he still keeps a schedule that has him globe-trotting from Prague to Dubai to Amsterdam, with gigs slated next month in Japan, Belgium and Barcelona.

Mr. Aznavour, who lives in Switzerland, said he felt that his writing was better than ever: “Working is my pleasure.”


