


For the residents of St. Lawrence County, a rural territory on the Canadian border in northern New York, the news out of the district attorney’s office in recent years has more often resembled a dark comedy than a courtroom drama.

There have been whispers of interoffice romances and questionable pay raises and reports about a federal inquiry into whether the office had used one inmate to improperly obtain jailhouse confessions from others.

In recent weeks, the trickle of unsettling news has turned into a torrent. The latest episode involved a junior prosecutor who had not yet passed the bar but was allowed to try a felony assault case, with a county court judge dismissing the case and suggesting that the office of the district attorney, Mary E. Rain, had engaged in fraud. The judge, Jerome J. Richards, subsequently recused himself from all cases being handled by Ms. Rain, a Republican elected in 2013.

So it was on Monday night that the county’s Board of Legislators took the unusual step of passing a resolution expressing no confidence in Ms. Rain, listing a series of embarrassing revelations and accusations, including a suggestion by a former assistant that Ms. Rain planned to use grand juries to investigate people she disliked.

In a special meeting, the board voted 10 to 3 to ask Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, to open an inquiry into Ms. Rain’s conduct, suggesting it was “detrimental to the criminal justice system and the public welfare.”

The resolution, which had bipartisan support, cited allegations of sexual harassment in Ms. Rain’s office, the firings and resignations of several assistant district attorneys, and the fraud accusation made by Judge Richards.

Judge Richards had sent a letter outlining the district attorney’s conduct to Presiding Justice Karen K. Peters of the State Supreme Court’s Third Department Appellate Division, which includes St. Lawrence County. He also filed a complaint with the Committee on Professional Standards, which reviews reports of misconduct by lawyers practicing in the Third Department.

Ms. Rain did not respond to requests for comment, but several of the county legislators who voted in favor of the resolution expressed deep concerns about her performance.

“St. Lawrence County residents are just fed up with it,” said Kevin Acres, a Republican legislator and dairy farmer who cited a steady stream of unflattering reports about Ms. Rain as the reason he supported the resolution. “The public reaction is, ‘Enough is enough.’”

The no-confidence vote also prompted a letter from Thomas P. Zugibe, president of the District Attorneys Association of New York, to the Committee on Professional Standards, in which he asked for an expedited investigation into the allegations against Ms. Rain because of “the crisis of confidence that has overtaken St. Lawrence County’s criminal justice system.”

Judge Richards is being temporarily replaced in St. Lawrence County Court by a judge from a nearby county, though cases were canceled last week.

In both his letter and a subsequent phone interview, Mr. Zugibe, who is the district attorney in Rockland County, said he was not taking a position on whether Ms. Rain had done anything improper, but noted that the problems in St. Lawrence County required immediate attention.

He said a no-confidence vote by a county board was exceedingly rare, though he wondered whether legislators were simply “basing it on what they’ve read in the newspapers.”

“We take this very, very seriously,” he said, adding, “Because this affects all of us.”

John Burke, the board’s chairman and one of three Republicans who voted against the resolution, also struck a cautious tone, saying he felt the board had made “a leap to conclusions,” and adding that he was not in a position to determine if Ms. Rain was doing a good job. “That’s up to the judicial system,” Mr. Burke said. “Not up to me.”

The Committee on Professional Standards declined to comment on or acknowledge any investigation into Ms. Rain’s actions. A spokesman for Mr. Cuomo said the governor would review the resolution when he received it.

Ms. Rain was the county’s public defender before resigning in 2011 after being stripped of her administrative duties. Two years later, she was elected district attorney after pledging to bring new vigor to investigating the unsolved murder of Garrett Phillips, a 12-year-old boy who was strangled in his mother’s apartment in Potsdam in 2011.

In 2014, Ms. Rain sought and won an indictment of Oral Nicholas Hillary, a local soccer coach, in the killing, despite a seeming lack of hard evidence. After several delays — including the case’s being dismissed once by Judge Richards for prosecutorial misconduct — Mr. Hillary’s trial is now scheduled for August.


