


Despite missing its top scorer, Jamie Vardy, because of a one-game suspension, Leicester overpowered visiting Swansea, 4-0, on Sunday to extend its unbeaten run to nine games and draw closer to collecting the Premier League trophy.

With the result, the only team that has a chance of catching Leicester is Tottenham, which is set to play West Bromwich Albion on Monday, but Leicester, a 5,000-to-1 preseason long shot, has its destiny in its hands.

Leicester, which has an 8-point lead, can clinch the top-flight title for the first time in its 132-year history by collecting 5 points from its remaining three games, regardless of what Tottenham does in its last four.

Manchester City and Arsenal can no longer catch Leicester, which last year was simply trying to avoid being relegated.

Leicester’s win over Swansea was its biggest in three months. After Riyad Mahrez gave the team a lead in the 10th minute, Vardy’s replacement, Leonardo Ulloa, scored twice. Marc Albrighton, a second-half substitute, completed the rout in the 85th minute.

Those performances were surely reassuring for Leicester as Vardy, who has scored 22 goals, continued to wait to hear from the Football Association of England on whether his ban would be extended. Vardy was sent off with a second yellow card in last weekend’s draw against West Ham and reacted angrily to the referee, eventually drawing a charge of improper conduct from the Football Association.

Fourth-place Arsenal, which has gone 12 years without winning the league, was held to a 0-0 draw at Sunderland in Sunday’s other game.

Later on Sunday, Mahrez, of Leicester, was named English soccer’s player of the year in the Professional Footballers’ Association awards. Mahrez, 25, who was born in France and plays internationally for Algeria, is only the second winner of the award from outside England, after the Uruguayan Luis Suárez, who won in 2014 while with Liverpool.

BACK IN FINAL (FINALLY) Twenty-six years after its only appearance in the F.A. Cup final, Crystal Palace will have another chance, having beaten Watford, 2-1, in a semifinal at Wembley Stadium in London. As it did in 1990, Palace will take on Manchester United, which beat Everton on Saturday.

JUVENTUS CLOSES IN Gianluigi Buffon saved a late penalty kick, and Juventus took a big step toward a fifth consecutive Serie A title in Italy with a 2-1 win at Fiorentina that left it 12 points ahead of Napoli.

If Napoli fails to win at Roma on Monday, Juventus will secure the championship with three matches to spare. If Napoli wins, Juventus needs only 1 more point to clinch.

The substitute Álvaro Morata scored the winner in the 83rd minute on Sunday, right after Nikola Kalinic had equalized for Fiorentina. Buffon then stopped a spot kick from Kalinic in the 90th.


