


ORLANDO, Fla. — It seemed as if all of Orlando was here, crowded around a glittering lake to remember the 49 people who died in a fit of violence.

Among the people, estimated by the police at 50,000, present at a vigil on Sunday for the victims of the Pulse nightclub shooting were:

Minnie Perez, 47, a Pulse regular who said she had lost 14 friends. She wore a blanket bearing their faces.

Megan Elkins, 25, who held her 7-year-old nephew as if it was the last time she would have the chance to do so.

And Syed, Ivette and Sasha Shamsuzzaman, a Bangladeshi-Puerto Rican family sitting under a black umbrella at the edge of the lake. Mr. Shamsuzzaman, 61, a Muslim from Bangladesh, wore a peace sign around his neck and called for Pulse to reopen as quickly as possibly.

“That would be a victory,” he said, adding that his daughter and Puerto Rican wife had danced at the club. “If it stays closed, we’ve lost and the terrorists have won.”

The crowd spilled out from the lake, covering the grass and a bordering sidewalk and crawling up the balconies and staircases that line parts of the park. There were few mentions of Omar Mateen, the man who entered the club on June 12, firing at its mostly Latino, mostly gay clientele, and holding many people hostage for hours as he declared allegiance to the Islamic State.

Instead, community leaders offered comfort. “You are safe, we love, be proud,” said Joe Saunders, a state representative and longtime gay rights activist, speaking from a stage. The crowd whistled, hooted and cried.

At one end of the park were a Sikh group that passed out cookies and volunteers of the Be an Angel Therapy Dogs Ministry. “We’re here for the scratching,” said Holly Horton, 62, offering up her golden retriever.

Nearby, two women gave free massages. “Basic touch can help you heal,” said Laura Gonzalez, 28, leaning into a man’s back as her friend massaged his leg. “It’s the best medicine they can have.”

Gusts of wind blew water off the lake. Ms. Elkins hugged her nephew and looked around. “I’ve never be so proud to be from Orlando,” she said.

As the sun went down, memorial organizers began to read the names of those who had died. Edward Sotomayor Jr. Alejandro Barrios Martinez. Christopher Joseph Sanfeliz. And at one edge of the park, about two dozen people wearing T-shirts with the words “Muslims Stand for Peace” gathered for the night’s prayer.

They stood and knelt, stood and knelt, finishing just after the last victim’s name was called.

On Monday, the Justice Department is expected to release partial transcripts of conversations between the police and the Orlando gunman on the night of the attack.

Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said the transcripts would include three calls between Mr. Mateen and negotiators as the massacre was unfolding.


