


After tests on Friday revealed that Chris Parmelee’s strained right hamstring could displace him for at least a month, the Yankees were forced to swallow down a difficult question about their situation at first base: Who’s left?

That snakebitten position has turned into a trap door of sorts for the team, with injuries now to four of the players who were expected to contribute there, leaving the Yankees precariously short of viable long-term options.

For now, the rookie infielder Rob Refsnyder will be the primary starter despite never having played the position before this week. Austin Romine, a backup catcher, becomes Refsnyder’s emergency relief. But things are certainly fluid. Already, six players have made at least one appearance at first base this season, and that does not include Greg Bird, who played 46 games at first last season but had season-ending shoulder surgery in February.

Before Friday night’s 4-0 victory against the Detroit Tigers, Manager Joe Girardi expressed as much confidence about Refsnyder as he could, knowing that the infielder, who primarily played second base in the minors, was still learning a completely foreign position.

“I think he’ll handle it fine,” Girardi said. “There could be some growing pains, but we don’t have a ton of first basemen with a lot of experience.”

Indeed, the attrition at the position in a two-week span has begun to assume darkly comical proportions. First, there was Dustin Ackley, a backup utility player, who was sent to the disabled list on May 30 with a dislocated right shoulder. Two days later, Mark Teixeira joined him on the shelf with a cartilage tear in his right knee.

Then on Thursday night, Parmelee, after having hit two home runs in his first start the night before, sustained a Grade 2 hamstring strain after stretching to catch a throw by shortstop Didi Gregorius. Girardi said he expected Parmelee to miss at least a month.

“He’s walking around, but obviously it’s going to take some time,” Girardi said.

The dearth of options at first would seem to present the Yankees with an opportunity to bring back a familiar face, Nick Swisher, who is currently playing in Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre after being signed to a minor league deal in April.

Swisher, who played four seasons in the Bronx from 2009 to 2012, and batted .268 with 105 home runs and an .850 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, had a swing that was tailor-made for Yankee Stadium’s short porch in right field and was a good clubhouse presence.

But as he is 34, it is unclear how much he can help at the major league level. Swisher batted .196 in 76 games for the Atlanta Braves and Cleveland Indians last season with only 25 runs driven in. The Braves wound up releasing him — and the $15 million left on his contract — in March.

Asked why Swisher was not brought in to help solve the first-base puzzle Friday, Girardi deferred to the front office for making certain call-up decisions. The Yankees recalled a reliever, Chad Green, to replace Parmelee on the roster; Girardi said the team wanted an extra arm.

“I go on the recommendations of our people, who they think can help us the most,” Girardi said.

Swisher is batting only .238 with four home runs and 17 runs driven in through 42 games in Class AAA, with two errors in 18 games at first base. He is hitting just .178 in his last 11 games.

“They didn’t think offensively he was doing what he’s capable of doing,” Girardi said. “Defensively, he’s played some first, not a ton, but they think he would probably be O.K. there. His range is probably not what it used to be. But that was the recommendation.”

So, for now, the first baseman will be Refsnyder. And the Yankees will hold their breath.

INSIDE PITCH

C. C. Sabathia continued his resurgent stretch of stellar performances with seven more shutout innings Friday to lead the Yankees past the Detroit Tigers, 4-0, at Yankee Stadium.

Sabathia earned his first win since May 20 but lowered his E.R.A. to 2.28 — the lowest it has been through at least 10 starts. He has allowed just three earned runs in his last six outings, and his scoreless-innings streak now sits at 12. “He’s been as good as it gets, he really has,” Joe Girardi said.

Sabathia said that he and the pitching coach Larry Rothschild “talked during spring training and felt good about the direction we were headed.” Sabathia’s 0.71 E.R.A. in his last six starts is the lowest over any six-start span in his career, according to the YES Network.

“Staying healthy is the biggest thing,” Sabathia said.

The Yankees scored three runs in the first off Mike Pelfrey, who slogged through six and two-thirds innings with five walks. Pelfrey walked in a run with the bases loaded in the first. Two batters later, left fielder Justin Upton misplayed a fly ball by Didi Gregorius that sailed over his head and allowed two runs to score.

Carlos Beltran, with his 11th R.B.I. in the past five games, bolstered the early lead in the third on a run-scoring single.


