


Islanders Coach Jack Capuano did not hide his anger after Brian Boyle scored an overtime goal to give the Tampa Bay Lightning a 5-4 victory Tuesday night at Barclays Center.

“It’s a direct shot to the head,” Capuano said, referring to an unpenalized hit Boyle had made on Islanders defenseman Thomas Hickey just before the goal. “Those are the type of hits we’re trying to eliminate from our game.”

Such is playoff hockey.

Boyle scored 2 minutes 48 seconds into the extra period to give the Lightning a two-games-to-one lead in the teams’ Eastern Conference semifinal series. The Lightning had forced overtime when Nikita Kucherov scored with 39 seconds left in the third period.

“It’s just too bad it had to end that way,” Capuano said. “I thought we played one of the best games of the year. We came out tonight and played a hard game. Our guys should be proud of the effort.”

Asked if he thought he could be disciplined for the hit, Boyle, a former Ranger, said: “I don’t think so. I’ve never had anything like that happen in my career.”

In a series needing a spark, the drama started in pregame warm-ups as Islanders defenseman Travis Hamonic had words at center ice with Boyle. The enforcers, Matt Martin of the Islanders and Mike Blunden of the Lightning, joined the discussion, and it was game on.

The Lightning knew they would have to deal with a raucous crowd at Barclays Center, and the Islanders came out flying, bombarding Lightning goaltender Ben Bishop with 17 shots in the opening period.

Josh Bailey, back in the Islanders’ lineup after missing the first two games of the series with an upper-body injury, scored the first of his two goals 7:55 into the first period.

An eight-year Islanders veteran, Bailey had perplexed his coaches and fans with a confounding lack of offensive production. But Capuano made it clear after the optional morning skate that he still wanted Bailey in the lineup.

“It doesn’t surprise me that he scored two goals,” Capuano said. “It doesn’t surprise me that he gave us a boost. That’s what veteran guys do.”

Capuano said the Islanders, coming off a 4-1 loss on Saturday in Game 2 in Florida, needed to be more physical against the speedy Lightning.

While there were no fisticuffs, the Islanders and the Lightning displayed their rugged best. There were numerous scrums after the whistle as players pushed and shoved one another.

“We knew they would come out strong in front of their home crowd,” said Bishop, who made 35 saves. “We knew there would be a push.”

The punishing play continued in the second period. Lightning forward Jonathan Drouin was dazed after an open-ice collision with Hickey, and the play started a skirmish in front of Islanders goaltender Thomas Greiss, who made 36 saves. Drouin’s head collided with Hickey’s shoulder, sending Drouin flying. He left the game but later returned to assist on Kucherov’s tying goal.

The brisk pace continued as defenseman Victor Hedman put the Lightning ahead by 2-1 with a booming slap shot from the point 8:10 into the second. Islanders defenseman Nick Leddy answered with a point blast of his own at 14:50 to tie the game at 2-2.

Bailey rewarded Capuano’s faith by poking the puck past Bishop on a power play 2:27 into the third to put the Islanders ahead by 3-2. But Tampa Bay’s Vladislav Namestnikov answered at 3:25 to knot the score again.

Cal Clutterbuck gave the Islanders a 4-3 lead with a goal at 11:23, and the Islanders seemed destined to capture a victory in regulation. But then Kucherov scored his team-leading seventh goal of the playoffs.

Bailey said he was already turning the page after his strong performance and looking ahead to Game 4, at home on Friday.

“These swings in momentum are all part of the ride,” he said. “You refocus and get ready for next one.”


