


The public is sharply divided along age, party and education lines over whether transgender people should be allowed to use public bathrooms that match their gender identity rather than their gender at birth, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.

While less than a majority, 46 percent of Americans say they think that transgender people should be allowed to use only public restrooms corresponding to their gender at birth. A smaller number, 41 percent, think transgender people should be allowed to use the restroom that matches the gender they identify with.

Democrats, college graduates and those under the age of 45 are more supportive of allowing for gender identity in bathroom choice, while their counterparts take the opposite stance.

The nationwide poll was conducted after President Obama issued a directive to public schools last week outlining ways to avoid discrimination against transgender students. The Obama administration contends that the issue is a federal civil rights question, while some states, such as North Carolina, say it is an issue for individual states to decide.

Nearly six in 10 Americans say they think decisions about which bathroom transgender students can use in public schools should be left to individual state or local governments to decide. While a slim 51 percent majority of Democrats think it is a federal issue, more than three-quarters of Republicans say the matter should be decided at the state or local level.

While the public narrowly disagrees with Mr. Obama’s stance on transgender rights and the restroom policy, his overall job approval rating, at 50 percent, is at its highest level in more than three years. His approval rating briefly rose after his re-election in November 2012.

However, approval for the president’s handling of the economy (42 percent) and foreign policy (47 percent) remain lower than his overall rating, and the public remains pessimistic about the track the country is on and sharply critical of Congress and the way things are going in Washington.

The poll also found decreased support for a vote on Judge Merrick B. Garland, whom Mr. Obama has nominated to fill the Supreme Court seat of Justice Antonin Scalia, who died in February. In March, 53 percent of Americans said the Senate should hold a vote on whether to confirm Judge Garland, who is the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, rather than wait until next year when a new president could nominate someone. In the latest poll, 48 percent of the public supported action now, while 45 percent said the Senate should wait.

In the last two months, Donald J. Trump has emerged as the Republican Party’s presumptive nominee, and the number of Republicans supporting a vote on Judge Garland has fallen 10 points.

The telephone poll was conducted on landlines and cellphones with 1,300 adults nationwide, and it has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points. More results will be released at 6:30 p.m. on nytimes.com.


