


Perhaps the first time that the Minimalist pioneer Donald Judd and James Rosenquist occupied the same space was in a 1964 issue of “Art in America.” In Judd’s August survey of gallery goings-on (including blurbs on Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg and Ellsworth Kelly), the then part-time critic refers to Rosenquist as one of the patriarchs of pop art, and to his “billboard technique.” (Rosenquist did paint large-scale advertisements for a living in the late ’50s.) “There is never any possibility of Rosenquist’s paintings being mistaken for billboards, however, as Lichtenstein’s paintings are mistaken for comics,” Judd writes. “The conspicuous fragmentation of the various subjects is immediately recognizable as art.”

Half a century later, the pair meets again — at the Judd Foundation’s SoHo branch, where Donald’s son, Flavin, is installing five of Rosenquist’s pieces on the ground floor of his deceased father’s former home and studio. Joining Judd’s untitled 1975 stainless steel and blue acrylic box will be Rosenquist’s 35-feet-long “Time Dust — Black Hole,” 1992, which he calls “a parking lot in space for junk. I did it in black and white because space is dark — literally and figuratively”; the mechanized sliding panels “Yellow Applause,” 1966, that, Rosenquist says, “could intrinsically mean anything — applause usually signifies approval but one never knows”; the 1961 “Shadows” and the 1972 prints “Horse Blinders (east)” and “Horse Blinders (west).” Flavin and his sister, Rainer, also pulled an inspired selection of books, like “Naked Lunch” by William Burroughs, “Theory of Colours” by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, “Catch-22” by Joseph Heller and “Powers of Ten” by Philip Morrison.

For all of the planning involved, Flavin refuses to overthink the relationship between Minimalism and Pop Art. “There’s this myth that the two movements were against each other somehow, and it’s complete nonsense,” he says, pinpointing an intersection. “Don and James were good artists. And I think that’s the only required commonality.”


