


The City University of New York reached a tentative contract agreement with its faculty and staff members on Thursday, ending a six-year stalemate and staving off a threatened walkout at the start of the fall semester.

The deal would give 25,000 employees represented by the Professional Staff Congress, the university’s largest union, 10.41 percent in compounded salary increases over seven years, from October 2010 through November 2017. It would also provide bonuses of up to $1,000 for workers.

Beyond salary issues, the agreement would offer adjunct faculty members — whose ranks have swelled in recent years, especially at CUNY’s four-year colleges — longer appointments of up to three years, rather than subjecting them to yearly or even semester renewals. CUNY’s professional staff, which includes program directors and student service providers, would also be given more chances for career advancement.

The deal must still be approved by CUNY’s board of trustees, as well as union members, in a process that could last several weeks. But both sides expressed optimism, and relief, that a deal had finally been struck.

“Great faculty are at the heart of every great university, and CUNY is certainly no exception,” Chancellor James B. Milliken said in a statement.

“This agreement provides not only a much-needed increase in pay for our many faculty and staff, but it also includes additional provisions important to CUNY’s competitiveness for talent at all levels.”

Barbara Bowen, the union’s president, who is also a professor of English at Queens College and at CUNY’s Graduate Center, said: “We were able to negotiate a strong, imaginative contract in a period of enforced austerity for public workers because our members mobilized. The fight for our contract was a fight for investment in quality education at CUNY.”

CUNY, a collection of 24 community, undergraduate and graduate schools, is the largest urban public university in the country. Approximately 45,000 employees help to educate 274,000 students annually.

But CUNY has confronted fiscal pressures in the last decade, as aid from Albany, which supplies the bulk of its funding, has dropped, in line with national trends in public higher education.

CUNY employees had been working without a new contract since 2010, and had become increasingly frustrated by the lack of salary increases during that time. That frustration was exacerbated by mounting concerns over workplace conditions including overcrowded classes, crumbling facilities and shrinking course options, as described in a recent investigation by The New York Times.

Last year, the university made an offer for a six-year contract, beginning in 2010, which would include salary increases totaling 6 percent, but it fell short of the raise the union desired. So CUNY asked the state to intervene, and the Public Employment Relations Board selected Kim Moore-Ward, the chief regional mediator and director, to handle the talks.

Then, last month, the union voted overwhelmingly to authorize a strike in the fall if no contract deal was reached — such an action would be illegal under state law, and could lead to the arrest of union leaders and fines against union members.

In an interview, Ms. Bowen said the union’s strike authorization vote, among other factors, most likely prodded state and CUNY officials to resolve the contract before the end of the legislative session in Albany.

And this past weekend, CUNY announced that it had reached new contracts with several smaller unions, including District Council 37, with salary terms that ended up being virtually identical to the ones agreed to on Thursday by the Professional Staff Congress.


