


The Kansas City Royals return to Citi Field on Tuesday night for the first time since they ran away with Game 5 of the World Series and clinched baseball’s championship.

The game turned on one play: Eric Hosmer’s daring dash to home plate in the top of the ninth with the Royals trailing by a run. Eight months later, a lot has changed for most of the Mets players who took part in that sequence, and not for the better.

Hosmer was on third base with one out and the Mets trying to hold on to a 2-1 lead. Jeurys Familia was on the mound for the Mets; the Royals’ catcher, Salvador Perez, was at the plate.

Perez hit a grounder to third, and David Wright fielded it, briefly looked Hosmer back to third and then threw to first baseman Lucas Duda for the second out.

But as Wright threw to first, Hosmer, knowing Wright had lately been reduced to throwing the ball sidearm without much on it, took off for home. And Duda, seeing all of this unfold, hurried his own throw to the plate. The ball sailed wide of Travis d’Arnaud, the Mets’ catcher.

Hosmer was safe, the score was tied, and a little while later, the Royals had an extra-innings victory and the championship trophy.

Now consider the three Mets who handled the ball after Perez hit it. Wright, after struggling this season to remain relevant while playing with spinal stenosis, had an operation for a herniated disk in his neck and is not likely to play again until 2017. Before the operation, he had hit .226 in 37 games.

Duda has not played since May after sustaining a stress fracture in his back. It is not clear when he will return. He was hitting .231 in 39 games when he went down.

And the injury-prone d’Arnaud has appeared in only 13 games and batted .196 this season because of a strained rotator cuff that has kept him out of the lineup. He has not played for the Mets since April 25, although he is expected to rejoin the team in time for the Royals series.

Familia? He is still doing fine. For that matter, so are Hosmer and Perez, who are both hitting over .300 for Kansas City and are likely to be starters in next month’s All-Star Game.

The Royals enter Tuesday’s game with a respectable 38-31 record, just a game out of first place in the American League Central. If the postseason began right now, they would be the second wild-card team in the American League.

In the National League East, the 36-32 Mets are simply a third-place team, at least for the moment. They have hit the wall of late and were six games behind Washington entering Monday.

They are having trouble scoring when they do not hit home runs, have no speed to speak of to help create alternate forms of offense and have been plagued by injuries, most notably to the three players who could not keep Hosmer from scoring that tying run in the fall.


