


Since 1822, the Church of St. Luke in the Fields has been the steward of a tree-shaded compound in the West Village that encompasses the Federal-style church building, several 19th-century townhouses containing rental apartments, a 1950s school, and gardens that are open to the public.

Until recently, it also included a parking lot.

The patch of asphalt, on the southwest corner of the complex at Barrow and Greenwich Streets, was used by staff and parishioners, said the Rev. Caroline Stacey, the rector of the parish. But over the years, as the cost of maintaining St. Luke’s buildings and social programs mounted, church leaders eyed the parking lot as a potential source of revenue. They couldn’t sell the parcel outright — the Episcopal Diocese of New York, the official owner of the block, would not allow it. But the church could lease the land to a developer who could then build on it.

Thus, 100 Barrow, a co-op under construction by Toll Brothers City Living, which now holds a 99-year ground lease on the site of the parking lot, was born.

Toll Brothers forged the agreement with St. Luke in 2013 and hired Barry Rice Architects to design the new building. It would be constructed at the same time that the church’s four townhouses on Barrow Street would be gutted and converted to single-family market-rate rentals by the developer as part of the deal. The church will continue to own the townhouses.

At the same time, the St. Luke’s School, which operates independently of the church, pursued plans to build a two-story addition atop its long, low-slung structure along Greenwich Street. The church’s compound takes up the entire two-acre block bounded by Hudson, Barrow, Greenwich and Christopher Streets.

Many local residents were alarmed at the proposed changes to what they regard as a precious neighborhood oasis. As the project made its way through the community board review process, there were objections to the size of the proposed residential building, which was 15 stories, and to its three-part design: a brick base topped by a setback glass tower, with a taller brick element rising at the rear. Because the property falls within the Greenwich Village Historic District, the project also needed the approval of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.

The first time the architects appeared before the board, in March 2014, the commissioners said the design was too tall, and also, with its multiple setbacks and balconies, too “fussy.”

Two months later, when the architects returned with revised plans, the co-op building had been reduced to 12 stories and simplified. Its six-story base would be clad in Flemish bond brick, chosen to harmonize with the Barrow Street townhouses, and the brick rear element would rise no higher than the six-story glass tower. The project was approved.

The building topped out in February and is expected to be completed in the fall of 2017, according to David von Spreckelsen, the president of Toll Brothers City Living in New York. A sales gallery is open at 426 West 14th Street.

The 26 market-rate apartments range from 1,600-square-foot two-bedroom units to a 4,400-square-foot four-bedroom duplex with a generous terrace. They are priced from $4.15 million to $14 million.

In exchange for a tax abatement, Toll Brothers has set aside seven units for buyers of “moderate” means — defined as up to 125 percent of the area median income, or $80,000 to $120,000, depending on the number of people in the household. These units range from studios for $90,000 to two-bedrooms for $180,000.

Some units will have oblique views of the Hudson River, others clear sight lines all the way to the Empire State Building. East- and north-facing windows will overlook the church’s gardens.

The land lease arrangement raises the question of what happens after 99 years, when the property reverts to the church. The lease could be renewed at that time, according to the participants in the current agreement, or co-op owners and church leaders could devise a different plan.

In the meantime, St. Luke, presumably on firmer financial footing, is considering adding a structure at the corner of Hudson and Christopher Streets to support its social programs.


