


A man accused of setting off primitive explosives at Pudong International Airport in Shanghai, injuring four bystanders, was dogged by gambling debts and had threatened to do something “totally crazy” before he detonated a bomb made from firecrackers, police investigators said on Monday.

A statement from the Shanghai police was the first account of the motives behind the attack on Sunday afternoon, when travelers scattered as cracking sounds rang out in Terminal 2 of the airport. Four people were slightly injured from shards of glass, and the suspect subsequently slashed his throat with a knife. He survived but was in critical condition.

The official account implicitly ruled out the idea that the suspect, Zhou Xingbo, nursed broader political grievances. Instead, according to the investigators, Mr. Zhou, a 29-year-old migrant worker from Guizhou Province in southwest China, lashed out after becoming mired in debt.

While working in an electronics factory in Kunshan, an industrial district outside Shanghai, Mr. Zhou “indulged in online gambling and lost all his savings,” said the police, citing the initial investigation into the attack. “He regularly borrowed from friends to get by,” they said.

Before the attack, Mr. Zhou sent a message on WeChat, a mobile messaging service popular in China. “I owe a lot of money to a lot of people,” he said.

“Getting ready to do something totally crazy, sure to lose little life,” he added, apparently referring to his own life.

On Sunday morning, the police said, Mr. Zhou caught a bus to Shanghai and went to the airport in the afternoon, when he detonated at least one beer bottle packed with the powder from firecrackers. Investigators found remnants of firecrackers in Mr. Zhou’s rented room in Kunshan. The police accounts did not say how many homemade bombs Mr. Zhou set off. Caixin magazine reported that, according to a witness, he used two empty beer bottles packed with explosives.

The police account offered no explanation of why Mr. Zhou chose the airport.

In a similar attack at the Beijing airport in 2013, the perpetrator had a longstanding dispute with officials, who he said had not punished government-employed security guards for beating him so badly that he was paralyzed and had to use a wheelchair.

But initial checks on Chinese websites revealed no previous documents or comments suggesting that Mr. Zhou harbored any grudge against officials.

On Monday, the Pudong International Airport instituted extra checks for arriving travelers and warned them to leave more time to get through the added security, according to a Chinese civil aviation news website.


