


LAFAYETTE, La. — At 17, Devin Harris is not old enough to buy a pack of cigarettes. But when he was accused of trying to use someone else’s credit card to buy cigarettes, he swiftly realized that — at least when it comes to the criminal justice system — the state of Louisiana considers him to be an adult.

“The last thing I wanted was to be in the system,” said Mr. Harris, who was in jail for nine nights in April because his mother could not afford the bond before he entered a pretrial diversion program. For the teenager, those were long nights. “I called my dad — I ain’t talked to my dad in almost two years,” he said. “I just needed somebody to talk to.”

Louisiana is one of nine states where 17-year-olds are treated as adults in the criminal justice system. However, that could change as jurisdictions across the country re-evaluate tough-on-crime policies.

The State Senate overwhelmingly passed legislation to include 17-year-old offenders in the juvenile justice system. The measure now goes to the House. The state District Attorneys’ Association dropped its opposition to the measure when its authors agreed to extend the phase-in period.

Proponents of the legislation point to cases like the prosecution of Mr. Harris. Some states treat people his age like children in many respects — they cannot vote, buy cigarettes or lottery tickets, or serve on a jury — but as adults when it comes to crime.

“They are children for just about every other meaningful purpose in society,” said Joshua Perry, the executive director of the Louisiana Center for Children’s Rights.

Mr. Perry pointed to a study done by the Institute for Public Health and Justice at Louisiana State University that strongly supported raising to the juvenile defendant age to 18. Among the reasons cited by the study:

— At 17, adolescent brains are still developing, so young people ae more likely to “engage in more risky and impulsive behavior.”

— Young defendants handled by the juvenile system had a 34 percent lower recidivism rate than those who went through the adult system.

— Inmates under 18 are more likely to be sexually abused by older inmates in prison.

In the adult system, cases can take much longer to be resolved than in the juvenile one. Parents do not have to be called if the police arrest a 17-year-old, but they can be an integral part of the juvenile system.

Rob Reardon, the director of Lafayette Parish’s corrections division, has been one of the strongest proponents of the change. He says it does not make sense to put 17-year-olds in an adult environment where they will miss school and get a record for life. “We’ve created a perfect system for creating criminals,” he said.

There is also a practical concern. Mr. Reardon estimates that it costs as much as $500,000 annually to house 17-year-olds at the Lafayette jail, even though they only have a few at any time. The Prison Rape Elimination Act, passed by Congress in 2003, requires those housed in adult facilities to be physically separated from older inmates.

One of the study’s authors, Stephen Phillippi, said the vast majority of the roughly 6,000 17-year-olds arrested in Louisiana in 2014 were charged with nonviolent crimes like marijuana possession. Proponents of the change note that for those charged with serious crimes, district attorneys would still be able to move cases into adult court — as they can now with many younger offenders.

This legislation comes as Louisiana takes a new look at its position as the state with the highest per capita incarceration rate. Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat elected last year, has promised to bring that rate down, and has made passage of the age legislation a major part of his agenda.


