


WASHINGTON — Alex Ovechkin glumly sat on the bench with his head pressed against his forearm Wednesday night after the Washington Capitals lost Game 4 of their Stanley Cup playoff series against the Pittsburgh Penguins.

Entering this second-round series, the focus was on Ovechkin and the Penguins’ Sidney Crosby, two superstars who are meeting in the playoffs for the first time since 2009. Instead, the series has been defined by unlikely heroes. Ovechkin, who led the league in goals for the sixth time in his career, and Crosby, who finished third in the league in scoring in the regular season, have only four points combined.

Even worse for Ovechkin, his team is facing a three-games-to-one deficit and has been pushed to the brink of elimination. Game 5 is here Saturday night.

“We’ve dug ourselves a hole,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said Wednesday after Washington’s third straight loss. “We’ll see if we can dig ourselves out.”

The Capitals steamrollered opponents during the regular season, outscoring their foes by 59 goals and handily winning the Presidents’ Trophy, awarded to the team with the N.H.L.’s best record. They had the league’s second-best penalty killing, the fifth-best power play and a goaltender, Braden Holtby, who tied the N.H.L. record for the most wins in a season.

The Capitals had built up such a head of steam that it appeared they might finally overcome their painful history of early playoff exits. Washington has not advanced past the second round since 1998, and the franchise has never won the Stanley Cup. Ovechkin is a three-time Hart Trophy winner as the N.H.L.’s most valuable player, but his lack of playoff success is a common knock against him.

All four games in this series have been decided by one goal, with two going into overtime. But it is a far cry from the epic clash between Crosby and Ovechkin seven years ago, when they each registered a hat trick in Game 2 before finishing with a combined 27 points in the series. Pittsburgh won the series in seven games and went on to win the Stanley Cup.

Many of the plays that tipped the balance have come from the 21-year-old rookie goaltender Matt Murray and other less heralded contributors.

The Penguins captured Game 4 with goals from Trevor Daley, a player Pittsburgh picked up in a trade in December from the Chicago Blackhawks, and Matt Cullen, a 39-year-old veteran, before Patric Hornqvist won the game in overtime.

The win was all the more impressive because Pittsburgh was missing perhaps its most crucial player: defenseman Kris Letang, who averages around 30 minutes of ice time a night during the playoffs. Letang was suspended for Game 4 for a high, late hit on Washington’s Marcus Johansson. Pittsburgh was without its No. 2 defenseman, Olli Maatta, who has not played since a late hit by the Capitals’ Brooks Orpik in Game 2, for which Orpik was suspended for three games. Eric Fehr, a member of Pittsburgh’s second line who scored the winning goal in Game 2, was also absent from the game.

“It seems like every night different people step up at different times and make important, key plays that help us win,” Pittsburgh Coach Mike Sullivan said on a conference call Thursday. “To see these guys play as hard as they do for one another as their coaches, it’s a thrill.”

Sullivan has played a pivotal role, too. After he took over for Mike Johnston, who was fired in December after a disappointing start to the year, the Penguins went 33-16-5 to finish the regular season with the second-best record in the Eastern Conference. Including the playoffs, they have won 40 of their last 59 games.

Pittsburgh did much of this without Evgeni Malkin, who missed the last month of the regular season with an upper-body injury before returning for the Penguins’ first-round series against the Rangers.

In the playoffs, Pittsburgh has survived without Marc-Andre Fleury, who has been their main goaltender for more than a decade after the Penguins picked him first over all in the 2003 draft. Fleury, in the first year of a four-year, $23 million contract, sustained a concussion at the end of March and was cleared to play before Game 3 against Washington. But he has stayed on the bench, backing up Murray, a move Sullivan referred to as “common sense.”

In the two games since Fleury was cleared, Murray has stopped 81 of 85 shots.

Murray, previously a standout in the minor leagues under Sullivan, is 6-1 with a 1.81 goals-against average and .944 save percentage in the postseason.

“I take time to reflect on what’s happened and to look back at all the fun that I’ve had and all the experiences that I’ve had this season,” Murray said Friday. “I’m feeling more and more comfortable.”

Murray has been aided by the play of Nick Bonino, a third-line center who has eight assists in nine postseason games.

The rookie Conor Sheary, who started the season in the minor leagues, has been a productive mainstay on Pittsburgh’s first line. Carl Hagelin, acquired in a January trade, has two goals and four points in the second round.

Those contributions have helped turn the Capitals into underdogs. Washington’s three-games-to-one hole in the series is something fewer than 10 percent of N.H.L. teams recover from. But the Capitals know it can be done. They led the Rangers by that count in last year’s second round before losing three games in a row.

“We have to take that experience and turn it around our way,” Ovechkin said.


