


Tim Lincecum made a winning return to the major leagues Saturday, restarting his career after nearly a year away with six sharp innings and several ovations in leading the visiting Los Angeles Angels over the Oakland Athletics, 7-1.

Sporting a bright red uniform that was in stark contrast to the black and orange one he wore for nine seasons with the San Francisco Giants, Lincecum gave up one run and four hits. He struck out two and walked two.

Lincecum, 32, had not pitched in the majors since last June 27 and did not quite have the blazing fastball that he used to win back-to-back National League Cy Young Awards. He had hip surgery in September, signed with the Angels in May and made three starts in the minors.

TAKING A SEAT Kansas City Royals pitcher Yordano Ventura started serving a suspension after it was reduced to eight games, from nine. He was disciplined for his role in a June 7 bench-clearing brawl against the Baltimore Orioles.

Ventura twice brushed back Manny Machado before hitting him in the back with a 99-mile-per-hour fastball. Machado, who retaliated by punching Ventura, dropped his appeal and will begin a four-game suspension Sunday.

COLLEGE WORLD SERIES Nathan Bannister matched his career high with 11 strikeouts in seven innings as Arizona beat Miami, 5-1, in the College World Series in Omaha.

Oklahoma State defeated California, Santa Barbara, by 1-0 behind Thomas Hatch’s complete game and Garrett Benge’s run-scoring single.

AROUND THE MAJORS Xander Bogaerts homered and singled to raise his American League-leading batting average to .352 as the host Boston Red Sox beat the Seattle Mariners, 6-2. Jonathan Schoop and Manny Machado each had three hits for the first-place Baltimore Orioles, who ended the visiting Toronto Blue Jays’ four-game winning streak with a 4-2 victory. Giancarlo Stanton singled in his first three at-bats as the host Miami Marlins totaled 17 hits while beating the Colorado Rockies, 9-6. Anthony Rizzo, Kris Bryant and David Ross each homered to lead the Chicago Cubs to a 4-3 home victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates. George Springer hit a run-scoring single in the 11th inning to give the host Houston Astros a 5-4 win over the Cincinnati Reds. Ian Desmond had a sacrifice fly to cap a two-run ninth-inning rally as the visiting Texas Rangers overcame a late deficit to beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 4-3. Zack Greinke won his seventh straight start, allowing three hits in eight innings and leading the visiting Arizona Diamondbacks over the Philadelphia Phillies, 4-1.

Andy Murray is one win from becoming the first five-time champion at Queen’s Club after defeating Marin Cilic, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3, in London.

Almost from the start Murray berated himself and disputed several line calls, but he eventually gained the upper hand. Murray will face third-seeded Milos Raonic in the final after he beat unseeded Bernard Tomic, 6-4, 6-4.

Other four-time winners since the tournament was established in 1890 include John McEnroe, Boris Becker, Lleyton Hewitt and Andy Roddick.

CLIMBING THE RANKS Madison Keys broke into the top 10 in the women’s rankings for the first time by advancing to the Aegon Classic final in Birmingham, England.

Keys, 21, beat Carla Suárez Navarro, the No. 15 player in the world, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (3). The seventh-seeded Keys will face Barbora Strycova, who beat CoCo Vandeweghe, 2-6, 6-4, 6-3.

NOT DONE YET Lleyton Hewitt, who said he would retire after the Australian Open this year, received a wild-card entry to play doubles at Wimbledon. The All England Club said Hewitt, the 2002 Wimbledon singles champion, would play with Jordan Thompson.

The Toyota TS050 Hybrid of Stephane Sarrazin led the 24 Hours of Le Mans heading into the night, battling back Porsche’s early challenge on a rain-soaked day. The Porsche of Neel Jani, which had started from the pole position, was in second.

Earlier, the Australian world champion Mark Webber, sharing driving duties of the Porsche, had snatched the lead from the Toyota of the fellow ex-Formula One star Kamui Kobayashi.

The 84th edition of the classic endurance event had a disappointing start in front of 200,000 drenched spectators. The first seven laps took place behind the safety car as torrential rain lashed the track and the 60 cars on the grid.

(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)

GRAND PRIX LINEUP SET Nico Rosberg claimed pole position for the European Grand Prix after his teammate Lewis Hamilton crashed out of qualifying at Baku, Azerbaijan.

Force India’s Sergio Perez was second but will take a five-place grid penalty for changing his gearbox after he also hit a wall and severely damaged the rear of his car.

Pavel Datsyuk is leaving the Detroit Red Wings with a year left on his contract, heading home to play in the Russia-based Kontinental Hockey League.

Datsyuk, 37, helped the Red Wings win the Stanley Cup as a rookie in 2002, and he was one of the franchise’s stars when Detroit won another title in 2008. He won three straight Selke Trophies as the league’s top defensive forward and four Lady Byng Trophies for displaying good sportsmanship while playing at a high level.

DUCKS RE-SIGN DEFENDER Defenseman Sami Vatanen re-signed with the Anaheim Ducks, agreeing to a four-year, $19.5 million deal through the 2019-20 season. Vatanen recorded a career-best 38 points last season, Anaheim’s highest-scoring season for a defenseman since 2011.

The Detroit police department said the former Michigan State basketball player Keith Appling was arrested on suspicion of carrying a concealed weapon. The arrest came days before Appling was to face a hearing on weapons and drug charges from a May arrest outside a suburban Detroit strip club.

Appling played for the Spartans from 2010 to 2014. He had two 10-day contracts with the Orlando Magic this season and played in the N.B.A. Development League.

Miguel Ángel López of Colombia moved into the overall lead at the Tour of Switzerland in Davos with a surprising performance in the time trial eighth stage.

López was 18 seconds behind the stage winner, Jon Izagirre. Neither is known as a top time-trial performer.

The previous overall leader, Warren Barguil of France, dropped to fourth. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)

Frank Lampard scored his first goal of the season in New York City F.C.’s 3-2 victory at Yankee Stadium over the Philadelphia Union, which leads M.L.S.’s Eastern Conference.

David Villa and Andrea Pirlo also scored for N.Y.C.F.C. (5-5-6), which ended the Union’s club-record eight-game unbeaten streak.

Lampard scored in the eighth minute, and Villa scored his 11th goal of the season in the 21st minute. Pirlo converted a free kick for his first career M.L.S. goal in the 50th minute.

N.Y.C.F.C.’s Jason Hernandez picked up his second yellow card in the 85th minute and was ejected.

Lexi Thompson, the defending champion, shot a five-under-par 66 for a share of the Meijer L.P.G.A. Classic lead with In Gee Chun in Belmont, Mich. Thompson, ranked fourth in the world, birdied five of the first 13 holes in her bogey-free round to match Chun at 15-under 198.

BRITISH AMATEUR Scott Gregory of England beat Robert MacIntyre of Scotland to win the British Amateur in Porthcawl, Wales, and earn a place in next month’s British Open. Gregory prevailed, 2-and-1, in a 36-hole match play final.

(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)


