


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

Finale time continues, spring is all around us, people are getting snazzy haircuts. Everything’s coming up Milhouse. Well, everything except for Fox’s new horrendous dating show “Coupled,” which made me want to throw humanity into the ocean.

Luckily there’s plenty of good and even some great stuff to watch this week instead. Plus ABC has posted the bios for the contestants on the new season of “The Bachelorette.” It’s a show I don’t particularly care about, but my god, one of the guys says his occupation is “erectile dysfunction expert.” Just lie, Evan! Say you’re a sales rep or something! Good grief.

We’re trying a new format for the newsletter today, with recommendations of what you should watch each day this week. We’d love to hear how you like it — or what you’d like to see instead. Email us at watching@nytimes.com, or tweet us at @Watching. Or just post Instagram photos of goats. Trust me, I’ll find them.

“The Detour” This TBS single-camera comedy is on its seventh episode, but it’s worth it to just jump in right here even if you’ve never seen the show. Created by Samantha Bee and her husband, Jason Jones, the show follows a family of four on a disastrous road trip. Jones and Natalie Zea star as the parents, and this episode, “The Road,” tells the story of their relationship, as they explain it to their tween twins in warped flashback — Jones’s hockey jersey says “dad’s team,” for example. The structure is reminiscent of the early “House” episode “Three Stories” in the way our characters fudge the narration of their own histories. “The Detour” is smart and warm and naughty, and more complex than it seems at first glance. (9 p.m., TBS; catch up on Season 1 on OnDemand or on tbs.com with a cable subscription; or purchase episodes on iTunes or Amazon)

Also: “Mike & Molly” series finale (double episode beginning at 8 p.m., CBS), “Jane the Virgin” season finale (9 p.m, The CW), “RuPaul’s Drag Race” season finale (9 p.m., Logo), “Castle” series finale (10 p.m., ABC)

“The Night Manager” If this espionage thriller passed you by a few weeks ago, fear not: You can (and should!) catch up on the previous four episodes on AMC.com; Tuesday is the fifth episode of six in this mini-series. Tom Hiddleston, Hugh Laurie, war, spies, John le Carré, Egypt, Switzerland, Spain, gorgeous costuming, gorgeous set design, gorgeous lighting, gorgeous people, just gorgeous, gorgeous, gorgeous. (10 p.m, AMC)

Also: “NCIS” season finale (8 p.m., CBS), “Chicago Med” season finale (9 p.m., NBC),“Coupled” series premiere (9 p.m., Fox), “Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.” season finale (9 p.m., ABC), “NCIS: New Orleans” season finale (9 p.m., CBS), “Chicago Fire” season finale (10 p.m., NBC).

“Jungle Animal Hospital” Ahhh, adorable baby monkey alert. The one-off special goes inside a veterinary hospital in Guatemala that rescues and rehabilitates animals with the goal of returning them to the wild. If you are moved by footage of caretakers nudging reluctant animals out of their carriers so that they may leave captivity forever … well, bring tissues. (8 p.m., PBS)

“black-ish” This Season 2 finale finds Dre and the Johnson family in a “Good Times”–inspired 1970s dream sequence. The show has blossomed this season, so even if you’re not a regular viewer, this episode is worth jumping in on. (9:30 p.m., ABC; catch up on the full series on Hulu)

Also: “The Middle” season finale (8 p.m., ABC), “Survivor” season finale (8 p.m., CBS), “The Goldbergs” season finale (8:30 p.m., ABC), “Empire” season finale (9 p.m., Fox), “Genius by Stephen Hawking” series premiere (9 p.m., PBS), “Modern Family” season finale (9 p.m., ABC), “Royal Pains” season premiere (10 p.m. USA)

“Archer” Seven seasons in, “Archer” is as raunchy and ridiculous as ever. Some of the story this season has been a little flabby, but lines like “Samuel Johnson tells us puns are the lowest form of comedy, but for me, it’s murder” still put this show in a class all its own. This week, a return to the Archer-Lana romance — generally a recipe for sublime insults.(10 p.m., FX. Watch the whole series on Hulu.)

Also: “Grey’s Anatomy” season finale (8 p.m., ABC), “The 100” season finale (9 p.m., The CW), “Blacklist” season finale (9 p.m., NBC), “The Catch” season finale (9 p.m., ABC), “Mom” season finale (9 p.m., CBS). Yes, “The Catch” got renewed.

“Lady Dynamite” Maria Bamford’s new Netflix series is so audaciously odd even if you don’t enjoy it, you should at least respect it. “Dynamite” stars Bamford as kinda-sorta herself, but the episodes are fragmented in both time and structure: Some tell one story, some tell several, some include surreal parodies, some play things closer to ordinary life. It takes a little while to get used to the show’s rhythms, so if you think you’d like to like it, plan to watch three or four in a row. (Netflix)

Also: “Grimm” season finale (8 p.m., NBC), “Masters of Illusion” season premiere (8 p.m., The CW), “Shark Tank” season finale (9 p.m., ABC), “Banshee” series finale (10 p.m., Cinemax)

“It’s become common this season to note that the female characters on ‘Game of Thrones’ are stepping to the fore, but that was especially evident on Sunday,” Jeremy Egner writes, with major moments for Sansa, Brienne, Daenerys, Margaery, Cersei and Osha on this week’s episode. “Women took purposeful steps to reshape their fortunes.” Plus, it really was an hour of actual ice and fire.

Saturday’s “Outlander” ended in a surprising fashion. Also, read our recaps of “Veep,” “Silicon Valley” and “Fear the Walking Dead.”

Last week, iTunes put several movies on sale for 99-cent rentals. You still have until Tuesday morning to rent the following titles — the best of the bunch. After that, as with all iTunes movie rentals, “you have 30 days to start watching your movie and 24 hours to finish it after clicking play.” So spend a buck, and then make time when you have it.

Sicario Emily Blunt, Josh Brolin and Benicio Del Toro star in this film about the drug enforcement war on the border between Mexico and the United States.

Chi-Raq Spike Lee’s film about gang violence in Chicago, and the women who withhold sex in an attempt to get their men to stop fighting, is an adaptation of the Greek play Lysistrata. Much of the dialogue is rendered in verse.

Dawn of the Planet of the Apes The sequel to “Rise of the Planet of the Apes,” which you definitely need to watch first.

Enough Said James Gandolfini and Julia Louis-Dreyfus star as two divorced parents who fall for each other in what Manohla Dargis called “one of the best-written American film comedies in recent memory.”

The Grand Budapest Hotel Do you like Wes Anderson movies? Have you not seen this one yet? What are you waiting for?

Live Die Repeat: Edge of Tomorrow This stars Tom Cruise and (again) Emily Blunt. Some people don’t like Tom Cruise. That should not stop you from watching this sci-fi action film, which is basically “Groundhog Day” crossed with an alien invasion war movie.

Under the Skin Scarlett Johansson stars as an alien on the prowl in this beautiful, disturbing and experimental art film.

Dick Wolf is about to have five — five! — prime-time shows on NBC. “We make Mercedes S-Class sedans,” Mr. Wolf said of his shows. “They’re designed to run basically forever and be comfortable and you don’t have to think about much. We don’t make Ferraris. I love ‘Homeland’ but after six years it’s got, what, 52 episodes or something?” (The New York Times)

One of TV’s best comic characters is Anthony Mendez, the narrator on “Jane the Virgin.” “Mendez’s performance is unique from other narrator roles because of its comedic timing and punch.” (NPR; the article is fine to read, but it’s better to listen to it for the full effect)

Finally, this profile of the comedian Billy Eichner is terrific. “In his ability to instigate and navigate all this, to will himself into stardom and to remain unfazed by it, and to confront us with fame’s magnitude and its inconsequence as we race to catch a bus, he is, perhaps, the ultimate New Yorker.” (The New Yorker)


