


GENEVA — A Russian diplomat at the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva has been accused of sending a threatening message on Twitter to a member of a human rights organization that supports activists in Russia, according to rights activists.

The intimidating message was sent in March to Florian Irminger, the head of advocacy for the Human Rights House Network. It showed an image of a flayed and bloody body from the popular television show “Game of Thrones” and said, “Our blades are sharp.”

The Council president, Choi Kyong-lim of South Korea, denounced the message as “completely unacceptable,” and told the Council during its opening session on Monday that he had taken up the issue with the head of an unnamed mission.

An investigation traced the message to a diplomat seated at Russia’s place in the Council during a discussion of a resolution promoting the protection of human rights defenders, Mr. Irminger said.

“We don’t think there’s a physical threat here,” he said, “but it has symbolic importance because this is how Russia acts with people who dissent. The real target is people who do human rights work in Russia.”

“I want to know if this is Russian policy or not,” Mr. Irminger added.

The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs said its Geneva mission had examined the episode and dismissed the message as “basically a joke,” albeit an unfortunate one. The message had ended with a smile and used a widely circulated image, the ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, said.

“We believe it’s unacceptable to threaten civil society. This incident doesn’t deserve the importance that is being artificially attached to it,” she said.

The director of the International Service for Human Rights, Phil Lynch, told the Council on Tuesday, “an online threat made by a state representative, albeit one hiding behind the cowardice of anonymity, is a threat against both the targeted individual, Florian Irminger, and the integrity of this important institution.”

Though he did not name the country involved, Mr. Choi, the Council president, said the country’s ambassador had “acknowledged that the member of the delegation committed this extremely regrettable act but not in his professional capacity” and without the intention of it being a threat. He said the ambassador had issued “an administrative reprimand” to the diplomat concerned.

Activists from China, Sri Lanka, Bahrain and other countries have faced intimidation, sometimes inside the United Nations, but officials said they could not recall such brazen harassment by a diplomat in the Council.

Rights groups said the episode was an example of a pattern of intimidation and likened the threat to the tactics they say repressive governments use regularly against defenders of human rights.

Human rights groups have called on Russia to take responsibility by publicly acknowledging the diplomat’s action, apologizing for his message and specifying how he would be sanctioned.

Instead, the rights groups said, the diplomat had taken his place with the Russian delegation at the Council’s session on Monday.

“That’s a slap in the face of the institution; it’s saying we don’t care,” Mr. Irminger said.


