


When the Mets traded for James Loney on Saturday, the prevailing rationale was that he would be a dependable, left-handed-hitting option at first base against right-handed pitchers with Lucas Duda now on the disabled list with a stress fracture and his return date unknown.

But that calculation has already changed. Loney, before taking one swing as a Met, was promoted. For now, at least, he has become the team’s everyday first baseman.

The reason is the chain reaction created by the latest injury to third baseman David Wright, the team’s captain. On Saturday, the Mets learned that Wright’s neck was feeling stiff. On Monday, Wright disclosed that he had a herniated disk in his neck.

Then, before Tuesday night’s 6-4 loss to the Chicago White Sox at Citi Field, Wright received an injection. He was to be re-evaluated in 48 hours, but the disabled list was still a possibility for a player already facing the daunting challenge of remaining a productive and more-or-less regular player while dealing with spinal stenosis.

With Wright out, the right-handed-hitting Wilmer Flores, who was originally going to platoon at first with Loney, will fill in full time at third.

To recap: Who’s on first? Loney, who batted sixth in the Mets’ lineup on Tuesday, going hitless in four at-bats.

“To be honest, he’s hit lefties better than anybody else we’ve got here who’s played first base,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said, alluding to Loney’s .254 career average against left-handed pitchers. “Right now he’s probably our No. 1 option.”

To make room for Loney, the Mets optioned Eric Campbell to Class AAA Las Vegas.

Loney could be an important bargain acquisition for the Mets. They paid cash for him and did not have to relinquish any prospects. Although it seems strange that the 32-year-old Loney, a career .285 hitter in the major leagues, was toiling with the San Diego Padres’ Class AAA affiliate in El Paso (where he was hitting .342) when the Mets acquired him, he fits into an infield that already had two other solid veterans acquired from elsewhere since last season.

Those two are shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera and second baseman Neil Walker, and both have been key contributors this year.

Loney may follow their lead. He lacks Duda’s power, with six seasons of double-digit home runs in the majors but never more than 15 in a season. But he does offer consistency, with six years in which he played at least 155 games, always batting .267 or higher.

“We’re missing Duda, and you bring Loney back, you’re going to feel like, ‘O.K., we still have a guy,’” said Rene Rivera, Loney’s teammate last season with the Tampa Bay Rays.

If Loney is the definition of stability, Wright, a seven-time All-Star, is currently the antithesis. The disk problem is the latest of the physical setbacks that have dogged him in recent seasons.

Collins was asked how Wright’s latest injury has affected him, and if he believed Wright, now 33, would ever perform at a premier level again.

“This guy’s been a special player,’’ Collins said. “The manager’s worst nightmare is to see a star start to fade, and I think David’s got a lot of baseball left in him because of the way he prepares.”

Collins added, “But it’s hard to watch what he’s going through.”

Collins said that he was not aware of any discussions regarding possible surgery for Wright, and that he believed the latest injury was not related to Wright’s spinal stenosis.

Speaking without any specific knowledge of Wright’s case, Dr. Christopher Mandigo, a neurosurgeon at NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia Medical Center, wrote in an email that healing time for a herniated disk could vary but was usually four to six weeks. He added that disk herniation and spinal stenosis were on a continuum of spinal arthritis and were related to each other.

The Mets did not place Wright on the disabled list. They are off Thursday, effectively giving him a three-day window for his condition to improve.

“Certainly, I think it’s serious,” Collins said of the herniated disk. “I never had one, but I’ve been around guys who’ve had. Bobby Parnell had one, certainly didn’t come back from it very good.”

After Parnell emerged as the Mets’ closer in 2013, a herniated disk led to surgery that September. He played one game in 2014 before tearing a ligament in his right elbow and having Tommy John surgery. He returned last season and had a 6.38 E.R.A.

Parnell is no longer a Met. But Wright does not appear ready to quit.

“He’s still special,” Collins said. “He’s still a great player.”


