


Mowgli lit a box office wildfire over the weekend.

“The Jungle Book,” directed by Jon Favreau and costing a hefty $175 million to make, took in about $103.6 million at North American multiplexes, or roughly 40 percent more than analysts had predicted before release. It was one of the largest openings on record for a PG-rated film, according to the database Box Office Mojo.

About 42 percent of ticket sales came from 3-D and other premium showings, which cost an extra $3 to $5 per ticket. Disney said on Sunday that surveys showed that crowds were almost evenly split between male and female attendees; about 70 percent of the initial audience was 17 or older.

“The Jungle Book” took in an additional $187.4 million overseas.

The turnout, powered by widespread critical applause, adds to a hot streak for Disney — “Zootopia” has now taken in nearly $900 million worldwide — and validates the studio’s decision to focus its signature label on remakes of animated classics. Audience support for “The Jungle Book” bodes well, in other words, for Bill Condon’s upcoming take on “Beauty and the Beast” and Tim Burton’s planned “Dumbo.”

The strength of this “Jungle Book,” meanwhile, will likely make life more difficult for a competing project. Warner Bros. has been working on its own expensive version of the Rudyard Kipling story; earlier this month, Warner pushed the release of its “Jungle Book” back by a year, to October 2018.

For the weekend, the Warner-distributed “Barbershop: The Next Cut” was a soft second, taking in about $20.2 million, according to comScore. This comedy sequel, from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Warner’s New Line, only cost $20 million to make, but expectations were higher; “Barbershop 2: Back in Business” took in $30.5 million in its opening weekend in 2004, after accounting for inflation.

The Melissa McCarthy vehicle “The Boss” (Universal) fell 57 percent in its second weekend — by far the biggest post-opening drop of her career — to place third, with about $10.2 million in ticket sales and a new total of $40.4 million.

Also of note: Lionsgate’s dismal box office run continued with “Criminal,” which cost a reported $30 million to make and collected just $5.9 million. Fortunately for Lionsgate’s production team, this letdown was mostly the handiwork of a partner, Millennium Films.


