


Five years ago, when Sara Grace Rimensnyder met Dan Cast, she was living in a small one-bedroom apartment on the fifth floor of a walk-up building on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.

He was living in Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn, in a shared two-bedroom. He traveled often for work and liked having a roommate. “I didn’t have to worry about things back home,” he said, such as returning to find a burst pipe.

His apartment was also on the fifth floor. “Your legs would shake, like if you had to bring groceries up,” Mr. Cast said.

In time, he moved into her apartment and the couple were married. He is now 44 and the assistant director on the television show “Impractical Jokers” on truTV. Ms. Cast, 38, is an editor and ghostwriter, mostly of business books.

Wanting a monthly rent lower than the $2,150 they were paying, they relocated to Prospect-Lefferts Gardens in Brooklyn. Their new rent, for a two-bedroom, was $1,500 a month. They bought a Subaru Outback, primarily for camping. To avoid dealing with alternate-side parking regulations, they rented a garage from a neighbor for $250 a month.

Once their daughter, Mia, arrived a year and a half ago, buying a home seemed like a good idea. “If I knew how much work it was, I honestly don’t know if I would do it again,” Ms. Cast said.

Last summer, they checked out a few two-bedroom co-ops. Open houses were mobbed; bidding wars ensued. They felt they couldn’t compete. Besides, for a co-op, they would need a 20 percent down payment. Financially, “it would put a lot of stress on us, when what we were looking to do was de-stress,” Ms. Cast said.

For help with the hunt, they contacted Reginald Salomon, the broker-owner of Lions Share Realty, who had been the listing agent for their two-bedroom rental.

“I encouraged them to look for a house,” Mr. Salomon said, in part because they could purchase a house with 10 percent down, rather than 20 percent. He also suggested they buy a multifamily house, with a unit for rental income. “You can always use a two-family as a one-family, but it’s hard to do it the other way around,” he said.

For a two- or three-family house, their budget was up to $750,000; for a single-family, it was closer to $600,000. They didn’t find many options, but they did find some.

A brick barrel-front two-family rowhouse in Flatbush, Brooklyn, in need of renovation, was listed at $599,000. Their offer of $580,000 was accepted.

Then, to everyone’s bewilderment, they heard nothing from the sellers. “It was like they dropped off the face of the earth,” Ms. Cast said.

“That was our first lesson in managing your emotional expectations,” Mr. Cast said. “You can really get your hopes up. I had to have Sara promise ‘no picking out curtains until we get that signed contract back.’ ”

Another handsome two-family on Martense Street in Flatbush, with an asking price of $580,000, also needed renovating.

“Maybe some corners were crumbling, but the bones of it were awesome and it had a lot of nice details,” Ms. Cast said. “We didn’t have a chance.” The place sold quickly for the asking price.

A short way from their rental, a single-family house on Miami Court, one of several short streets in a 1920s development called Coral Gardens, was listed for $499,000.

The house was adorable — and so small that “we would immediately be bursting at the seams,” Ms. Cast said. It sold for $525,000.

They declined to pursue a $399,000 two-family house in Flatbush on Albemarle Road with a fake stone facade and a “warren of lived-in, smoky rooms,” Ms. Cast said.

At one point, the couple wondered whether they should just stay put. Finding a house to buy seemed too hard. And Ms. Cast could not help but notice that “all of a sudden there were three options for me to get an iced coffee within a three-block radius,” she said. “Our familiar neighborhood that we loved was now kind of popping.” She feared they had been priced out.

But Mr. Salomon called one day with a single-family house for them to see in East Flatbush. The neighborhood was new to them, but “it felt like a stable, safe, unnoticed bit” of Brooklyn, Ms. Cast said. The two-story rowhouse, listed at $459,000, was across from Holy Cross Cemetery.

The house had three bedrooms and two bathrooms, a backyard and a detached garage. “I had that feeling — we can live here,” Ms. Cast said.

Mr. Cast liked the house, too. “For the other places,” he said, “we were saying, ‘Once we fix this place up, it will be livable,’ but this place was ready to go.”

At the inspection, “the inspector tells you every single thing that’s wrong with the house, and it’s intimidating,” Ms. Cast said. “There’s a million things on the list.” But everything wrong was fixable. They bought the house for $449,000, with a 10 percent down payment. For repairs, they budgeted around $20,000.

“It is a super-steep learning curve,” Ms. Cast said. “Chimney lining? Repointing the chimney? These are things I have never heard of before. I know a ton about plumbing now.”

Mr. Cast is unhappy with the upstairs bathroom — “poor workmanship,” he said — and with the drab beige carpet on the stairs, now shredded by Gus, their cat. The yard has an unattractive chain-link fence. The garage roof leaks.

“People tell you that babies are a lot of work, and you don’t really get it until the baby is there,” Ms. Cast said. “That’s exactly how I feel about our house. We love our house,” she added. But, “it’s, like, a transformative amount of work, or at least it has been for us.”


