


It would be an understatement to say that chee cheong fun is a dish that’s open to interpretation.

You can get it all over Asia, and you can get it from street carts and dim sum palaces in Chinatown and Queens. It appears in a seemingly infinite assortment of forms. At the dish’s core are steamed, rolled-up rice noodles. (“Chee cheong” refers to pig’s intestines; there’s a slight resemblance.)

Splashed with a ladle of sauce — sometimes sweet, sometimes spicy, sometimes funky, sometimes all of the above — the softly chewy clusters become ridged and folded purses of flavor.

“You don’t want the noodles to taste like anything,” said Simpson Wong, the chef and proprietor of Chomp Chomp, a restaurant in Greenwich Village that specializes in the hawker fare of Singapore. “You want them to be like white rice, to soak up all the sauce. If the sauce is not good, you’re gone.”

Once you’ve got that liquid component nailed down, “you can add whatever,” he went on. Sometimes the noodles are stuffed with shrimp; sometimes they’re topped with extras like eggplant, fried tofu or fish cakes. It depends on where you are.

At Chomp Chomp, Mr. Wong, 52, recently began serving a version that reflects the multicultural crosscurrents of Singapore. The noodles are Chinese in origin, but Mr. Wong’s sauce is a comforting, rusty-hued curry gravy that nods toward India and Malaysia, where he was born and grew up.

“I think the color is wonderful, isn’t it?” Mr. Wong mused the other day as a plate arrived at the table.

The chef’s youthful years were marked by poverty, he said, so he has created a take on chee cheong fun that he might have ordered if he had lucked into a windfall as a child. The toppings are rich: braised spare ribs and unctuous squiggles of chicharrón, along with a splatter painting of black sesame seeds, chopped scallions, sriracha and pickled jalapeño.

“This was my favorite, growing up,” he said of the pork ribs, “because it seemed luxurious to me. It’s real protein.”

You can order chee cheong fun as a dinner special at Chomp Chomp. If you want to act like an authentic Singaporean, though, you can wait until the restaurant begins its weekend brunch service on June 18.

“Usually it’s a breakfast thing — or a late-night thing,” Mr. Wong said. “At dinner, almost nobody eats this.”


