


Brazil’s Senate voted on Thursday to suspend President Dilma Rousseff and begin an impeachment trial against her. During the trial, which could last more than six months, Ms. Rousseff will be replaced by her former vice president, Michel Temer.

The vote stirred an impassioned response from Brazilians on nytimes.com and on The New York Times Facebook page, where thousands of readers shared their thoughts on the news.

Here is a sampling of those comments, edited for length and clarity.

Vitória Fernandes, 23: Brazil will not change. The problem with our country and economy is not the president herself, but our senators and everyone else who’s been stealing, and ruining our country to their personal gain. I’m sad to say that, even though I don’t support Dilma and never voted for her, what’s coming is much, much worse than her. I was hopeful we’d have emergency elections and elect a new president, that should be our next step, after all, no one votes for Temer to be president. He and those behind him are more corrupt than Dilma herself, and I fear for the future of my country.

Patricia Esse, 40: The removal of a democratically elected president represents a major setback in the development of the country and a disrespect for its citizens. The illegality of the lawsuit and the whole procedure is truly astonishing, and it makes me fear for the future. I expect a right-wing government with all that it entails… These are dark times for Brazil.

Lucas Barbosa Direito Uel, 20: The removal of our president represents the enforcement of law against her and the corrupt political party that ruled Brazil for the last 13 years.

Raul G Dagir, 16: With Dilma out and Michel Temer as our new president, we now take the first step towards leaving the economic crisis we’re facing in the present moment… The whole impeachment process may have put Brazil in an even worse situation than before, but it is the only solution to put Brazil back on track.

Mauro Bento, 31: Her removal means hope for the people. The country will be free of the most corrupt and incompetent party on earth. Michel Temer is prepared and certainly going to be the leader Brazil needs.

Thiago Mourão, 29: It means Brazil may now dream of a new future. It doesn’t mean our problems are solved, but may be the beginning of punishments for crimes of fiscal responsibility, as we are a rich country controlled by irresponsible politicians.

João Paulo Roland, 36: Her temporary (and most certainly permanent) removal from office means that our economy now has a chance to recover from her wrongdoings.

Eduardo Araújo: A pack of wolves conspired to oust an honest, legitimate president. Yet another coup in Brazil. Yet again supported by white, middle-class Brazilians, like many times before. A sad day for those who support democracy in my country.

Pedro Rasera, 27: The biggest issue I see is the cultural impact and the message being sent. There is now a dangerous precedent being set against democracy and due process is out of the window. Also, there is a worrisome trend of politics mixing with religious agendas.

Aline Hond, 22: Dilma was democratically elected by the people, and she will remain our president until 2018. We don’t recognize a president put in power by an institutional coup!

Thomás Abers Lourenço, 16: A completely hypocritical sense of morality has once again fallen upon the Brazilian middle class, which supposedly condemns every form of corruption (even the nonexistent), but does not care for the law or for elections… What most upsets me in this scenario is the growing sense that Brazil, only decades after the end of a long military dictatorship, has a problem with democracy, which still seems like an optional procedure, only used when convenient to the powerful.


