


WASHINGTON — A fierce debate over tougher gun control laws, ignited by the mass shooting in Orlando, Fla., began in the Capitol corridors on Tuesday afternoon as the Senate moved to take up an annual appropriations bill that covers the F.B.I. and other federal law enforcement programs.

Senate Democrats have pledged to force a vote on an amendment that would generally bar anyone who has appeared on a government terrorism watch list, or who is otherwise suspected of ties to terrorist groups, from buying a weapon.

Republicans, however, said that the Democrats’ proposed restrictions were overly broad and that they would push their own measure. It would give federal prosecutors three days to prevent a weapon from being sold by demonstrating probable cause that the person “attempting to buy a gun has committed or is conspiring to commit an act of terror,” according to Drew Brandewie, a spokesman for Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the chamber’s No. 2 Republican.

Democrats said that standard would impose too great a burden of proof, effectively rendering the restriction useless.

Even before floor debate began on the appropriations bill, the fight over gun rights was underway in the hallways of the Capitol, where lawmakers held dueling news conferences.

“The lessons that we’ve learned all across America with these horrible mass shootings, we need to do a better job in America of keeping guns out of the hands of those who would misuse them,” said Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Democrat in the Senate. “Felons, the mentally unstable and people with a terrorist connection have no business owning guns in America.”

Democrats said they would block a final vote on the Commerce, Justice and Science appropriations measure unless the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, allowed a vote on their amendment.

But even as Democrats criticized Republicans for having blocked a similar amendment in December, Republicans on Tuesday accused the Democrats of trying to exploit the Orlando shooting to score political points and insisted that their proposal would be more effective.

“Right now, our Democratic friends seem to be more interested in opportunistically using this tragedy to advance their agenda, rather than looking to work with us to solve problems,” Mr. Cornyn said.

Mr. McConnell said of the Democrats’ proposal: “Our suspicion is this is basically a politically motivated effort. But we’re open. Nobody wants terrorists to have firearms. We are open to serious suggestions from the experts as to what we might be able to do to be helpful.”

In the House, Democrats on the Judiciary Committee wrote a letter to the panel’s chairman, Representative Robert W. Goodlatte of Virginia, complaining of inaction and urging him to convene hearings on gun violence.


