


Of the Mets’ many recent health concerns, one had resolved itself by Tuesday. Manager Terry Collins was back on the job, delivering the lineup card as usual before the Mets played the Pittsburgh Pirates at Citi Field. He had felt disoriented before Sunday’s game in Milwaukee — dehydration, he guessed — and was taken to a hospital. But his tests had found nothing alarming.

“Freaky things happen,” Collins said before batting practice. “I’m just glad it’s done, and I’m glad I’m sitting where I am right now.”

If only the Mets’ injured players could recover as quickly as their 67-year-old manager. The lineup was missing five starters from opening day. To the usual disabled-list trio of David Wright (neck), Travis d’Arnaud (right shoulder) and Lucas Duda (back), the Mets began Tuesday without Neil Walker (back) and Michael Conforto (left wrist).

For six innings, their patchwork lineup had no hits off Jameson Taillon, a heralded right-hander making his second major league appearance. Curtis Granderson rolled a single to right to start the seventh, but the Mets went quietly in a 4-0 defeat. Collins said he would not criticize his offense, which managed just three hits in all.

“Our lineup is what it is because that’s what we have,” he said. “I’m not going to sit here and complain about it. We’ve got to get it done.”

Walker’s back flares up every year and always recovers, Collins said, though Walker could not get loose enough to pinch-hit on Tuesday. Conforto’s status, though, is more tenuous.

Conforto had a cortisone shot in his wrist on Monday and struck out as a pinch-hitter Tuesday. After hitting .365 in April, he has batted .150 in the month and a half since, with just 10 walks in 132 plate appearances. Collins said Conforto would start again on Thursday, but General Manager Sandy Alderson acknowledged that he might benefit from a stint in the minors.

“That’s sort of a gut feel; there’s no perfect answer or formula for when it’s right for a player to go down and when it’s right for a player to fight through it,” Alderson said. “If you remember, when we brought him up, one of the reasons we did was because of his approach and his foundation, in terms of decision-making at the plate. And that’s probably something he’s struggled with over the last few weeks and something we’ve got to get back — and continue to remind him that’s how he got here.”

Alderson said a brief demotion seemed to help d’Arnaud after a prolonged slump two years ago. D’Arnaud was 25 then, two years older than Conforto is now. If they so choose, the Mets may have a good option to replace Conforto in Brandon Nimmo: Like Conforto, he is a left-handed hitting outfielder and former first-round pick, and he has been on a tear at Class AAA Las Vegas lately, hitting .474 in his last 10 games before Tuesday.

Alderson said Nimmo was putting himself in position to be considered for New York, which could be significant. The promotion of Conforto last July, and the professional at-bats he brought with him, proved an important part of the Mets’ surge.

Elsewhere, the Mets’ choices seem limited. They have already found veterans from outside the organization during the season: catcher Rene Rivera, first baseman James Loney and infielder Kelly Johnson. All are best as bench players, but they are more capable fill-ins than the Mets’ early replacements last season, when injuries also decimated the lineup.

“The deficiencies are similar,” Alderson said. “The question is whether we’re better positioned to overcome them.”

That is not the only question, though. The other concerns the competition. Last summer, the Mets were chasing an underachieving Washington Nationals team that was plagued by injuries and led by an overmatched manager, Matt Williams. This year, the Nationals are healthy and thriving under the sage Dusty Baker.

The Mets lag five games behind in the National League East standings, though they are leading for the second N.L. wild-card berth.

“We’ve got a lot of games with the Nationals left — a lot of them,” he said, accurately (the teams meet 13 more times).

The Mets’ extraordinary rotation, and the recent resurgence of Matt Harvey, will keep them in contention. Upgrading the offense is tricky now, for many reasons: Few impact hitters are available yet, Alderson said, and the team is still assessing its needs.

At least Wright’s status seems likely to be resolved soon. He has been in limbo since his last game on May 27. Wright is in Los Angeles with a back specialist, and Alderson said the team would know by the end of this week whether to proceed with conservative rehabilitation for his herniated disk or opt for surgery.

One third baseman became available Monday when Major League Baseball declared Yulieski Gourriel a free agent. Gourriel, 32, was a star in Cuba who defected in February. Cautiously, Alderson indicated some level of interest.

“Our preference has always been to kind of diversify a little bit and spread our risk, and that’s typically not possible in the Cuban market,” he said. “But we’re taking a look at that situation, and we’ll look at that market in the future.”

The Mets will clearly explore the trade market for splashier acquisitions than they have already made. Acquiring Yoenis Cespedes from Detroit last summer cost the Mets pitcher Michael Fulmer, who has been dominant for the Tigers. The Mets’ farm system is not as deep now, but they hope they have enough.

“Will we be as aggressive? I don’t know the answer to that at this point,” Alderson said. “Are we able to be as aggressive? I still think we have the prospects, if necessary, in our system to move, and from a financial standpoint I think we also have what is necessary. We’ll just have to see what happens late in July.”

The path to get there could be more daunting, though: Even at their lowest point last season, the Mets never trailed the Nationals by more games than they do now.


