


PITTSBURGH — The season San Jose debuted in the N.H.L., in 1991-92, the Pittsburgh Penguins captured a second consecutive Stanley Cup. The Sharks have spent the last quarter-century just trying to play for one.

The wait has been torturous, and even after the Sharks have arrived in the finals, their frustration endures. They continue to chase the Penguins, who squandered a two-goal lead Monday night but filched a 3-2 victory in Game 1 after Nick Bonino scored with 2 minutes 33 seconds remaining.

Martin Jones made 38 saves for San Jose, but he could not stop the high shot from Bonino, who corralled a brilliant pass that Kris Letang zipped through the crease, past two defenders, from behind the net. Letang noticed that San Jose defenseman Brent Burns, barreling toward him, did not have a stick, affording him a precious extra split-second to thread the puck.

When San Jose went on the power-play seconds later, it was Bonino who anchored the penalty kill that denied the Sharks even a shot on goal, spoiling their first Stanley Cup appearance in franchise history.

“They played their game for longer stretches than we did tonight,” San Jose Coach Peter DeBoer said of the Penguins. “That’s what happens. You don’t deserve to win when you don’t outplay the other team.”

Letang had lost track of time in the third period, unaware that less than three minutes remained when Bonino scored. “So when I looked at the clock,” Letang said, “I was pretty happy.”

It was that kind of game: consuming and intense, demanding full concentration, played at supersonic speed. The Penguins’ roster is loaded with fast skaters, like Carl Hagelin and Phil Kessel and Bryan Rust, but their best asset is how quickly they all move — and think — together. They race up and down the ice not as forwards and defensemen but as a unit, offering support, advancing the puck, probing.

That frenetic pace dominated play, hewing to the Penguins’ strengths in the first period and accentuating their blunders in the second. Instead of chipping in the puck and then dashing past the Sharks’ defensemen, they turn in the neutral zone.

“We chose to try to play in front of them instead of behind them,” Coach Mike Sullivan said.

On the rush, though, Pittsburgh is deadlier than hemlock. Its first goal, blasted into an open net by Rust at 12:46 of the first period, came after Justin Schultz pinched into the Sharks’ zone. His shot, deflected by Marc-Edouard Vlasic, caromed toward the crease, toward Rust, who had slipped behind his defender.

Rust spent part of this season in the minor leagues, much like Conor Sheary, who extended the Penguins’ lead just 62 seconds later. The swift maturation of Pittsburgh’s younger players has lengthened its lineup. It has also engendered trust.

Sheary skates on a line with Crosby because he can handle the attendant expectations and responsibilities. He also does so because he can anticipate the nightly wizardry from Crosby — “He was impossible to defend,” Matt Cullen said — who chased the puck behind Justin Braun and toward the corner, gained separation with a tight turn, then whipped a no-look backhander across the ice. And because he can collect that absurd pass and blister it into the top corner past Jones.

“He sees you all over the ice,” Sheary said.

The quandary confronting Bay Area sports fans Monday night: Watch San Jose’s first Stanley Cup finals game, or the Golden State Warriors’ pursuit of basketball immortality?

Those who tuned in for face-off before tipoff were given little reason to watch (Joe) Thornton instead of (Klay) Thompson. The score was 2-0, and even a hockey novice could have discerned the Penguins’ dominance from the proceedings or the first-period stat sheet — 27 shot attempts, 15 on goal, for Pittsburgh.

“They came out flying; it looked like we were stuck in mud,” said San Jose center Logan Couture, who added, “We obviously weren’t prepared.”

All that could disrupt Pittsburgh, it seemed, was a disavowal of a tenet so critical in this series.

With an undisciplined penalty, the Penguins allowed San Jose’s power play — converting at a 27 percent rate in these playoffs — to prowl, and produce. Were tertiary assists awarded, one would have gone to Joel Ward, who initiated the sequence that led to Tomas Hertl’s goal at 3:02 of the second period with a deft swipe of his stick at the blue line, keeping the puck in Pittsburgh’s zone.

It was a crafty goal by Hertl, but an ugly one yielded by Matt Murray, as it zipped between his legs from a tight angle. It foretold another, this one by Patrick Marleau, making his Stanley Cup debut in his 1,577th career game.

Murray turned 22 last Wednesday, the day before he stifled Tampa Bay in Game 7 of the conference finals, and his development has both infused the lineup with confidence and created a goaltender conundrum for the front office to sort out this summer. But his slow reaction to Marleau’s wraparound, failing to slide to the opposite post in time, accentuated a more pressing concern at the present.

By ceding two consecutive goals to tie the score at 2-2 entering the third period, the Penguins again tumbled into a bad postseason habit. They beat Washington in Game 6 of the teams’ second-round series despite giving up a three-goal advantage, then lost Game 5 to Tampa Bay after leading by two in the second period.

The Sharks, sunk by Letang’s guile and Bonino’s precision, bemoaned their nerves, their slow start, their turnovers, their stagnant neutral-zone play. They vowed to perform better in Game 2 on Wednesday, but in the meantime, they still trail in the series.

The chase continues, and so does the wait.


