


PORSCHE 911 owners are a faithful and rabid bunch who do not like their car to be messed with. In the late 1990s, when the people in Stuttgart switched from air-cooled to water-cooled engines, loyalists were certain the move caused the financial collapse in Southeast Asia and tsunamis in Papua New Guinea. Perhaps even that dreadful movie “Armageddon.”

It could be déjà vu all over again. With the 2017 model year, all 911s are now turbocharged. That’s right: Technically it means you can buy a base Carrera and crow to your friends you own a 911 turbo, which you would, just not a Turbo model (which still exists, with fender intakes and 540 horsepower, so that’s quite a white-lie buster).

Visually, only eagle-eyed Porschephiles will spot the redesigned front and back fascia, doors and a rear air intake that gulps more air on the 2017 version. No controversy there. The twin-turbo version of the flat-6 engine is smaller now at 3 liters and more fuel-efficient. It also packs additional horsepower — 420 in the Carrera S Cabriolet model I drove, which drinks premium fuel at a rate of 20 miles per gallon city, 28 highway, according to the government.

And then there’s the torque — 368 pound-feet of it delivered in a wonderfully linear manner from 1,700 through 5,000 r.p.m., whereas the outgoing engine’s power built progressively as the revolutions built up. Enthusiasts should hug the engineers.

This new motor is more drivable, especially when teamed to the 7-speed manual transmission I’m rowing. The 7-speed PDK dual-clutch automatic gearbox is a brilliant piece of machinery. Both transmissions are redesigned. A starting price of $90,450 for a base hardtop coupe will save most of us from having to choose between the two. As tested, the Cabrio just clears $135,000.

Going from the hard top coupe to Cabrio costs around $12,000. The updated leather interior in Bordeaux red sets you back $4,280, and the sport seats are another $2,320. Can’t do without the Spyder Design wheels? That’ll be $2,370, please.

Manual 911s dash from standstill to 60 miles an hour in about 4 seconds, while the PDK — which stands for Porsche Doppelkupplung, not Pretty Darn Kwik — is a couple of ticks faster.

Sonically, the 911’s precision clockwork-on-amphetamines characteristic remains, save for a whisper of a whistle added by the turbos that should be a deal breaker only to those sensitive to ultrasonic dog whistles. That symphony of mechanical delight is deliberately guided into the cabin.

Corner hard and the 911’s heroic abilities feel different from those of the midengine Cayman and Boxster. The rear-engine 911 essence is a perceptively heavier tail that’s easier to rotate in a controlled manner. Brakes scrub speed off like nobody’s business. Front vents and an active rear spoiler improve aerodynamics on the fly. Drop the perfectly tailored fabric top (something you can do while moving at speeds up to 30 m.p.h.) and air management in the cockpit is well managed.

Not much changes in the familiar cabin, which treats eyes and fingers to materials with visual and tactile heft. The world’s most over-engineered cup holders spring from the dashboard, and the new entertainment system is fully modern with pinch-to-zoom features, Google Maps and Apple CarPlay. A front-axle lift option means steep driveways will no longer keep people from owning a Porsche.

The “frunk” is roomier than you might expect; two carry-on suitcases will fit. Anything else will need to go in the back seat. I use the term “seat” loosely.

To those who would rather buy a Miata and pocket the extra $100,000, your frugality is commendable; the Mazda is a fun romp. Know that the 911’s precision and gravitas are on a whole different level. It’s why second mortgages were invented. Loyalists may approach turbocharging across the board with trepidation, but newcomers to the brand should simply feel free to enjoy the evolution of a legend.


