


The Japanese Olympic Committee will form a commission to investigate allegations of corruption in the awarding of the 2020 Summer Games, the president of the organization said on Wednesday.

Tsunekazu Takeda, the committee’s leader, told Parliament in Tokyo that the commission would include outside lawyers and would “investigate the presence or absence of illegality” in payments made to a Singapore company called Black Tidings.

Tokyo overcame rival bids in 2013 from Madrid and Istanbul to win the Summer Games for the first time since 1964. Japanese officials have cast the Olympics as an opportunity to show the world that the country has recovered from the devastating March 2011 earthquake and subsequent nuclear disaster at Fukushima.

Suggestions that corruption played a role in that selection, however, have cast a pall over it.

Le Monde, a French daily, on May 12 quoted French financial prosecutors as saying that investigators were examining money transfers totaling about $2 million made by a Japanese bank to Black Tidings, thought to be linked to a son of Lamine Diack, the former head of the International Association of Athletics Federations, which governs track and field events. The transfers were apparently discovered after the French authorities began a criminal investigation last year of the elder Mr. Diack — who was also a member of the International Olympic Committee until 2013 — on suspicion of having accepted more than $1 million in bribes to cover up positive drug tests.

A World Anti-Doping Agency report in January found that Black Tidings was implicated in the drug testing cover-up.

Mr. Takeda had previously acknowledged that payments were made, but he said they were audited and were for legitimate purposes. He declined to answer further questions from lawmakers on Wednesday, citing a confidentiality agreement with Black Tidings.

News of the French investigation was first revealed by The Guardian on May 11. The French authorities are also investigating the awarding of the 2016 Summer Games to Rio de Janeiro.

The Japanese Olympic Committee could not be reached after working hours on Wednesday. The organization has defended its integrity, saying that Tokyo was awarded the Summer Games because it made the superior bid.

The International Olympic Committee said in a statement that its chief ethics and compliance officer, Pâquerette Girard Zappelli, “has been in contact with the French magistrates in charge of the investigation on the IAAF case, and with WADA, since its start” and that she would “continue to be in contact with all interested parties to clarify any alleged improper conduct.” It declined to make any further comment on the Tokyo allegations.


