


The Republican primary is effectively over, and Donald J. Trump will really, truly be the nominee.

Mr. Trump won Indiana so convincingly on Tuesday that he drove Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, his chief rival, out of the race. One more contender, Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, remains, but for all intents and purposes, the contest is finished.

On the Democratic side, Senator Bernie Sanders’s victory did little to alter the race. Hillary Clinton’s delegate lead remains intact, and Mr. Trump’s emergence as the unchallenged Republican standard-bearer may help the Clinton cause as Democrats grow anxious about the general election matchup.

Here are some of our takeaways from what proved to be a decisive night for the Republican race:

With his victory in Indiana, Mr. Trump inherits a Republican Party that has been traumatized and torn apart by his campaign. A majority of primary voters in the later contests ultimately chose him, but potentially crippling divisions persist on the right: In Indiana, roughly a quarter of Republican voters said they would be scared to see him elected president, according to exit polls.

It is not clear that Mr. Trump has it in him to unite the party. His final day on the campaign trail was a tour de force of political brutality. He first lobbed the outlandish claim that Mr. Cruz’s father had a connection to John F. Kennedy’s killer, and then mocked Mr. Cruz as a floundering loser. Mr. Trump has continued to ridicule other vanquished foes, including Jeb Bush, long after they left the race.

Mr. Trump begins the general election as a severe underdog to Mrs. Clinton, and large-scale defections from the Republican side could doom his candidacy even before he formally claims the nomination. But Mr. Trump boasted on Tuesday night that Republicans were clamoring to board “the Trump train,” and said of the party, “We have to bring unity.”

Republican elected officials and party leaders deferred the day of reckoning for as long as possible, but now it has arrived: They will have to say, definitively and soon, whether they plan to support Mr. Trump in the general election.

The Republican National Committee has already swung behind Mr. Trump, with Reince Priebus, the party chairman, declaring Tuesday night that Mr. Trump was the presumptive nominee. But others in the party — most significantly, a half-dozen senators running for re-election in Democratic and swing states — face a tougher choice.

Democrats see this as a fateful moment for their adversaries, who must decide whether to shun Mr. Trump and risk angering a huge chunk of the Republican base, or to embrace him despite his controversial comments and low levels of support among crucial groups like women, college-educated voters, moderates, young people and nonwhite voters.

Democratic Senate candidates have already wielded Mr. Trump against their opponents this week. Ted Strickland, the party’s nominee in Ohio, released a statement Tuesday night jeering, “Here are the 5 words that are striking fear into Senator Rob Portman: presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump.”

Republicans opposed to Mr. Trump gravely misunderstood their own party. Many believed that the bulk of primary voters were firmly set against Mr. Trump’s candidacy and saw his early successes as a function of the large, fractious group of candidates running against him. As the Republican field dwindled in size, they expected a majority of the party to rally around a single rival.

That simply did not happen. When Mr. Trump won a landslide victory in New York last month, easily cracking the 50 percent mark, Republicans hoped it was a home-state phenomenon. A week later, on April 26, he swept five Northeastern states, and Republicans hoped that was a matter of regional affinity.

This was wishful thinking, and in Indiana, Mr. Trump put an end to the mirage. He defeated Mr. Cruz by more than 15 points and won more than half the vote in a seventh consecutive state — this time, in the Midwest.

There was no anti-Trump majority left to rally, if it ever existed in the first place.

Mr. Sanders’s success in Indiana did little to loosen Mrs. Clinton’s grip on the Democratic nomination. It would still take a turnaround of unprecedented scale for Mr. Sanders to overtake her in the delegate race, and many of his supporters seem to recognize that.

In a state split almost evenly between the candidates, three-quarters of Democratic voters said they expected Mrs. Clinton to be the nominee, according to exit polls. Of the voters who forecast a Clinton nomination, two in five voted for Mr. Sanders.

Sanders supporters, who are mainly young, liberal and distrustful of Wall Street and international trade, are not delusional about his path forward — but nor are they willing to stand aside and give Mrs. Clinton the nomination unchallenged. They want to make her keep working for it.

Mrs. Clinton and her closest allies have been careful not to anger Sanders supporters by seeking to shove him out of the presidential campaign. His strong showing on Tuesday proved that there is still a powerful constituency for Mr. Sanders’s ideas within the Democratic base and, in some sectors of the party, a real sense of loyalty to him personally.

Mr. Trump’s emergence as the all-but-anointed Republican nominee may change this dynamic. Giving him a monthlong head start to rally skeptical Republicans behind his campaign, while Mrs. Clinton continues to grapple with Mr. Sanders’s challenge on the left, could become an intolerable prospect for Democrats eager for a free hand to engage Mr. Trump.


