


Linda Wen Jeng and Conor Nicholas Healy were married May 14 at their new home in Washington, to which they had invited guests to what was billed as a housewarming party. Tiffany M. Newman, a minister affiliated with the Sacred Life Church in Richmond, Va., solemnized their marriage license.

On May 29, they are to have a nonbinding cultural ceremony at Luttrellstown Castle, an event space in Dublin, where Simone Walsh, a civil family celebrant, is to lead the couple in a Celtic handfasting ceremony in which they bind their hands together with a ribbon.

Ms. Jeng , 41, who will keep her name, works in the division of financial stability at the board of governors of the Federal Reserve in Washington, where she helps develop policies in financial regulation.

She graduated cum laude from Duke and received law degrees from Columbia and the University of Toulouse in France. The bride’s previous marriage ended in divorce. She is the daughter of Melissa Jeng and Raymond Jeng of Norcross, Ga.

Mr. Healy, 42, is an economist in the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, a division of the World Bank in Washington. He is also an adjunct professor at the school of foreign service at Georgetown.

He graduated with first-class honors from Trinity College in Dublin, and received a Master of Science in Economics in comparative politics from the London School of Economics, as well as a Ph.D. in politics and public policy from Princeton. He is a son of Mary E. Healy and Nicholas J. Healy of Dublin.

The couple met on a bitterly cold evening in Washington in February 2013, when she bumped into a mutual friend who was with Mr. Healy. “It was so cold that you couldn’t register a person’s face,’’ Ms. Jeng said.

Three months later, she was out for drinks with another mutual friend, Michael Strauss, when she told him about how hard it was meeting anyone interesting. Minutes later, unprompted, Mr. Healey sent Mr. Strauss a text inviting him to join him and his old Princeton roommate for dinner a couple of blocks away. Mr. Strauss invited Ms. Jeng along.

At first, she was put off by Mr. Healy’s sense of humor. “He was telling a horrific story and chuckling,’’ she said. “It was a painful story, but soon I learned that’s how the Irish show their pain, through their laughter.”

The conversation soon got on more entertaining footing, and when Mr. Strauss called it a night, Mr. Healy and his former college roommate persuaded Ms. Jeng to continue the evening with them at a bar across the street, where she regaled them with descriptions of her highly unorganized bookshelf.

“We then convinced her that we should clean up her bookshelf,’’ said Mr. Healy, and in the wee hours after the bar closed, they walked her home. Along the way a large rat darted out of the bushes and nearly across Ms. Jeng’s feet.

“She jumped into my arms,’’ said Mr. Healy, who recalled thinking, “Oh she’s interested in me.” As promised, he and his friend organized her bookshelf before she kicked them out around 3:30 a.m.

They began dating regularly, but a few months later she took on a half-year job assignment in Switzerland, which turned into a long-distance relationship of almost two years. “I was Penelope back in Greek myth making my tapestries waiting for her to come back,’’ he said, though they did manage to see each other every two or three months.

During a vacation to India in August 2015, he proposed during a 10-course dinner on their balcony in Agra with the Taj Mahal before them in the distance.

“It was a feast for Mughal emperors,’’ she said, and after she accepted, a member of the staff lit a red paper lantern outside, which floated to the sky.


