


Mayor Bill de Blasio’s prospects of getting the Legislature to renew his control of New York City’s schools were thrown into doubt on Thursday, when the leader of the State Senate issued a statement harshly criticizing Mr. de Blasio’s performance at a hearing on the issue.

“Too often, the mayor showed a disturbing lack of personal knowledge about the city schools,” the Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan, a Long Island Republican, said in a statement. “In addition, he has left too many unanswered questions and failed to provide specifics on many of the issues raised by my colleagues on both sides of the aisle.”

“Until that occurs,” Mr. Flanagan added, “I will not entrust this mayor with the awesome responsibility of operating the New York City school system.”

The animus between Mr. Flanagan and Mr. de Blasio is not new. The mayor is the subject of a multipronged investigation by state and federal authorities over an unsuccessful effort in 2014 to oust Senate Republicans from power. Last year, when Mr. de Blasio went to Albany seeking renewal of mayoral control of schools, originally granted to Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg in 2002, Mr. Flanagan made sure he received only a one-year extension.

Still, Mr. Flanagan’s statement had the feeling of a sneak attack. On Wednesday, Mr. de Blasio appeared before members of the Senate in Albany to argue for a seven-year extension of mayoral control. Mr. Flanagan did not attend the hearing, and the questioning was relatively mild, although one Republican senator, Terrence P. Murphy, asked why, given the multiple investigations Mr. de Blasio’s administration is facing, he should trust the mayor to run the city’s schools.

In an exchange that may have given Mr. Flanagan his opening, another Senate Republican, John DeFrancisco, asked the mayor about the back pay being given to the city’s teachers under the most recent contract. Mr. de Blasio did not know the answer to the question, although it was a simple one, which prompted Mr. DeFrancisco to respond with derision.

On Thursday, a spokesman for the mayor, Austin Finan, did not respond directly to Mr. Flanagan’s criticism, saying the mayor and the schools chancellor, Carmen Fariña, “articulated a clear and compelling case for the state to grant a multiyear extension of mayoral control.”

“From pre-K for all to graduation rates above 70 percent,” Mr. Finan continued, “the successes of a school system with direct, mayoral accountability cannot be denied.”

A second hearing is scheduled for May 19 in New York City.


