


For his bookshop and website One Grand Books, the editor Aaron Hicklin asked people to name the 10 books they’d take with them if they were marooned on a desert island. The next in the series is Ari Shapiro, the co-host of NPR’s “All Things Considered,” who shares his list exclusively with T.

“1Q84,” Haruki Murakami

I read this book when I was working a night shift, going to sleep at 6 p.m. and waking up at 2 a.m. each day. My surreal, hazy existence during those weeks was a perfect fit with the world of “1Q84,” where everything seems just a little bit off. It’s recognizable as the world you live in, and also somehow not.

“Birdsong: A Novel of Love and War,” Sebastian Faulks

I never quite understood World War I in the way that I’ve understood other 20th-century wars. It always felt a bit too distant and complicated. I read this book during the 2014 centenary commemorations of the war, and suddenly the conflict snapped into focus for me in a way it never had before.

“Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone,” Deborah Madison

Years after I left vegetarianism behind, this is still the cookbook I reach for more than any other.

“The Gilded Gutter Life of Francis Bacon,” Daniel Farson

I’m not really a fan of biographies, or of Francis Bacon’s art. So why do I love this book? It brings mid-20th-century gay London to life. And it helps me understand why people appreciate Bacon’s work so deeply, even if I still can’t say I’d hang his paintings on my living room wall.

“The Wake,” Paul Kingsnorth

The tale behind this book is as riveting as the book itself. The first-time novelist can’t get a publisher, so he crowdfunds this book. The story is set 1,000 years ago and written in a slightly made-up version of Old English. Of course nobody will buy it. Except that they do. It gets rave reviews and awards. When you read it, you’ll understand why.

“The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay,” Michael Chabon

I almost never reread novels. It’s just not something I do. This is the only exception I can think of.

“Cloud Atlas,” David Mitchell

Mitchell is one of the few writers whose catalog I’ll read beginning to end. He’s a stylistic acrobat, and “Cloud Atlas” is his most beloved work for good reason.

“Tales of a Shaman’s Apprentice,” Mark Plotkin

When I was a teenager, this book briefly convinced me to become an ethnobotanist. I almost chose my college based on whether it had a good ethnobotany program. Really.

“In the Light of What We Know,” Zia Haider Rahman

I can open this book to any page and find a passage that I want to read aloud to the person next to me. It’s about mathematics, and war, and finance, and relationships, and everything else in the world.

“Mil Besos,” Ruven Afanador

My husband and I were in Seville, Spain, during a citywide celebration of flamenco. Massive, stark, black-and-white photographs of passionate female flamenco dancers lined the street. We looked into buying a print. They were way out of our price range. The next year, all of the prints were published in this book. It was my birthday present to myself.


