


Name Johan Lindeberg

Age 59

Occupation Founder and creative consultant, J. Lindeberg; photographer

Location Williamsburg, Brooklyn

Favorite Room The living room of his rental house, which has green-gray walls and a Vladimir Kagan sofa where the Swedish-born clothing designer, who recently returned to his namesake brand, J. Lindeberg, does his best work. “I don’t like to sit behind a desk — it blocks my mind and my creativity,” Mr. Lindeberg said. “For me, a sofa is the center point.”

This room, with its dark walls and collection of skull masks, feels very masculine. Do you live alone? I think it feels French chic. But I separated from my partner a year and a half ago. I’d been living in SoHo for many years. I was kind of tired of traffic and people. I changed my environment, moved to Williamsburg. It’s a very calm street. I always like dark walls. It makes it somehow tighter and homier.

You’re known as a partygoer and a night owl. How much time do you actually spend at home? I actually changed in the last year. I used to be out a lot in New York. Since I moved here after a separation, I decided to spend a lot of time at home and think and ground myself and find inspiration on a new level. So the house has been very important to me the last year and a half.

That’s a great photo of John Lennon above your fireplace. I’ve always been a massive fan of John Lennon. And Yoko Ono. Their relationship seemed very powerful and connected on all levels. John Lennon could find that sweet spot where you can create words and songs with integrity and still be big. That’s something that I’m always working for: to reach a lot of people but still do the art you believe in.

You have more candles in here than an Anthropologie store. The candles are something I grew up with because of the dark winters in Sweden. Even in the summer I put on candles. They’re a strong signature for myself. And I always have roses with me. White roses feel like peace.

Do you have a favorite fashion-y candle brand? Diptyque? Fornasetti? I actually buy them at Ikea.


