


A RENOVATED VILLA IN NORTHERN PORTUGAL

$1.64 MILLION (1.45 MILLION EUROS)

This home, originally built in 1939 on the coast of northern Portugal, was renovated to create contemporary interiors and expanded into a 6,800-square-foot compound in 2007. With walls of granite and brick and a terra-cotta tile roof, the three-story villa is on 3.16 acres and has views of the Atlantic Ocean from the upper floors. There are a total of 13 bedrooms and 11 bathrooms in three sections: the main house; a wing that is reached only from the outside; and a separate building.

The property, about 50 miles from the city of Porto, has a 1,076-square-foot swimming pool, an outside bathroom, a tennis court and a small lake. About a half-acre of the property is landscaped.

The main entrance to the villa opens to a foyer leading to the dining room, which has a rustic white-painted wooden ceiling, a granite wall and hardwood floors. To the left is the eat-in kitchen, which has ceramic floors, butcher block countertops, white wooden cabinets and high-end appliances, said Ricardo Alves da Costa, a real estate broker with Luximo’s Christie’s International Real Estate, which has the listing for the property. (It can be found in English at the Prestige Property Group.) Furniture is not included in the home’s asking price, but is negotiable.

Stairs off the villa’s foyer lead to the second story, which has a living room with an ivy-covered veranda and ocean views, next to the master bedroom, which has an adjacent bathroom, a terrace and sea views. Three other bedrooms on this level share a bathroom. Stairs lead to a small tower with another bedroom.

The home’s dining room opens to a patio with two covered outdoor dining areas and an ornamental pool. Stairs from that patio lead down to another large patio that is covered in vines.

Enclosing the second patio is a wing, reachable only from the outside, with a second living room, four bedrooms with en-suite bathrooms, three additional bathrooms and a set of rooms for storage. The living room has a vaulted wooden ceiling and an immense window looking out over the property, as well as a fireplace.

A nearby detached building has four bedrooms and two bathrooms. Another structure has a laundry and a mechanicals room.

The villa is in Areosa, a parish of about 5,000 residents in the city of Viana do Castelo, with a population of about 90,000. There are plenty of shops for groceries and essentials in the city within walking distance, Mr. da Costa said. The Atlantic Ocean beach is a two-minute drive from the house, and a peninsular area nearby is known among wind surfers for its strong, steady winds.

The villa is about 45 minutes by car from the international airport in Porto, the second largest city in Portugal, with about 1.48 million residents in the urban area.

MARKET OVERVIEW

Home prices in northern Portugal fell by as much as 35 percent after the global real estate crisis of 2008, but in the last three or four years, prices have held steady, and the number of sales has been growing, said André Borges, a broker with the Porto office of Portugal Sotheby’s International Realty.

“In some areas of Porto, we’ve even seen a little spike in the prices, so there’s a tendency to have higher prices now than a year ago, especially in downtown Porto and an area we call Foz that’s by the sea and the Douro River,” he said.

The global real estate crisis mostly affected lower- and midpriced homes, while sales of higher-end homes — those over 500,000 euros, or $565,000 — slowed, but prices were largely stable, Mr. da Costa said.

Portugal is currently experiencing very high tourism levels, which often translate into home sales to foreigners, said Greg Boegner, the founder of a lifestyle website, PortugalConfidential.com.

Porto in particular has been attracting many foreigners, including Americans, drawn by its culture and lifestyle, as has the wine-producing Douro Valley to the east, Mr. Boegner said.

“The vibe in Porto is very hip, artistic and cool,” he said.

Foreign home buyers tend to focus on Porto, though if they are seeking large estates, vineyards or farms to convert to hotels, they will look at other parts of northern Portugal, Mr. Borges said. Those seeking villas, apartments or condos within Porto generally look in Foz or downtown, which has been undergoing a renaissance, he said.

An area of Porto called the “Golden Triangle,” bounded by Avenida do Brasil, Avenida da Boavista and Avenida do Marechal Gomes da Costa, is upscale and attracts both wealthy foreign and Portuguese home buyers, Mr. Borges said.

Prices for the homes in northern Portugal that typically attract foreign buyers generally range from about 3,000 euros to 5,000 euros per square meter, or about $315 to $525 per square foot, Mr. da Costa said. The best homes in Porto with ocean views can cost as much as 6,000 euros a square meter, or about $630 per square foot, he said.

WHO BUYS IN NORTHERN PORTUGAL

A tax program for part-time residents that enables those from countries with high income taxes to pay much less tax in Portugal instead has been enticing home buyers to northern Portugal from such countries as France and Belgium, Mr. da Costa said. Other buyers are coming from Brazil, England and Spain. “Americans are discovering Portugal as well,” Mr. da Costa said.

Mr. Borges said he also works with buyers from Germany, Denmark and Finland, as well as occasional clients from the Middle East and from African countries, including Angola and South Africa.

A program called the Golden Visa has also been fueling the housing market, with Middle Eastern, Chinese and some Brazilian buyers taking advantage of it, agents said. The program offers residence permits to noncitizens of the European Union who buy a property costing more than 500,000 euros, or one costing more than 350,000 euros that is more than 30 years old or in an area of urban renovation.

BUYING BASICS

There are no restrictions on foreign home buyers in Portugal. Brokers typically recommend that home buyers budget about 7 percent for transaction fees, including stamp duty, transfer tax and notary costs, on homes over 550,836 euros, or about $622,445.

A lawyer is not necessary as long as buyers work with a reputable real estate agency, Mr. da Costa said. “The notary does everything for 700 euros,” or about $791, he said.

Lawyers typically charge about 1 percent of the property’s purchase price, though the fee is negotiable, Mr. Boegner said. Typically, the home seller pays the real estate agent’s fee of 4 percent to 6 percent, brokers said.

Portuguese banks offer competitive mortgages to nonresidents, but will usually lend only about 50 percent to 60 percent of the property’s value, Mr. da Costa said.

WEB SITES

Visit Porto site: visitportoandnorth.travel

Municipality of Porto travel site: visitporto.travel

Areosa parish website: paroquia-areosa.pt

Viana do Castelo website: cm.viana-castelo.pt

LANGUAGE AND CURRENCY

Portuguese; euro (1 euro = $1.13)

TAXES AND FEES

The annual property tax on this home is about 2,500 euros, or about $2,825, Mr. Costa said.

CONTACT

Ricardo Alves da Costa, Luximo’s Christie’s International Real Estate, (011-351) 961-696-319 ; luximos.pt

Mike Braunholtz, Prestige Property Group, (011-44) 1935-817188; prestigeproperty.co.uk


