


JUPITER, Fla. — Brian Mast is used to being asked why he always wears shorts. He pairs them with T-shirts, polo shirts, even with a coat and tie. But the questions — which have more to do with his prosthetic legs, the most noticeable mark of his military service in Afghanistan, than with his sense of style — did not start until he decided to run for Congress.

Mr. Mast, who is running for the Republican nomination in this House district in southeastern Florida, embraces his identity as a veteran. The images are splashed across his campaign website: him flashing a thumbs-up, draped in his Army gear; reading the names engraved on the National September 11 Memorial; a clip of him running down a suburban street in the Florida sun, the camera zooming in on his prosthetic legs and panning up slowly past his camouflage shorts.

But when Mr. Mast, 35, announced the endorsement of Senator Joni Ernst, Republican of Iowa and also a combat veteran, one commenter on his campaign’s Facebook page expressed skepticism: Does Mr. Mast have to wear shorts to accommodate his prosthetics?

“Or is he purposely using his disability for his campaign?” the commenter wrote. “What I know of him, I like him, but this bothers me.”

In a year when many voters are denouncing political correctness, military valor, often an almost unassailable political credential, is being scrutinized with the same frankness and, in some cases, even scorn as other aspects of a candidate’s biography.

This is, after all, an election cycle when Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, belittled Senator John McCain of Arizona, a former prisoner of war and the 2008 Republican presidential nominee. “He’s not a war hero,” Mr. Trump said in July. “He’s a war hero because he was captured. I like people that weren’t captured.”

“What Trump showed this year was that you could touch the third rail and survive when it comes to veterans’ issues,” said Peter D. Feaver, a professor of political science and public policy at Duke University “And didn’t just touch them, but he grabbed hold of them and danced on them.”

But Mr. Feaver disputes the notion that Mr. Trump’s aggressive posture signals an era in politics in which people can disrespect a veteran’s military credentials with impunity.

“I don’t know that anyone else doing that same thing would get away with it,” he said.

There is recent precedent. In 2004, the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth charged in an ad that John Kerry, the Democratic presidential candidate, had misrepresented his service and that of others during the Vietnam War, an attack that proved damaging.

Still, more candidates use their military background as a foundation of a campaign. In the House of Representatives, about 18 percent of lawmakers are veterans, and about 20 percent of the Senate have served in the military. Strategists advise veterans hoping to make the jump from serving in one of the nation’s most trusted institutions to serving in one of the least — Congress — to steel themselves for the scrutiny.

Mr. Mast does not mind the questions about his legs if they are asked in the right spirit, he said on a sunny afternoon as he sat overlooking one of the numerous golf courses on Florida’s Treasure Coast. His cane resting nearby, he had just finished playing in a tournament to benefit a veterans organization.

He explains why he wears shorts with the rapid cadence of someone who has recited this speech many times: His prosthetics have sharp edges that tear his pants when he falls — a daily occurrence, but “I just suck it up,” he wrote on Facebook — and he cannot bend his feet.

“Put your leg out straight, turn your foot up 90 degrees, leave your shoes on — because my shoes don’t come off — and try putting on a pair of pants and see how that works out for you,” he said.

Mr. Mast was serving in Kandahar, Afghanistan, on the night of Sept. 19, 2010, when he took a wrong step while crossing a bridge and a roadside bomb tore through his body.

“I can remember it rattled my teeth,” he said. “I didn’t even know if I had teeth left in my mouth because the concussion of this explosion that took off both of my legs and nearly took off my arm.”

About a month later, Mr. Mast was lying in a hospital bed at Walter Reed Army Medical Center when he told his wife that he could not accept that perhaps the most meaningful work of his life was behind him. He decided to run for public office.

In one high-profile Senate race, both candidates are trying to leverage their military credentials. Senator Mark S. Kirk, Republican of Illinois — and a former intelligence officer in the Navy Reserve whose campaign website features a photograph of him in fatigues — is trying to fend off a challenge from Representative Tammy Duckworth, a Democrat, who lost her legs and some use of her right arm in a rocket attack while serving as an Army helicopter pilot in Iraq.

In March, the National Republican Senatorial Committee got its own reminder of the pitfalls of criticizing a veteran, posting — and quickly deleting — a Twitter message that read, “Tammy Duckworth has a sad record of not standing up for our veterans.” A spokeswoman called the post a mistake but stood by its claim.

Mr. Mast is one of 11 candidates over all for the seat now held by Representative Patrick Murphy, a Democrat. Mr. Murphy, who is running to replace Senator Marco Rubio, won his seat four years ago, beating Representative Allen West by fewer than 2,000 votes.

Seven Republicans are vying for the nomination, including Carl Domino, a former state legislator and Mr. Murphy’s 2014 challenger; Rebecca Negron, a school board member and wife of a powerful state senator; and Mark Freeman, a physician who owns a handful of Medicare centers. Randy Perkins, who founded a company that manages natural disaster cleanup, has set himself apart on the Democratic side by putting about $2 million into the race, which the Cook Political Report recently listed as a “Democratic tossup.”

Though he respects Mr. Mast’s service, Mr. Perkins said veterans are not inherently more qualified than other candidates. But he knows criticizing a veteran, particularly when that critic has not served, can be fraught.

“I’ve been told, be very careful when you’re going to be talking about Brian,” he said.

Just a few miles from the sandy shoreline in Jupiter, a handful of customers chatted over coffee at a Dunkin’ Donuts as Mr. Mast teed up. Mr. Trump, whose Mar-a-Lago estate is about 25 miles to the south, is popular. In March’s primary, he ran away with about 53 percent of the vote in this district.

The doughnut shop customers had not heard of Mr. Mast, they said; the congressional primary is still more than three months away.

Bill White, 73, who briefly served in the Navy. He said he appreciated the commitment veterans had demonstrated to their country, a willingness to make sacrifices that spoke volumes about them.

“If I don’t know either candidate that was running for Congress, the veteran would get my vote,” he said.


