


FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — When Darron Lee, the Jets’ No. 1 pick, showed up in a purplish suit for his first news conference on Friday, his mother, Candice, wearing glasses and with her hair pulled back after a sleepless night, quietly took a spot in the back of the room, behind the cameras.

That was a bit of a change for Candice Lee, who is a weekend anchor for WCMH-TV, the NBC affiliate in Columbus, Ohio — not far from the Ohio State campus, where her son became a top linebacker.

“He’s used to it,” Candice Lee said of her son being on television, “but, for this process, I took a step back, because I wanted to enjoy it.

“It’s hard to enjoy something when you’re working.”

When Darron Lee decided to leave Ohio State after two full seasons to prepare for the N.F.L. Combine in February by attending a training center in Phoenix, his mother tagged along, filing a series of reports for her station about what he was doing to get ready.

She said she would not be doing any reports this weekend from New Jersey, but she did say that she was thinking about leaving the station to be closer to her son. Darron Lee would really like his mother not to work at all, because he thinks she has earned a break.

“Just seeing the approach to how she works — her work ethic is unbelievable,” he said Friday. “You don’t see work ethics like that. She’s very respected in the newsroom. You can see the work she produces. She’s always trying to do a great job.

“She taught me all those things growing up — to be accountable, to have pride in your work. Having pride in your work is nothing to be ashamed of.”

Her son has come a long way since showing up at Ohio State three years ago. He was a quarterback and defensive back at New Albany High School, about 20 miles northeast of Columbus. He was 197 pounds when he got to Ohio State. He said he now weighs 237.

But his mother told him to ask questions when he did not know the answers. She told him to listen closely, to study the intricacies of linebacker, a position he had not played since before he had arrived in Columbus.

“I said, ‘If you do that, and if you stay focused and you stay out of trouble, you’ll have success at anything you do in your life,’ ” Candice Lee said.

She smiled when she added: “He has always had a little swagger. Some of that is me saying: ‘Be proud of who you are. You’re a good kid.’ ”

After a redshirt season, Lee compiled impressive statistics at Ohio State — 147 tackles, 12 sacks and three interceptions — and the Buckeyes won the national championship in his first season as a starter.

He was used more in pass coverage last season than as a run-stuffer, and he will have to make another transition with the Jets, moving from a 4-3 defense to a 3-4. But the Jets told him they had drafted him primarily for his speed, and he is eager to contribute.

“It’s been one heck of a ride,” he said. “I came a long way, but personally I feel I’m just getting started. I personally feel that I’m only going to keep getting better. I’m raw at the position, but I’m a very, very fast learner. That’s why I got on the field pretty quickly at Ohio State. So I feel that the sky is the limit for me.”

One of his Ohio State teammates, the wide receiver Devin Smith, was drafted by the Jets in the second round last year, and another teammate, the cornerback Eli Apple, was drafted 10th over all by the Giants.

He laughed when he said he and Apple had joked about not touching each other’s belongings in the locker room — the Giants and the Jets have different locker rooms, anyway — and Candice Lee said she might ask Apple’s mother to check up on both of them if she cannot.

But Candice Lee is confident that her son is on his way — and so is he. Even after eating 5,000 calories a day in Arizona, he is still generally considered to be too light to play inside in the N.F.L.

“All I’ve got to say to that is: Click on the Wisconsin tape,” Lee said, smiling. “That’s all I can say to that.”

Lee was talking about the 2014 Big Ten championship game, which the Buckeyes won, 59-0. He believes he showed “that I can take on bigger guys, and take on fullbacks, and play at the point of attack, and that I’m not afraid of contact. I think that’s a common misconception of me.”

After the news conference was over and Lee, holding a green jersey with No. 1, had posed for a few photos in front of the marquee at the Jets’ training complex, he was hustled to meetings with team executives and coaches.

Candice Lee the mother, not the news anchor, said: “I said to him, ‘Don’t let anybody tell you differently — you’re a confident person. If someone says you’re arrogant, that’s their problem, not your problem.’ ”


