


Drinkers probably love William Shakespeare more than Shakespeare loved drinkers. In college, I discovered the particular pleasure of exercising the liquor-loosened tongue on Shakespeare’s glorious language, and reciting his sonnets was one of my favorite bar pastimes. No. 129 was always a hit, with its adjectival litany of nastiness: “murderous, bloody, full of blame/Savage, extreme, rude, cruel.” April 23 marks the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death, as good a reason as any to raise a glass — even if he could be tough on drink: Drink, a porter tells Macduff in “Macbeth,” “is a great provoker of three things ... nose-painting, sleep and urine.”

We know little about Shakespeare’s drinking preferences. Even a recent cocktail book called “Shakespeare, Not Stirred,” written by two Shakespeare scholars, skirts the issue: “If you’re wondering what Shakespeare ate and drank,” they write, “this isn’t the book for you.” We do know that in his era, ale, cider and wine were popular alcoholic beverages, so a toast to Shakespeare can be as simple as hoisting a bottle of beer. Almost as easy: a highball called the Hamlet, which in one version is just aquavit on ice, fizzed up with bitter-lemon soda.

But if you feel, as I do, that Shakespeare rates greater effort, I have two suggestions. I recently created a punch in honor of South Brooklyn Shakespeare, the nonprofit theater company run by the owners of the bar where I work. Its next production is “Twelfth Night” — which happens to be a wonderfully boozy play. In Act 2, Sir Toby, Sir Andrew and Feste stay up late drinking. “Sir Toby is like Falstaff, immoderate, all about revelry,” Susan Harlan, who teaches Shakespeare at Wake Forest University, says. “Olivia is in mourning, so her drunken houseguests are too much, given her mood. Her steward, Malvolio, says angrily that they ‘make an alehouse of my lady’s house,’ but these characters also bring festivity into her cloistered court, and in a comedy, that’s a good thing.”

I call the punch What You Will, after the play’s subtitle. And even though I serve it in springtime, I wanted to include flavors that evoke the winter holiday from which the play takes its name; nutmeg and cinnamon do the trick. The whiskey-based punch contains the juice of blood oranges, which I imagine grew in ancient Illyria, where “Twelfth Night” takes place. (My conjecture gets some encouragement from the title of John Hawkes’s 1970 novel set in Illyria: “The Blood Oranges.”)

If you’d rather just make a drink or two than a whole bowl of punch, there’s a fine vintage cocktail whose name appears in Shakespeare’s greatest play (I will never be persuaded by any argument in favor of another), “King Lear.” The drink is called the Serpent’s Tooth. A recipe for it appears in Crosby Gaige’s 1941 charming, odd “Cocktail Guide and Ladies’ Companion”; whether it predates the book or is Gaige’s creation, I cannot say. How closely its contents were intended to reflect the tragic goings-on in “Lear” is also unknown — but its blend of whiskey, vermouth, lemon juice, kümmel (a liqueur laced with caraway and other spices) and bitters has appropriate gravitas. Given the provenance of its name, it may be unsuitable for family gatherings (“How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is/To have a thankless child!”), but it’s just right for celebrating Shakespeare’s genius.

Recipes: What-You-Will Punch | Serpent’s Tooth | Blood-Orange Oleo-Saccharum


