


PORTLAND, Ore. — Accompanied by a small crew of medical and support personnel, Stephen Curry arrived at Moda Center on Saturday afternoon about four hours before Game 3 of the Western Conference semifinals between the Golden State Warriors and the Portland Trail Blazers.

Curry, the Warriors’ star guard, then played 2-on-2, the latest phase of his ongoing recovery from a right knee sprain. Warriors Coach Steve Kerr shared two observations. First, Curry carved up Chris DeMarco, a player development coach who was assigned to defend Curry. Second, Curry refused to pass the ball to his teammate, the assistant coach Jarron Collins.

“But I wouldn’t, either,” Kerr said, deadpan, before adding: “He came out of it fine. It was his first actual basketball.”

Given the Warriors’ long-term aspirations of repeating as N.B.A. champions, the game before the game was important — important because Curry appeared to be nearing a return, and even more important because the Warriors went on to absorb a 120-108 loss without him.

While the Warriors have been able to survive and even thrive without Curry for much of the postseason, Saturday’s setback reinforced his value. The Warriors will take a two-games-to-one lead into Game 4 of the best-of-seven series here on Monday night, but the Trail Blazers regained their rhythm in Game 3, finally capitalizing on a chance to steal a win in Curry’s absence.

In fairness, not even Curry’s shot-making pyrotechnics would have masked his team’s breakdowns. Damian Lillard collected 40 points and 10 assists for the Trail Blazers, who shot 17 of 30 from 3-point range. Al-Farouq Aminu, a rangy forward, added 23 points and shot 8 of 9 from the field. Coach Terry Stotts played three of his starters at least 41 minutes each.

“We had to do everything to win this game,” Stotts said.

Draymond Green had 37 points, 9 rebounds and 8 assists for the Warriors, and Klay Thompson finished with 35 points. But Kerr said he felt that his players failed to move the ball, fouled too much and struggled in several other areas. He had a long list of lapses.

Draymond Green scored 37 points for the Warriors, and Klay Thompson had 35. But Kerr said he felt that his team’s ball movement was stagnant, and he cited other problems.

“We couldn’t get a loose ball or a rebound to save our lives,” Kerr said, adding, “I just didn’t feel like we played with the desperation that’s necessary to win a playoff game.”

As if the series had not taken enough of a dramatic turn, Green went so far as to make a guarantee for Game 4.

“We’ll win,” said Green, whose larynx might as well be a megaphone.

After losing the first two games of the series in Oakland, Calif., the Trail Blazers found solace at home. The last time the Warriors visited Moda Center, on Feb. 19, the Trail Blazers blistered them, 137-105 — by far Golden State’s most lopsided loss of the regular season.

The Trail Blazers also bounced back from a demoralizing loss on Tuesday in Game 2, when the Warriors outscored them by 22 points in the fourth quarter to turn an 11-point deficit into an 11-point win. The Trail Blazers came away feeling as if they had outplayed the Warriors for three quarters — at Oracle Arena, no less — until they let their momentum slip away.

Before Saturday’s game, Kerr said his players had done a good job of adjusting to life without Curry. It is not ideal, of course. He will need to regain his timing and conditioning once he does return. But he appeared to come out of Saturday’s workout with his appendages intact, and Kerr said that Curry would most likely play some 3-on-3 at Sunday’s practice. His status for Monday’s game remained uncertain.

Curry has not played since April 24, when he sprained his knee slipping on a wet spot on the floor in Game 4 of the Warriors’ first-round series against the Houston Rockets. The Warriors have not had reason to rush him back — not yet, anyway.

On Saturday, with his team trailing at the end of the first quarter, Lillard went to Stotts with a request that sounded more like a demand. Lillard usually sits on the bench for the first five or six minutes of the second quarter, but he wanted to return earlier. Stotts was willing to oblige. There was no reason to exercise caution at this stage of the season.

“It’s not going to be none of this, ‘You come out at this time or that time,’ ” Lillard said. “It was straight go-get-it mode.”

Lillard delivered. His fifth 3-pointer gave Portland a 12-point lead late in the second quarter. Likewise, Thompson carried the Warriors, scoring 24 of his team’s 46 points in the first half.

But Lillard got more help as the game wore on. Early in the third quarter, Gerald Henderson extended the Trail Blazers’ lead to 15 with a 3-pointer. Curry could only watch from the bench.

“We challenged them,” Lillard said.

REBOUNDS

Steve Kerr, the coach of the Warriors, said he had a great deal of respect for Dave Joerger, who was fired on Saturday as coach of the Memphis Grizzlies. “It makes me a little nervous,” Kerr said, adding: “But I’ve said this many times: That’s why they pay us a lot of money. That’s part of the deal, and even winning doesn’t guarantee you employment. So you make the best of it. And when you’re on a good run like we are here, you enjoy it, because you know it doesn’t last long.”


