


Porsche defended its 24 Hours of Le Mans title in startling fashion on Sunday after Toyota relinquished the lead minutes from the end of the endurance race in Le Mans, France.

With Kazuki Nakajima behind the wheel of the No. 5 TS050 Hybrid, Toyota was poised to clinch its first Le Mans victory, only to lose power and halt on the pit straight with five minutes left. That allowed Neel Jani to overtake Nakajima in his No. 2 Porsche.

Nakajima crossed the line second, but his final lap of nearly 12 minutes was too slow to be classified, so Toyota’s No. 6 car, driven by Stéphane Sarrazin, took second place. Audi moved up to third, maintaining its streak of podium finishes each year since its 1999 debut. Roland Dumas and Marc Lieb were the other winning drivers for Porsche.

No Rust For Hornish Just six days after accepting an offer to race for the first time in 2016, Sam Hornish Jr. led 183 of 250 laps for a dominant win at the Nascar Xfinity race at Iowa Speedway in Newton, Iowa.

The Baltimore Orioles amassed a season-high 19 hits in an 11-6 win over the Toronto Blue Jays, who wasted homers by Troy Tulowitzki and Devon Travis.

Matt Wieters had four hits and Chris Davis added three to help the Orioles win the deciding matchup of the three-game series between American League East foes.

The start of a four-game suspension ended Manny Machado’s run of 229 consecutive starts, which was the longest active streak in the majors.

College World Series Zach Remillard doubled and tripled in runs as Coastal Carolina upset No. 1 national seed Florida, 2-1, in the College World Series in Omaha. Texas Christian beat Texas Tech, 5-3, after Luken Baker hit a go-ahead three-run homer in the top of the ninth.

Around the Majors David Price pitched eight sharp innings, and Mookie Betts hit a go-ahead homer as the host Boston Red Sox beat the Seattle Mariners, 2-1. Marcell Ozuna hit a three-run drive in the sixth inning to lift the host Miami Marlins over the Colorado Rockies, 3-0. The Marlins climbed five games above .500 for the first time since May 8, 2014. Jose Ramirez’s two-out single with the bases loaded in the 10th inning scored Rajai Davis as the host Cleveland Indians beat the Chicago White Sox, 3-2. Pinch-hitter Yasmani Grandal walked with the bases loaded to end the game as the host Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 2-1. Cheslor Cuthbert singled home Lorenzo Cain in the 13th inning to lift the host Kansas City Royals, 2-1, over the Detroit Tigers.

Tina Charles had 26 points, 15 rebounds and 6 assists to help the visiting Liberty beat the Indiana Fever, 78-75, in overtime. Kiah Stokes grabbed a career-high 14 rebounds for the Liberty (8-4), who have won four in a row.

Stokes made a layup with 2 minutes 48 seconds left in overtime to start an 8-2 spurt for the Liberty. Tamika Catchings, who scored 23 points for the Fever (5-8), missed a potential winning runner as regulation expired.

Mike Grella scored twice as the host Red Bulls beat the Seattle Sounders, 2-0, for their fourth straight victory. Grella tapped in a rebound after a Sacha Kljestan shot hit a goal post in the 18th minute, and he chipped in a goal from the top of the penalty box in the 59th.

The Red Bulls (7-7-1) have not allowed a goal in more than 400 minutes, outscoring their opponents, 13-0, during their winning streak.

U.S. Suspensions Upheld The U.S. Soccer Federation’s appeals of a red card given to midfielder Jermaine Jones and a yellow card given to forward Bobby Wood have been dismissed. The United States will be without both players Tuesday night for its Copa América Centenario semifinal against Argentina in Houston.

Andy Murray claimed a record fifth title at Queen’s Club in London, recovering from a set and 3-0 down to beat Milos Raonic, 6-7 (5), 6-4, 6-3.

Neither player faced a break point in the opening set, and after taking the tiebreaker, Raonic made an intimidating start to the second by dropping just one point in the first three games. Murray appeared to be overwhelmed, but he responded by winning the next five games.

Around Tennis Florian Mayer beat Alexander Zverev, 6-2, 5-7, 6-3, to win the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany. Zverev, 19, is the highest-ranked teenager on the tour, at No. 38, and was seeking his first title. Madison Keys beat Barbora Strycova, 6-3, 6-4, in the Aegon Classic final in Birmingham, England, to win her second grass-court title.

Sei Young Kim won the Meijer L.P.G.A. Classic for her second victory of the year, beating Carlota Ciganda with a birdie on the first hole of a playoff in Belmont, Mich.

After bogeying the 18th in regulation to drop into the playoff, Kim rebounded on the par-4 hole in the playoff. She hit a 124-yard shot from the deep left rough that ran onto the green and settled within 4 feet of the hole.

Miguel Ángel López became the first Colombian rider to win the nine-day Tour of Switzerland after placing fourth in a shortened final stage. López finished 12 seconds over all ahead of Jon Izagirre of Spain and 18 seconds ahead of Warren Barguil of France.

Jarlinson Pantano of Colombia won the 35-mile final stage to the Alpine resort of Davos. The route avoided a mountain pass because of severe weather.

Two Russian athletes said they had appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport to overturn the International Association of Athletics Federations ban that will prevent Russia’s track and field team from competing in the Rio Olympics.

On Friday, the I.A.A.F., track and field’s world governing body, upheld a suspension of the Russian team imposed in November after a World Anti-Doping Agency report detailed widespread, state-sponsored doping.

The racewalkers Denis Nizhegorodov, who was an Olympic silver medalist in 2004, and Svetlana Vasilyeva argued that a ban of the entire team was unfair punishment.


