


Readers who chided me last week for having been too quick to dismiss Jed were right, of course: There’s a lot more to the arms dealer Richard Roper’s American mistress than first meets the eye. “The Night Manager” does a beautiful job this week of starting to unveil the character’s various dimensions, with a lingerie ad-like opening sequence (is it the drugs that make her put her red lipstick on before her white dress?) that ends abruptly with the nagging buzz of a phone call from home.

“Mom — what do you want?”

Suddenly, there is no ethereal presence, no breathy speech, no mansion, no Mediterranean, no shimmering wardrobe, or flowered terraces. Just an unhappy young woman in her underwear suiting up for the ignoble job of entertaining a wealthy patron so that she can keep sending the checks back home.

“They say he doesn’t even ask about you anymore,” her mother taunts her, and the specter of a faraway Billy brings tears to Jed’s carefully made-up eyes.

Poor Jed. Being an absentee mother and the mistress of Roper, the “worst man in the world,” clearly isn’t much fun, even with high doses of what I presume are tranquilizers. But there is one compensation: the presence of Roper’s son, Danny, an adorable and very well-dressed little boy whom Jed clearly adores.

When he is faux-kidnapped — the central drama of this somewhat maddeningly overloaded episode — there’s no doubt that her screams of terror are very real.

Roper’s concern, on the other hand, may or may not be manufactured. He certainly knows how to keep his cool under pressure — but then, that’s not surprising for a psychopath. But I did think Roper had moments when he at least appeared to be genuinely afraid that his boy’s life might be in danger.

But then, how quickly he bounced back! How suspiciously fast he was to identify Jonathan, whose face, it seemed to me, ought to have been bashed pretty well beyond recognition. His lack of gratitude was striking in a man who had just nearly lost his only child. Unless that man had half-suspected that the supposed kidnapping was a setup all along.

Roper’s first words to Jonathan — “Must have given them the fright of their lives” — are ambiguous, to say the least. His “Anyone you want us to call? Girlfriend? Family? Still alone, are we?” were faintly mocking. And his “We’re gonna take care of you,” offered no comfort at all.

The most careful setups can go terribly wrong, even when choreographed by as seasoned a spy actor as David Harewood (who played the C.I.A. chief David Estes on “Homeland,” with a far better American accent.) Jonathan takes pains to assure that things seem “real” — an effort for which he’s rewarded with a big dose of verisimilitude that lands him in a private hospital (“Our one,” Roper says, “not the death trap on the main drag”), and ultimately in a bedroom in Roper’s kingly compound by the sea.

There, I fear, things are going to get truly nasty next week. Corky, Frisky and Tabby seem to be licking their paws in anticipation of roughing up their new catch. For now, it’s just a war of well-turned phrases.

“I should like to go soon, please,” Jonathan says, not yet quite inhabiting his intended new role as the second-worst man in the world.

“I’m not so sure we’re quite as poorly as we’re making out,” Corky purrs.

I don’t know about you, but I am very, very worried about Jonathan. In writing this, I’ve all but skipped his Devon chapter, a meander through the English countryside that was supposed to give Jonathan some street cred, but left me a bit underwhelmed. Yes, Jonathan as Jack Lindon did break the heart of a lonely single mum, and yes, he did skip town without making his bed, but, really? Was he ever scary?

Jonathan, menacing a local drug dealer: “I would advise a different business language from now on.”

Or, silencing a crowd: “What?”

And serving a cup of coffee?

Old habits die hard, I suppose. But still — I’m not sure that this particular variety of tough-guy stuff will go very far in impressing Roper and his band of surly kittens. (Speaking of: I’m so glad the Langbournes were still around this week, with Dad, all too believably, cozying up to the cheery young au pair.)

As Angela Burr has nervously noted, Jonathan is far too “perfect” for his own good. He needs to toughen up — to bulk up, eat some more of the nasty biscuits she seems to like to carry around. His pretty face has been marred, but it’s quickly re-emerging, and his lithe body is not yet visibly bruised.

How will he survive a “fizzy drink treatment”? Was his transition from the “hotel of nonexistence” to a life of evil thuggery too rapid?

Let’s just hope they don’t bring out the funnel.


