


As Hillary Clinton begins to look past Senator Bernie Sanders to a possible general election campaign, a new ad she began running this past week pays Mr. Sanders a high compliment.

It is unmistakably an homage to Mr. Sanders’s “America” ad, which featured the music of Simon and Garfunkel: Mrs. Clinton’s commercial, called “Love and Kindness,” showcases the rich harmony of Andra Day, a singer nominated for a Grammy for her single “Rise Up,” urging listeners to “spread a little hope and love now.”

Notably, many of the glimpses we get of Mrs. Clinton are from behind or over her shoulder, keeping the focus on the people she is engaging with — as if to say her campaign is about them, not about her.

As Ms. Day croons, the camera follows a smiling Mrs. Clinton from backstage to the forefront of several joyful campaign events, which flicker by in and out of focus. She doles out high-fives, exchanges hugs and never stops grinning. Broad platitudes in big block letters urge voters to “break down barriers, so we can all rise together.”

As Ms. Day sings, “We’ll walk it out together now,” the commercial shows a number of victims of gun violence and racial attacks who are supporting Mrs. Clinton: Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, who was famously beaten in the 1965 Selma-to-Montgomery march; Geneva Reed-Veal, the mother of Sandra Bland, who was found hanged in a Texas jail cell after being arrested during a traffic stop last year; and Gabrielle Giffords, the former Arizona congresswoman who was shot in the head in 2011 and has become a powerful advocate for expanded gun control.

The ad closes with warm images of Mrs. Clinton one-on-one with avid supporters and beaming in front of a big crowd, as a concluding message fills the screen: “Let’s stand together.”

Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, like Mr. Sanders’s, has long alternated between emotional ads that engage in identity politics and policy-driven commercials on issues like equal pay, health care and money in politics. This ad may be her first — and certainly is the most effective — to touch on the “love and kindness” theme that she has been sounding on the campaign trail for months.

Like a salve after an unexpectedly injurious Democratic primary, the “hope and love” message looks beyond Indiana, California and other remaining primaries. Ms. Day’s lyric — “We’ll walk it out together now” — and the ad’s appeal to “support each other” are consistent with Mrs. Clinton’s need to persuade Sanders supporters to heal their differences with Mrs. Clinton and unite behind her if and when she seals up the Democratic nomination.

Changing channels …

The Trump campaign, newly focused on advertising and spending about $1 million in Indiana alone, released an ad leveling numerous attacks against Senator Ted Cruz, all which could be rated “half-true.” It accuses Mr. Cruz of supporting amnesty for immigrants in the country illegally, on which his stance has shifted; of supporting President Obama’s trade bill, which he actually opposed once it was drafted; and of favoring the admission of Syrian refugees, which Mr. Cruz did in 2014, but has adamantly opposed since late last year.

Great America, a “super PAC” supporting Donald J. Trump, is continuing the time-honored tradition of hard-selling pitchmen shouting to “Call now!” The cheaply produced commercial implores viewers to “join the movement” by calling a number to “pledge your support to Mr. Trump.” Doing so prompts a telemarketer to solicit donations to the super PAC.

$3.1 million: Amount spent on television ads in Indiana by Republican presidential candidates.

$100,000: Amount spent by the Clinton campaign in Indiana.


