


The Coachella of classic rock is coming soon, and it features no less than Bob Dylan, the Rolling Stones and Paul McCartney.

Neil Young, the Who and Roger Waters of Pink Floyd will round out the bill for Desert Trip, a new festival scheduled for Oct. 7 through 9 at the Empire Polo Club in Indio, Calif., home of the popular Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. But instead of the millennial-heavy crowd that flocked there last month for LCD Soundsystem, Ellie Goulding and Disclosure — accompanied by flower-crown fashion and trendy V.I.P.s — this one aims squarely at baby boomers, a largely untapped festival audience.

Goldenvoice, a California concert promoter that is owned by the global concert giant A.E.G. Live, organized the mega-concert, which will have two acts play full-scale shows — not abbreviated festival sets — per night.

The Rolling Stones and Mr. Dylan are scheduled to get things going on Friday, Oct. 7, with Mr. McCartney and Mr. Young filling the Saturday slots on Oct. 8. Mr. Waters and the Who will close out the event on Sunday, Oct. 9.

Despite their established places in the rock canon, the six acts have never shared a bill. Roger Daltrey of the Who called the lineup “the greatest remains of our era.”

Three-day passes start at $399 for general admission, with reserved tickets also available for the floor ($699, $999 and $1,599); the grandstand ($999 and $1,599); and the standing pit ($1,599). Single-day passes cost $199. Tickets go on sale on Monday at 10 a.m. Pacific Standard Time at DesertTrip.com.

The performers, who have all been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, teased their participation with videos posted this week to social media, but each gave just one hint: “October.”

Before expanding to these titans of the ’60s and ’70s, Goldenvoice made its name with Coachella, which has become perhaps the marquee summer pop festival, known for its top-tier bookings and headline-grabbing reunion shows (Guns N’ Roses, Outkast, the Pixies). Last year’s edition sold an industry-leading $84 million in tickets and had daily attendance of 99,000, according to the trade publication Pollstar. The promoter is also behind festivals including Stagecoach, FYF, Firefly and the new Panorama on Randalls Island in July.


