


In his latest swipe at Mayor Bill de Blasio, the State Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan, introduced a bill on Friday that would extend mayoral control of New York City schools by only one year, while allowing the governor to appoint an “education inspector” with substantial power to interfere in the management of the schools.

The bill prompted swift criticism from both Democratic members of the Assembly and the Partnership for New York City, a business group, which warned that it would return the schools to a chaotic and dysfunctional form of governance.

Mr. Flanagan, a Republican, has in recent weeks made something of a sport of tormenting Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, as the mayor seeks a renewal of mayoral control, which otherwise will lapse on June 30. He has questioned Mr. de Blasio’s knowledge of the schools, accused him of not being forthcoming with information, and expressed indignation when the mayor, after testifying for nearly four hours at one Senate hearing, did not attend a second one.

Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, was the first mayor to win control of the city’s schools, which he did in 2002. The Legislature granted him seven years, with strong support from the Senate’s Republican majority, and then a six-year renewal in 2009. But Mr. de Blasio made an enemy of Mr. Flanagan in his first year in office, when he tried to help the Democrats win a majority in the Senate. As a result, last year, when Mr. de Blasio asked for permanent control, he got only a one-year renewal.

This year, Mr. de Blasio asked for seven years, then requested three years, after the Democratic majority in the Assembly approved a three-year extension.

Mr. Flanagan’s bill would create a position of “education inspector,” to be appointed by the governor and confirmed by the Senate. Among the inspector’s powers, he or she would have access to all the district’s records, documents and information systems. The mayor and the city’s Education Department would have to fully cooperate with all of the inspector’s requests for information. The inspector could appeal decisions by the city’s Panel for Educational Policy, which approves contracts and decisions to locate charter schools in public school buildings, among other things, to the state education commissioner. The inspector could void any contracts or appointments to the panel if he or she finds a conflict of interest.

On Saturday, the two other parties in the state government said they did not support the education inspector provision. Michael Whyland, a spokesman for the Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, a Democrat, said Democratic lawmakers supported a straight extension of mayoral control, without conditions. And a spokeswoman for Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, with whom the mayor has been openly feuding, said the governor supported a three-year extension “and nothing else.”


