


Michael Lewis specializes in narratives about quirky individuals who zig when everyone else zags. In “Moneyball,” he tracked the astonishing success of Billy Beane, the general manager who turned the Oakland A’s from underdogs into championship contenders by relying on statistics rather than acquiring star players. His 2010 book “The Big Short” dissected how a handful of renegades foresaw the collapse of the housing market, while everyone else was pouring money into subprime mortgages.

Both books were best sellers that were adapted into major feature films. But they raised a nagging question that Mr. Lewis never fully confronted: Why do most people, from sports managers to bankers, so often overlook the data and make colossal errors based on gut instinct? Why aren’t people as data driven as Billy Beane?

In his coming book, “The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds,” which W.W. Norton & Company will release this December, Mr. Lewis finally tackles that question.

“The Undoing Project” explores the groundbreaking work of two psychologists, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, whose research into decision making and judgment has challenged fundamental beliefs about human nature. In study after study, they showed that when it comes to making decisions, humans are predisposed to irrationality. Their surprising findings have had profound implications for everything from behavioral economics and politics, to advanced medicine and sports.

Their work, and its impact, is hardly obscure. Mr. Kahneman won the 2002 Nobel Prize in Economics (Mr. Tversky died in 1996.) But Mr. Lewis wasn’t aware of their research, and how much it had influenced his own writing, until 2003, when he came across a reference to them in a review of “Moneyball” in the New Republic. He has been working on “The Undoing Project” on and off for the last eight years, and conducted countless interviews with Mr. Kahneman.

“When you wander into the work of Kahneman and Tversky far enough, you come to find their fingerprints in places you never imagined even existed,” Mr. Lewis wrote in a 2011 article for Vanity Fair, which was adapted from the book. “It didn’t take me long to figure out that, in a not so roundabout way, Kahneman and Tversky had made my baseball story possible.”


