


MIAMI — Last September, when the Nets were beginning training camp for the 2015-16 season, Joe Johnson was asked what he thought about point guard Deron Williams’s decision to negotiate a buyout and leave the team during the off-season.

Calling the move surprising, Johnson inadvertently coined a droll catchphrase that captured the asphyxiating ennui of the Nets this season when he added, “It’s not that bad here.”

Five months later, Johnson was gone, too.

In Miami last week, Johnson reflected happily on his decision to negotiate his own buyout with the Nets on Feb. 25, which required him to give up $3 million of his remaining salary with the team. Two days after he left Brooklyn, Johnson signed with the Heat and, he said, immediately felt reinvigorated by the intensity of his teammates. There was urgency every game. He relished that he was now in the playoffs after beginning the season in such an unfavorable environment.

“This is what I was looking forward to,” Johnson said.

The Heat have been counting their blessings, too. Chris Bosh, who had been averaging 19.1 points and 7.4 rebounds per game, has been sidelined since the All-Star break because of a recurring blood clot problem.

Bosh’s absence created an enormous hole in the Heat’s lineup, and out of the blue appeared Johnson, a player whom the Heat already admired. Erik Spoelstra, the team’s coach, said the coaching staff and front office had brainstormed ways to acquire Johnson. That he was available in their time of need seemed like a great stroke of luck.

“To be able to add somebody of his All-Star caliber that late in the year on a buyout, you don’t see that all the time,” Spoelstra said. “A lot of times, buyouts aren’t guys you plug in immediately and have him be a starter on a playoff team.”

With Bosh out of the mix, the Heat were compelled to change their style of play, shifting gears to a faster pace and spreading the floor. Such moves seemed to liberate forward Luol Deng and point guard Goran Dragic. The team’s scoring surged. Soon after his arrival in Miami, Johnson joked that it had been almost a decade since he had run so much in games. But still, his skills fit the team’s plans.

Miami leads the Charlotte Hornets, 2-1, in their first-round playoff series, and the Hornets have been wary of the threat Johnson poses on offense. Charlotte Coach Steve Clifford said Johnson’s range and his ability to post up were obvious dangers.

“He’s also a much, much better pick-and-roll player than people realize,” Clifford said. “He has the size to look over the top and make passes both into the paint and to the weak side, which is hard to do at the 3 spot.”

Heat forward Amar’e Stoudemire agreed. Stoudemire was drafted by the Phoenix Suns in 2002 and quickly developed a bond with Johnson, then a second-year player on the team. Johnson helped Stoudemire become acclimated to the league, and the two played one-on-one often.

Two months ago, when Johnson was still deciding where to sign, Stoudemire sent him a series of texts telling him how much he enjoyed playing in Miami, and how much the team could use him.

“Joe has brought an offensive threat that we haven’t had,” Stoudemire said. “His pick-and-roll offense is something that’s hard to guard because he’s great at keeping guys on his back and creating two-on-one-type situations for us.”

Johnson started 57 games for the Nets this season, averaging 12.5 points per 36 minutes and shooting .406 from the field, the second-lowest percentage of his career. He shot .397 in his second year in the league.

In the 24 regular-season games he played for Miami, he averaged 15.0 points per 36 minutes and shot .518 from the field.

“It’s easy,” Johnson said when asked about the stark difference in his shooting percentage after his move to Miami. “The game isn’t hard. Some teams, some people, have a tendency to make it hard, but it’s not hard. Just move the basketball, get the best available shot.”

Referring to guard Dwyane Wade and then Deng at power forward, Johnson went on: “Here, man, it’s so easy because D-Wade draws a double team. We got Goran, who lives in the paint, kicking out for wide-open shots. Then with Lu being at the 4, it keeps the floor spaced. It’s been pretty simple.”

Johnson’s demeanor has been a positive influence on the team, too.

“He’s definitely Joe Cool,” Stoudemire said. “He’s real quiet. He understands the game. He plays in control all the time. But you can tell by his play, you can see in his face, he’s competitive.”

In his 15th season in the league, Johnson has prioritized winning. Not too long ago, he was embarking on a season that seemed lost before it began. Now he has a chance to make a deep run in the postseason with a team that has embraced him.

“He’s been a true pro,” Spoelstra said. “He feels like a Heat guy.”


