


Nature and art meet in many places around New York City. Next week, in the Bronx at least, one of their favorite rendezvous will be in the branches of a tree.

“I was thinking about how we use trees and their parts, and how we could make them something interesting to learn about and something that would be fun to create with,” said Olivia Kalin, an educator at Wave Hill, the 28-acre garden. Taking advantage of the city’s public school spring break, the garden is offering Arbor Week, with a series of 90-minute programs Ms. Kalin created for children ages 5 through 10.

The first, Tuesday at 1 p.m., will involve making hiking staffs from fallen tree branches, including hemlock, birch, sassafras and black cherry. Children will use parachute cords to devise handles and decorate the staffs with feathers, beads and ribbon.

Those eager to use their creations can also register for a 2:30 p.m. hike to explore trees’ life cycles. “They’re not just working with parts of the tree, but looking at the trees and the buds and the bark and how they grow — things that urban people tend to take for granted,” said Debra Epstein, Wave Hill’s director of education. After the expedition, each child will pot a dawn redwood seedling to take home. (Note to amateur foresters: The trees will eventually require a transfer; redwoods’ dimensions are not compatible with apartment interiors.)

On Wednesday at 1 p.m., young visitors will be introduced to tree cookies — but don’t expect to eat them. These so-called cookies are round slices of tree trunk whose surfaces reveal a pattern of rings. “Each ring represents a season of growth,” Ms. Epstein said. “And not each ring is even.” After painting the striations different colors, children will create pine tree ring prints.

Another workshop, on Thursday at 1 p.m., will focus on mobiles. Participants will make impressions of leaves in modeling clay. Once dry, the clay leaves, along with seed pods and other decorations, will be attached to an embroidery hoop for hanging, to “give you an impression of a little forest right above you,” Ms. Kalin said.

Arbor Week continues into the following weekend, with more art projects and the chance, on April 30, to climb a tree with the aid of safety harnesses, hard hats and professional arborists. Many city children can say they’ve viewed New York from 20 stories; how many can say they’ve seen it from 20 feet up a sugar maple?

(Tuesday through May 1 at 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale; 718-549-3200, wavehill.org. Workshop space is limited and registration is required.)


