


European soccer’s governing body voted Tuesday to formally recognize the Kosovo Football Federation as its 55th member in a vote at its annual congress in Budapest. Serbia, which does not recognize Kosovo, reacted angrily to the decision and said it would work to overturn it.

Recognition by the European body, UEFA, paves the way for FIFA membership for Kosovo in a vote next week in Mexico. That would allow Kosovo to enter qualifying for the 2018 World Cup in Russia, a country that refuses to recognize it. (Gibraltar, which won a ruling favor i ng its own FIFA membership at the Court of Arbitration for Sport on Monday, is also likely to enter FIFA next week.)

“We will be able to bring people together through football,” said Fadil Vokrri, Kosovo’s federation president and a former international player for Yugoslavia. “This is our vision for the future.”

The vote was close, 28 to 24 in favor (two ballots were declared invalid), with opposition being led by Serbia, which, like Russia, does not recognize Kosovo’s independence.

“We must say no to politics,” Tomislav Karadzic, the president of Serbia’s soccer association, told UEFA members in a speech before the vote, adding, “It would create tumult in the region and open a Pandora’s box throughout Europe.” Many Serbs view Kosovo as an inviolable part of their country’s territory.

Serbian officials said they would file a complaint with the Court of Arbitration for Sport, arguing that UEFA had acted in violation of its statutes and referring to Kosovo as “the separatists.”

“This could lead to serious divisions in the continent’s competitions,” Marko Djuric, an official in Serbia’s ruling party, told reporters in Belgrade. “They can only dream that our fight is over and that their UEFA membership is definite.”

Ever since fighting a war of independence against the Serbs in the late 1990s, Kosovo has existed in political and cultural limbo. Despite being recognized by a majority of United Nations and European Union member states since declaring independence in 2008, Kosovo has yet to win official recognition. Russia, an ally of Serbia’s, has threatened to veto any such move at the United Nations Security Council.

With political recognition at a dead end, sports became a battleground for Kosovo’s international legitimacy. In 2014, the International Olympic Committee recognized Kosovo, allowing its athletes to compete under their own flag for the first time at the Rio Olympics this summer.

But such was the lack of support within soccer’s corridors of power at UEFA and FIFA that Mr. Vokrri and his general secretary, Eroll Salihu, opted for unconventional methods to raise awareness of their campaign for recognition. In 2012, the two men sneaked into the Swiss national team’s hotel before a World Cup qualification match against Albania. They hoped to procure signatures from the Swiss players with Kosovar roots for a petition calling on UEFA and FIFA to recognize the Kosovo federation.

Two years later, the former FIFA president Sepp Blatter pushed through a limited agreement to allow Kosovo to play international friendlies against FIFA members. But Tuesday’s membership vote is unlikely to be the end of the controversy.

First, Kosovo will submit its application for membership to FIFA, and a vote to approve it — most likely a formality — will be held at that organization’s annual congress next week in Mexico. Next, discussions will take place on how to insert Kosovo (and Gibraltar, should it also win membership next week) into the qualifying groups for the 2018 World Cup. This also has a seemingly simple solution; while seven of the nine groups for UEFA qualification have six teams, the other two have five.

The most controversial discussions, though, will be the issue of players’ switching nationalities. A number of players born in Kosovo or with roots in the territory now play for other teams, including Albania’s captain, Lorik Cana; Belgium midfielder Adnan Januzaj; and Switzerland midfielder Xherdan Shaqiri.

The Kosovo federation, citing what it calls Kosovo’s unique set of circumstances, has called for players to be granted a one-time chance to switch nationality immediately, which is currently against FIFA rules.

But several European national teams could be decimated if such switches were permitted. At the 2012 World Cup qualifying match between Switzerland and Albania, for example, a majority of the 22 players who started the match had Kosovar roots.

Last Sunday, the Swiss tabloid newspaper Blick published an article with the headline “The Kosovo Fear: Could Shaqiri and Xhaka Leave Our National Team Soon?”

Several Swiss players, like Granit Xhaka — whose brother, Taulant, represents Albania and whom he will play against when the two national teams meet at Euro 2016 this summer — have said they will consider making a switch.

“Yes, of course,” Granit Xhaka told The New York Times in 2012. “For now we play for Switzerland, but later we will see what will happen.”


