


MOSCOW — A Russian court ordered the release on Wednesday of a dissident performance artist who could have gone to prison for setting fire to the front door of Lubyanka, the headquarters of Russia’s principal intelligence agency.

A judge also reduced the fine that prosecutors had asked to impose on the artist, Pytor Pavlensky, who is known for needling the government of President Vladimir V. Putin with actions intended to provoke his arrest.

The ruling surprised human rights advocates, who have grown accustomed to the government’s harsh treatment of dissidents. It suggested to some that the authorities were keen to avoid a repeat of the high-profile prosecution of Pussy Riot, the anti-government punk performance group, which made international media stars of some of the young women involved.

Mr. Pavlensky was ordered to pay a fine of about $7,800 and to compensate the security agency for the $7,500 cost of replacing the heavy oak door. That door leads to the heart of the Federal Security Service, or F.S.B., the main successor to the K.G.B. Prosecutors had asked for a fine of $23,400 for “damaging an object of cultural heritage.”

Speaking after the verdict on the courthouse steps, Mr. Pavlensky said his action had been a success in redefining the meaning of the main door to Lubyanka. Out of the destruction of an object, he had made a “monument to myself,” he said, adding, “Thank you to all those who have no fear.”

Mr. Pavlensky had been in pretrial detention since Nov. 9, when he splashed gasoline on the door, set it on fire and waited calmly to be arrested. He titled the piece, “Threat: Lubyanka’s Burning Door.”

Mr. Pavlensky considers his work to be adhering to the tradition of subversive street artists like Pussy Riot and Femen, a Ukrainian group. With free media and opposition parties repressed, this sort of art is a rare remaining outlet for dissent.

Mr. Pavlensky, whose work blurs the lines between protest, revolt and artistic expression, dropped out of one of Russia’s most prestigious art academies to join a community of protest artists in St. Petersburg.

Among the most prominent in this circle is the art collective Voina, or War, which takes aim at what the artists call the neo-Soviet side of Mr. Putin’s policies. Members of Pussy Riot also emerged from this St. Petersburg underground.

In perhaps his best-known piece, Mr. Pavlensky nailed his scrotum to a crack in the cobblestones of Red Square in 2013, to call attention to the submission of Russian men to Mr. Putin’s governance. The action, he said, was inspired by an established, if extreme, form of protest in the Russian penal colony system in which an inmate nails his scrotum to a bunk bed or the wooden planks of a barracks floor to protest the actions of prison guards. Mr. Pavlensky was detained only briefly.

He has described his art as consisting of two parts: his actions and the reactions of the government, which he says tend to be mutually reinforcing.

The authorities have tried to avoid playing into his hands. The transcript of one police investigator interrogating Mr. Pavlensky, and, amazingly, eventually agreeing with the artist’s views and quitting his job in the Russian security services, became the script for a play staged at a Moscow theater.

In May, Mr. Pavlensky was convicted of vandalism for staging a pro-Ukraine protest in St. Petersburg. In the protest, he and other activists burned tires and banged metal sheets with sticks while on a bridge over a canal, emulating the 2014 uprising that overthrew the Ukrainian government.

In the ruling Wednesday, the judge made no mention of the obvious political overtones of Mr. Pavlensky’s actions. The judge echoed the prosecutorial argument that the building, the nerve center of Stalin’s reign of terror, was integral to Russian cultural heritage because “many cultural and political figures” were detained there. Initially, the artist had been charged with vandalism and additional charges were expected. Mr. Pavlensky had asked the court to convict him as a terrorist.

Emerging free and blinking in the afternoon sunshine on Wednesday, Mr. Pavlensky said he did not know why he was released, but assumed it was done to avoid calling additional attention to his art. Of burning the door, he said, he had no regrets and saw it as a “great success.”


