


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Susanne Craig, a metro reporter, describes a series of phone calls she had with Donald J. Trump concerning her recent coverage of his aircraft.

The whirring blades on Donald J. Trump’s helicopter were drowning out our conversation, but there was one comment that was hard to miss.

“I am going to make America great again,” he said, adding that he would make it great again just for me.

It was the first call that day in a series of conversations that ultimately spun out of control.

Mr. Trump was en route to a campaign rally in Waterbury, Conn., and he promised to call again in about 30 minutes. I was filing a story on Mr. Trump’s aircraft and was up against a tight deadline.

Mr. Trump’s fleet — two airplanes and three helicopters — is an integral part of the billionaire image Mr. Trump projects, and the aircraft are an effective prop on the campaign trail. They are also one of his campaign’s largest expenses. So far a company owned by Mr. Trump has been paid roughly $3.7 million by his campaign for costs associated with flying him to events.

The story I was working on took a close look at the aircraft — which, I was surprised to learn, were aging: four were more than 20 years old. Having covered Wall Street for years, I knew this was an anomaly among the super wealthy, who tend to buy newer aircraft, or lease or charter planes. (Mr. Trump had written in his book “The Art of the Deal” that older planes are good value. Others say he buys them because he really isn’t worth the $11 billion he claims to be.)

Presidential candidates frequently field reporter questions, but usually in gaggles. One-on-one interviews tend to be strategically planned, and candid moments are rare. Reporters do not typically travel with the candidate and do not get close to them at rallies.

Mr. Trump, though, is no ordinary candidate, and he often calls (and calls out) reporters who are writing about him, alternately charming and bullying them. My experience suggests Mr. Trump makes a calculated game-time decision on each call; if he thinks he will benefit from a given conversation, he engages. Stories that talk about his wealth, or question the size of it, seem to be of particular interest.

I had hoped Mr. Trump would call to discuss his aircraft, and I’d put in a request for an interview with Hope Hicks, his campaign spokeswoman.

I knew it was a long shot. Mr. Trump was unhappy with a story that I’d written with my colleague David Chen in February; it had challenged his business prowess in New York. The headline read: “Donald Trump in New York: Deep Roots, but Little Influence.”

“You are very dishonest reporters,” he said in an email that was sent to Mr. Chen and me via Ms. Hicks. “Your last story was a disgrace to journalism.”

Another front-page article we had written — on how he weighed a run for governor in 2014, measuring whether a stop in Albany was a necessary steppingstone to the White House — was seemingly well received by his supporters. Still, he opted not to participate.

As part of my story on his aircraft, I had discovered that the registration on his 1997 Cessna 750 Citation X had expired. The call I made to the Federal Aviation Authority resulted in the jet being grounded.

Mr. Trump switched to alternate transportation. Meanwhile, readers flooded my inbox with emails, some accusing me of picking on him. The most common comment, though, was about my curly, occasionally out-of-control hair. In this respect I know how Mr. Trump must feel.

“Have you considered firing the person(s) responsible for your hair?” wrote one reader.

So I was a bit surprised when Ms. Hicks emailed me to say Mr. Trump would speak to me about his aircraft.

I was out of town for the weekend, and after a number of false starts I was told he would call me Saturday, an hour before deadline. My Internet and phone lines were down, so early that morning I scouted out a spot with decent cell reception: a lonely corner of a friend’s deck. I had three bars on my iPhone and was ready when it rang.

That first call was too short to be of any real use, but Mr. Trump could not have been nicer. After he promised to make America great again, just for me, he talked briefly about his airplanes. It was as if he had forgotten about the article he’d recently called a “disgrace to journalism.”

Though he promised to call when he landed in Waterbury, my phone didn’t ring. The deadline for the paper’s first edition came and went.

He surfaced after the campaign rally. “I don’t know if you got to see it, but we had a good time,” he said.

During this second call, he waxed on about his aircraft, explaining that he buys older planes because he gets better deals on them. He said he does not think of his planes as marketing tools, but knows people think of them that way.

I asked him whether his Cessna was cleared to fly yet. It was, he told me. Still no hint that he harbored any ill will toward me.

I was almost out of questions. He said he had to go. Then, to my surprise, he said he wanted to continue the conversation and would call again when he landed at his next campaign event, in Bridgeport, Conn.

While he was in the air, I filed Mr. Trump’s comments into my story.

As I was finishing, he called for the third time. “The Boeing 757 has always been considered a masterpiece,” he said. He could not stop talking about that plane.

But as my questions grew more pointed, so did his observations of me.

“Hope said, ‘Don’t call back because she is only going to write bad things; that is all she knows how to do.’ Then you will write bad, and I will tweet badly about The Times: that they are inaccurate and don’t know what they are doing,” he said. “And that is what we do. We play the game.”

He was, not surprisingly, irked about the story that said his footprint in New York had greatly diminished over years. He twice called it the “most false” article he has ever read about himself.

“You write things like I don’t do anything in New York,” he said, noting he owns a number of “great” properties in the state. “You didn’t say that internationally I am one of the biggest. Not that it matters. Who cares what you say, but you didn’t say that.”

We went back and forth. I defended our reporting. Mr. Trump admitted that he hadn’t read the front-page story on how he had weighed a run for the governor’s office, the article I thought he might have enjoyed.

“I will go back and read it,” he promised. I offered to get him a subscription to The New York Times.

The call ended on a cordial note. He asked me to treat him fairly. He said that if he didn’t like the article, he would not let me know.

I never heard from him. On Sunday, the day my latest story ran, he played his part and attacked The Times on Twitter.

“I am happy to hear how badly the @nytimes is doing,” his tweet read. “It is a seriously failing paper with readership which is way down. Becoming irrelevant!”


