


NEWPORT, R.I.

WHAT: A Federal house with four bedrooms and three bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $1,395,000

SIZE: 3,000 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $465

SETTING: This house is on a narrow residential street a few blocks inland from Newport Harbor, at the edge of a neighborhood called the Hill. It is within walking distance of downtown in a National Historic Landmark district covering the city’s oldest buildings, including modest seamen’s cottages, handsome merchants’ houses, wood-frame churches and storefronts, some dating to the mid-17th century. Restaurants and shops are within a few blocks. A summer resort since the early 19th century, the city is about 70 miles from Boston and 180 miles from New York.

INDOORS: The three-story clapboard house was built in 1811 and underwent a major renovation in 2014. The renovation was done by the architect John K. Grosvenor, a principal of Northeast Collaborative Architects, and Cheryl Hackett, the author of a book on shingle-style architecture in Rhode Island.

Much of the original interior had been buried under drywall and linoleum. Recovered during renovations were wide-plank hardwood floors, molding, mantels and plaster walls. Elsewhere, salvaged materials were used, including slate fireplace surrounds made of blackboards from a 19th-century school in Newport. Lighting is a mix of new LED fixtures and antiques, including the slag glass pendant in the foyer and crystal sconces in one of two first-floor sitting rooms.

The kitchen and dining area are housed in a bright open addition with a pitched 22-foot beadboard ceiling, tall enough to accommodate three rows of windows. Appliances are stainless steel, including two dishwashers and a Verona gas range. The central island seats four and is organized around a crushed-granite sink. The kitchen and an adjoining sitting room open to a teak deck.

One bedroom, part of a suite, is on the first floor. The other three, including the master, are upstairs. The windows in the master include an eight-foot-wide clerestory window salvaged from an estate in Providence. The dressing area has a pair of antique chinoiserie dressers, built-in. The third floor, formerly an attic, is now an office with built-in bookcases, a window seat and extra storage under the eaves.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is bit more than a 10th of an acre, fenced and landscaped with a small yard and a perennial garden. There’s also a fire pit. Walkways were made using bricks salvaged from the original chimney. There is a one-car detached garage. An old stone wall runs along one end of the property.

TAXES: $6,670 a year

CONTACT: Michelle Drum, Gustave White Sotheby’s International Realty, (401) 848-6720; gustavewhite.com

•

GLEN ELLEN, CALIF.

WHAT: A shingled house with two bedrooms and two bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $1,359,000

SIZE: Approximately 1,469 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $925

SETTING: This house is within a mile of downtown Glen Ellen, a community of about 800 people in the Sonoma Valley, 50 miles from San Francisco. Upscale but understated, the area is home to a handful of vineyards and restaurants. There are large tracts of parkland, including the 202-acre Sonoma Valley Regional Park and the 535-acre Bouverie Preserve, where riparian woodlands meet grasslands and evergreen forest.

Also in Glen Ellen is Jack London State Historic Park, where the author had a ranch and wrote “The Valley of the Moon.”

INDOORS: The two-story house was built in 1920 and renovated over the last 20 years. On a sloping, wooded and secluded property, it has views of the treetops and hills, with a series of interconnected patios and decks to facilitate indoor/outdoor living.

The interior is cozy and bright, with original fir floors, wood-beam ceilings and walls of glass. Common areas are on an open floor plan off a skylit entryway. Many of the renovations, including the slate fireplace surround and slate bench seat in the living room, as well as the kitchen cabinets, were designed and built by one of the current owners, Steven Froman, an artist, woodworker and furniture maker. The French doors in the living and dining area open to a deck built around a large old oak tree, with views of Sonoma Mountain.

The kitchen has a vaulted ceiling and is separated from an informal dining area by a prep island. Appliances are stainless steel; countertops are black stone; floors are ceramic tile. French doors open to a patio with a brick pizza oven built into a tall stone wall.

One bedroom is part of a suite on the main floor; the second, the master, is downstairs on a lower level that follows the grade of the land. The master bedroom has walls of windows, while the adjoining bathroom has a walk-in glass shower with a rain shower head, alongside a carved wood vanity and ceramic sink. The lower level also has a TV room. Also on the property is a two-story workshop with inside parking for one car.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The house is on 3.61 acres. A stone path on one side of the house leads to the patio with the pizza oven, then curves around to a large patio and a swimming pool. From there, stone steps lead to a hot tub and fountain. While most of the property is wooded, there is a cleared garden space next to the workshop.

TAXES: Approximately $16,990 a year

CONTACT: Tina Shone, Sotheby’s International Realty Wine Country Brokerage, (707) 799-7556; tinashone.com

•

RIVER FOREST, ILL.

WHAT: A prairie-style house with four bedrooms and four bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $1,375,000

SIZE: Approximately 6,000 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $229

SETTING: River Forest is about 10 miles from downtown Chicago. Much of the village is in a district on the National Register of Historic Places, with architecture including Italian Renaissance-style mansions, Queen Annes, midcentury moderns and several houses by Frank Lloyd Wright, who also designed throughout neighboring Oak Park. This property started life as the River Forest Women’s Club and was converted to a residence about 10 years ago. It sits on a tree-lined residential street, across from a Catholic school. A Chicago Transit Authority train stops eight blocks away in Oak Park; the ride downtown takes about a half-hour.

INDOORS: The club, built in 1913, was designed by the architect William Eugene Drummond, a draftsman for Wright who worked throughout the Chicago area, with a focus on River Forest, where he lived. Landmarks Illinois cited the current owners for the sensitivity and thoroughness of their renovation.

A prairie-style structure with a flat roof and ribbed board-and-batten siding, the exterior is marked by four tower-like corner sections with tall vertical windows.

Much of the entry level’s square footage is taken up by what was once the club’s two-story auditorium, now used as a living room. Original details include dark pine-paneled walls and two rows of windows, the topmost cut in a saw-toothed design. A small plaque next to the raised stage commemorates soldiers who died in World War I.

Two bedrooms, once reading rooms, are on this floor, with new walls made of the original accordion pine doors. The master suite is in a loft over the auditorium. It has two bathrooms, renovated in marble, as well as closets with pebble-glass doors and built-in dressers.

Downstairs, there’s an open-plan living and dining area, with light-colored concrete floors and floor-to-ceiling windows opening to the back courtyard. The unusually large kitchen has commercial-grade stainless-steel appliances as well as stainless-steel surfaces and subway tile walls. The fourth bedroom is on this level. Floors in most of the house have radiant geothermal heating, part of a system that also includes solar water heaters on the roof.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is 0.36 acre, fenced, with raised flower beds.

TAXES: Approximately $18,940 a year

CONTACT: Lauren Miller, @properties, (312) 883-0082; atproperties.com


