


Peer Review: The geobiologist Hope Jahren — her memoir, “Lab Girl,” hits the hardcover nonfiction list at No. 7 — has found a larger audience than many scientists partly through her use of social media. Jahren is prolific on Twitter, and since 2013 has maintained a lively free-range blog, “Hope Jahren Sure Can Write,” that is nominally about “interactions between men and women and academia” but is more accurately, and haphazardly, “about things” (as she puts it on her masthead). What sorts of things? A tribute to Leonard Nimoy, for one: “Nothing less than God himself . . . could take Spock away from us.” For another, a cheese recipe written in pitch-perfect lolcat dialect: “Ferst-thing ur going store to buyz 1 gallun hole milk.” And yes, there’s plenty about sexism in science, including a scathing reply Jahren wrote after a male colleague challenged her work in an email he mistakenly sent to her instead of their department head. “Why,” she asked, “are there any women in science at all? I keep asking myself. Is the price that I paid and keep paying worth it? I am sure that you believe that you’ve struggled during your career. . . . Did you ever spend a night in a Turkish police station trying to explain the concept of rape? No? Well, I did. It can really disrupt your field season, boy howdy.” She ended: “You didn’t ask for my advice, but I am going to give you some anyway: Learn to use your email. . . . But don’t be discouraged, you’re way ahead of me. You’ve already learned how to type out what you really think and send it out into the world. I am just now learning how to do the same.”

Epic: The CNN anchor Anderson Cooper and his mother, Gloria Vanderbilt, top the hardcover nonfiction list with “The Rainbow Comes and Goes,” an extended conversation in which Cooper asks Vanderbilt about their (extraordinary) family history and the accrued wisdom of her 92 years. Don’t let the soppy, gnomic title scare you off: Vanderbilt is frank and sometimes salty, as when she confides that she faked all her orgasms until she met Howard Hughes. “My mom wasn’t the kind of parent you would go to for practical advice,” Cooper says. “What she does know about are . . . the kind of things you discover only by living an epic life.”

Leather Vampires: “The Beast,” the 14th title in J.R. Ward’s Black Dagger Brotherhood series, enters the hardcover fiction list at No. 2. Here’s how Ward described the series to the website She Knows: “Warrior vampires in black leather pants falling for females who hand their butts to them on a plate.” O.K. then! Later in the interview, though, Ward identified a more conventional ­story, Elizabeth Lowell’s “Summer Thunder” (1983), as “the most important romance novel” she’s ever read. “Times have changed and so have heroes and heroines, but the core of what makes readers happy has remained the same,” she said. “Are you in love with the way they are in love?”


