


MOSCOW — They have stripped and sexually abused a woman, severely burned a toddler by firebombing a house and broken a woman’s pinkie as a warning. Gang members, bandits, mobsters? Not exactly. These are debt collectors, a peculiarly Russian variety that is flourishing amid the country’s economic turmoil.

As a punishing recession stretches into a second year, people struggling to make ends meet are resorting in growing numbers to borrowing at astronomical interest rates that many cannot possibly afford.

With unpaid debts mushrooming, collection has turned into something of a blood sport reminiscent of the shocking gang violence of the 1990s, with threats and violence by debt collectors spreading across the sprawling Russian hinterland largely unrestrained by public authorities.

“As a rule, small sums are involved in these cases, and it is easier to recover them by physical force,” said Danila S. Mikhalishchev, a debt collector turned consumer advocate. “It is easier to frighten people than to sue them.”

In 2015, the amount of unpaid debt surged by almost 50 percent to $15 billion, or about 13 percent of all personal debt, according to Alexander A. Akhlomov of the United Credit Bureau, a private organization that tracks credit ratings. A borrower making no payments for three months is considered to be in default. Just since March of last year, the number of Russians in that category has leapt to 7.5 million from six million, he said.

It is not hard to see why. In 2015, real wages declined 10 percent in the face of a steep drop in the global price of oil, a weak ruble and Western economic sanctions imposed over Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine. This March, for the first time since 2008, Russians spent more than half their income on food, beverages and cigarettes, according to government statistics.

To make matters worse, banks have tightened credit, so the growing ranks of Russians living paycheck to paycheck have fewer options. “What changed with the crisis is that banks became much stricter about issuing new loans,” Mr. Akhlomov said. “Before, if people did not have the money to pay off a loan, they could go to another bank. That does not work anymore.”

Generally, banks seeking loan payments are not in the business of thrashing their customers physically. The worst abuses are rooted in the so-called microfinance industry, which extends small loans to tide borrowers over until their next paycheck.

Those loans average $125, according to United Credit Bureau statistics. The interest rate is usually 2 percent a day, or 730 percent a year. That adds up fast.

Take Natalya Gorbunova, 38, a house painter in Iskitim, a small city of 60,000 about 2,100 miles east of Moscow. She usually earns some $400 a month but hit a rough patch in September 2014 while her husband, a security guard, was hospitalized with an ulcer.

She borrowed $75 from the small blue and green kiosk of a microfinance company called Instant Money near a bus stop in Iskitim, figuring she could repay it within a month.

She could not, however, and that was when the abusive telephone calls started. Collectors threatened to kill her if she did not pay. Angry, Ms. Gorbunova decided not to repay a kopeck, she said in newspaper and television interviews. She did not go to the police, she said, because “everyone told us that no one would deal with it.”

By the time four debt collectors wearing black balaclavas smashed into her small wooden shack on March 30, that debt had bloated to more than $3,600. The men put bags over her head and those of her husband and 17-year-old son, beating and kicking them while demanding repayment.

They pushed Ms. Gorbunova facedown on a couch, stripped off her pajamas and began “poking” her with some kind of wooden object, she said.

“I was shocked, but the only thing I thought about was that I did not want them to hurt my son,” she said on a television talk show.

The police called it sexual assault, and an appalled public called it rape. Representatives of the collection industry either accused her of lying or suggested that a few “black collectors” were soiling the entire industry. No one has been arrested, and the credit company denied any involvement.

The grass-roots level of the collection industry is unregulated, thinly separated from organized crime and peopled mainly by cashiered police officers, former secret police agents and prison or security guards. About 40 percent of all unpaid debt ends up in the hands of collection agencies, said Mr. Akhlomov of the United Credit Bureau.

Short of violence, collectors use all manner of psychological pressure. They telephone constantly, sometimes as many as 150 times a day. They hound not just the debtors but their families, friends and business associates, demanding that they help pay.

The police in the southern city of Stavropol opened a case against one collection agency that blocked phone service to the local children’s hospital by robocalling every hospital number in pursuit of a debtor.

Collectors spray-paint apartment doors with the word “DOLG,” or “DEBT.” They ruin locks with super glue and break windows.

They distribute fliers using the pictures and phone numbers of debtors and advertising for sexual services. They threaten death or the loss of a limb. Some debtors have been driven to suicide.

When they call or send text messages, the collectors often use names from Chechnya or the southern Caucasus, whose residents have a reputation for fearsome violence.

“When they call, they use some invented name like Ahmed Islamovich, which immediately exerts psychological pressure on any Russian,” said Anton Babin, 29, a psychologist who accuses the collectors of provoking a fatal heart attack in his 55-year-old mother by hounding her.

Children are frequent targets of coercion. Several kindergartens have been evacuated because collectors threatened to blow them up.

Victims are generally poor and uneducated, have little faith in the government and do not know that most courts will wipe out the ballooning interest.

The level of violence horrifies Russians, who believed that the most vicious Al Capone-like excesses of the chaotic 1990s had been left behind given the stern guidance and prosperity of past years under President Vladimir V. Putin. The outcry finally prompted the government to act, albeit haltingly.

Yuri Y. Chaika, Russia’s prosecutor general, publicly urged law enforcement agencies to be less lethargic. Out of 21,000 complaints in recent years, only a handful of cases were pursued, he said, calling the legal response a failure given the magnitude of the problem.

This month Parliament began debating a law to ban collection agencies. “They should be handcuffed, so they won’t beat anyone, won’t rape anyone or won’t burn anyone,” said Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a populist politician, waving handcuffs as he delivered a Parliament speech that was broadcast nationally.

Critics say that an outright ban would just drive the process underground, and that a regulatory framework is what is really needed.

In the meantime, people are trying to figure out how to defend themselves.

Evgeny O. Sharov, 26, a singing teacher in the southern city of Tolyatti, joined a forum called Stop Collector after he and his relatives were harassed.

“I’m now aware that when a call comes from those collectors, I shouldn’t show them that I’m afraid,” he said in a telephone interview. “The faster you show them that you’re afraid of something, the more dogged they become.”


