


The painter Duncan Hannah was musing the other day about life’s simple pleasures.

“I remember a great party after a Roxy Music show,” he said, recalling a night from the early 1970s when he was a student at Bard College, visiting the city on weekends.

“It was at Larry Rivers’s loft, and it was just fabulous,” Mr. Hannah said. “Nureyev was there, and all the Warhol drag queens, and David Bowie and Bryan Ferry and Andy Warhol. At the end it was time to go, and Andy said, So, we’re going to the 82 Club” — an East Village drag bar — “do you want to come with us? I said, Yeah, who’s we? He said, David Bowie and Bryan Ferry. And I said, Yeah, that sounds good. So we got in the limo, and I, unfortunately, was extremely drunk, so I thought, I’d better keep my mouth shut, because I don’t trust myself. We pull up and it’s Andy Warhol and David Bowie and Bryan Ferry and me, an art student.

“I woke up the next morning from a blackout in an abandoned building on 135th and Lenox, on the fifth floor, and there was no one in that building or any buildings around. It was just Dresden. I don’t know what happened that night, but it was a fast trajectory from the most glamorous moment I ever had to possibly the most tawdry moment I ever had. I still have no idea how I traveled 133 blocks with no money, and found myself on the top floor of a ruined building — seemingly untampered with. It must’ve been someone’s idea of a really good joke. The last thing I remember is when the bouncer threw me in the gutter. I remember thinking, Wow, I actually made it to the gutter I’ve heard so much about. Now I’m in it. So that was a good party.”

Mr. Hannah has a lot of stories, some of which appear in the book “Please Kill Me: The Uncensored Oral History of Punk,” by Legs McNeil and Gillian McCain, which is being reissued this month in an expanded 20th-anniversary edition.

Much in the punk world has changed since the book first came out. The Ramones, the shaggy galoots of CBGB, are currently subjects of a reverential exhibition at the Queens Museum. Richard Hell wrote a well-received memoir, and Patti Smith has become an august institution. CBGB itself is a restaurant at Newark Liberty International Airport.

But Mr. Hannah, who at 63 still looks the wide-eyed enthusiast, has continued doing what he has done for decades: cobbling a persona from old movies and books and clothes, and making unfashionably romantic paintings that seem conjured from another century. The sexy racing cars are all from the days before Nascar, the sexy women mainly from old European movies, the sensibility closer to Edward Hopper than to Andy Warhol or Jean-Michel Basquiat.

Without being exactly famous, he is a rarity in New York: a painter who makes a living solely through his art. Two of his paintings are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s permanent collection, and a show of his recent work — mostly starlets and gas stations — is at the New Release gallery in Chinatown through May 14.

“It’s interesting that he continued to do his own thing,” said Roberta Bayley, who worked the door at CBGB and remembers Mr. Hannah in the club wearing a straw boater or looking like Alain Delon in “Purple Noon,” all pretty features and noir mystique. “Nobody was dressed like that,” Ms. Bayley said. “He was just destined for beauty.”

Mr. Hannah, who grew up in Minneapolis, arrived in New York in 1973 and quickly made his way to the back room at Max’s Kansas City.

“I’ve always been interested in scenes,” he said. “Even scenes that aren’t mine, like Swinging London, the Beat scene, or Paris in the ’20s. So when I got to New York, I wanted to find the scene or make the scene. Whatever was going on, I wanted to find the center of it. And I still do, I suppose.”

He played drums in some short-lived bands and starred in a couple of underground movies with Deborah Harry. He ran the shorter-lived fan club for the band Television.

Danny Fields, a member of the Max’s court, described the young Mr. Hannah as a star-struck wannabe in the best possible sense. “Wanting to get in was part of it,” Mr. Fields said. “He was wanted and he wanted to be there. He was a beautiful young artist, and the world was at his feet. Of course he would be someone important.”

Mr. Fields added, “Why would you come to New York unless you were star-struck?”

Mr. Hannah, for his part, was not blind to the effect he had on people.

“It seemed like older gay men had the keys to the city,” he said. “And I was an androgynous youth. Men were interested in me because of the way I looked, and were willing to take me to a party that John Gielgud was giving, stuff like that.”

He’s sober now, and his club of choice is the private Century Association, where he recently helped book the indie rockers Bambi Kino, who perform only songs from the Beatles’ 1960-62 set lists. A recent night out entailed shopping for old art catalogs at the Strand, then having a hamburger and nonalcoholic beer with his friends Michael Chaiken, an archivist, and Richard Kern, a filmmaker and photographer, followed by watching an obscure French movie called “The Girl With the Golden Eyes” at Lincoln Center. Tawdry the night was not.

“I hope it’s the theater with the good popcorn,” said Mr. Kern, whose artistic themes include heroin, sexual obsession and lots of nudity.

Mr. Hannah said he had lately been reading his diaries and considering writing his own punk memoir, in part because others had made the scene seem too historic.

“Initially it was like 100 kids that would show up, and we were all drunk, and we thought everything was preposterous,” he said. “If you read a book about some party in Montparnasse in 1920 or something, and everybody’s in the same room — Brancusi’s there and Modigliani’s there and Cocteau’s there and Man Ray’s there — and you think, just imagine, how fabulous. Then it turns out that you’ve been in rooms like that, where everybody’s there, and it wasn’t like that. There were cliques, and people hated each other, and so-and-so wouldn’t dream of talking to so-and-so. And you think, it was probably that way in 1920, too.”

At the opening for his Chinatown show, several characters from “Please Kill Me” made polite appearances, and at least one bought a painting.

A few days later in his apartment, Mr. Hannah displayed a new painting of his friend the writer Glenn O’Brien, leaning against a Rolls-Royce Wraith (a loaner from Rolls; sticker price: from $304,350), which the two had taken for a test drive near their country houses in Connecticut. Mr. O’Brien was an early editor of Interview magazine, which gave Mr. Hannah some of his first attention.

The image is a long way from CBGB and the world of “Please Kill Me.” But Mr. Hannah had always had other interests, and these have sustained him, as he has sustained them. They’re there in the painting of Mr. O’Brien, posed in front of the car like Sean Connery in a James Bond movie you can’t quite place.

“I suppose it’s kind of escapism for me,” Mr. Hannah said of his painting. “Basically I’m just here working, but through my work I can be all over the world with all kinds of people, many of whom are dead. It’s a fantasy, I suppose. I’ve always been that way. I was like that as a kid watching black-and-white movies. I would just enter into them.”

It was, he said, a pursuit of the light.

“You need hope to paint well, I think,” he said. “Beauty is hard to achieve.”


