


Pete Seeger was a giant in politically progressive music circles, and when he died, in January 2014, the impact was felt around the world — nowhere more, perhaps, than in a lower-level hall of the Memorial United Methodist Church in White Plains. That is where a group called the Walkabout Clearwater Coffeehouse, which the folk singer established, had blossomed into a community of like-minded people who gather to hear music and promote their social causes.

For its members, the community remains a vibrant one. But as it ages, it has undergone a slow attrition, finding it difficult to bring new young people into the fold. Mr. Seeger had warned of the problem and, spurred by his death, its leaders have stepped up their efforts to draw in new audiences, judiciously scheduling younger and more diverse acts, even as they remain true to the folk mainstays.

“We have more consciously decided we have a job to do,” said Steve Siegelbaum, 72, a Walkabout coordinator and one of the early members of the chorus.

At the April coffeehouse gathering, the 40-member chorus, founded by Mr. Seeger in 1984 as a vehicle for taking his progressive message to rallies and the like, was holed up in a room rehearsing their songs of protest and hope. Among them were Holly Near’s skeptical “I Ain’t Afraid” and Mr. Siegelbaum’s ironic “There’s No Need for This Song.” The chorus became the resident performing group when the coffeehouse was formed in 1989.

While the chorus rehearsed, the featured act of the evening, the trio Brother Sun, conducted a sound check in the church’s Asbury Hall, running through bits and pieces of an eclectic songbook of traditional and original tunes, which drew on Appalachian airs and their Irish antecedents; the music of the church, and the blues.

After those preliminaries, the singers lined up for a home-cooked meal served by the community’s unheralded stalwarts, the self-described galley wenches. Then the show went on, eliciting a strong reaction from the more than 200 people in attendance.

But the aging of the crowd soon came into focus as Aaron Rosin, the youngest chorus member, stepped forward and, hands reaching toward the sky, let loose with: “Ain’t gonna let nobody turn me around,” the title line from a spiritual decrying racism. Aaron, 6, was one of the few people in the room without gray hair.

“It’s heavily skewed to us older folks,” Mr. Siegelbaum said.

The difficulty of engaging millennials was underlined by Alayna Bierley, 15, one of the few people of high school or college age at the coffeehouse. Ms. Bierley, who was spending time with a cousin in a hallway away from the action in the auditorium, expressed little interest in joining the chorus.

“I just come because my grandparents are in it,” she said.

Jean Havens, the coordinator of the coffeehouse gatherings, drove home the point: “We have a student price,” she said. “We don’t use it very often. That’s a comment right there.”

The issue of attracting younger people has taken on a fresh urgency this season. For the first time, Hudson River Sloop Clearwater, the environmental organization Mr. Seeger founded in the 1960s — and the one to which proceeds of the coffeehouses go — has decided not to hold its Great Hudson River Revival, one of the nation’s oldest and largest music festivals to benefit the environment. The event, which dates to 1978, will be replaced by a benefit on June 18 at the Tarrytown Music Hall.

The decision not to hold the festival, Ms. Havens said, reflected a need to spend Clearwater’s money on refurbishing the sloop itself, which plies the Hudson River and is the organization’s symbolic heart. It didn’t help, she said, that attendance at last year’s festival had fallen short; a “perfect storm” that she attributed to bad weather, though visits to the festival in recent years have revealed a distinctly aging crowd.

Mr. Siegelbaum said in an email that Clearwater intends to revive the festival in 2017. But at the coffeehouse, he is countering the drift now. Among the younger and more diverse acts booked this season have been the Peace Poets, a hip-hop group from the Bronx; Kristen Graves, a troubadour from Connecticut; and the singing Chapin Sisters, the daughters of Tom Chapin, a fixture at the coffeehouse.

“We thought things would continue on a downward trend,” he said. “But we’ve been having better audiences than we expected.”

The season’s next and last coffeehouse, on May 14, will face competition, if unintended.

Walkabout has slated the singer-songwriter Vance Gilbert, one of the few black performers working the coffeehouse circuit, and a popular draw. But Common Ground Coffeehouse in nearby Hastings-on-Hudson has also scheduled a show, featuring the idiosyncratic Erin McKeown, known for her funky take on folk idioms.

The concurrence of the coffeehouses was a fluke that occurred because Ms. McKeown had to reschedule, said Carter Smith, who founded Common Ground in 2001. The two coffeehouses’ relationship is “not competitive, it’s a community,” he said, adding that the Walkabout chorus has performed at Common Ground.

Whatever impact the simultaneous scheduling has on attendance, audience size is only one measure of its success; the quality of the information exchanged is another. But age recently took its toll at Walkabout; the person responsible for managing the table at which literature about social causes is distributed died before the April coffeehouse, Ms. Havens said. The table lay empty.

Nonetheless, the chorus’s message, echoed in Brother Sun’s close harmonies and trenchant lyrics, elicited an enthusiastic response. While no one soon expects to see the kind of excitement generated at the coffeehouse’s 20th anniversary celebration, in 2009, when Mr. Seeger’s appearance prompted organizers to move the event to the 900-seat auditorium at White Plains High School, he continues to set an example.

“Pete’s absence is felt,” said Joe Jencks of Brother Sun. “But there are a lot of people who continue this work, and that was part of what was unique about Pete. He was absolutely sure that it was not about him, that it was about the work.”


