


Of all the charges and the allegations in a 17-page criminal complaint accusing a powerful New York City union leader of corruption, perhaps the most far-reaching development was woven into the legal boilerplate, essentially hiding in plain sight.

A person, referred to as “CW-1,” for Cooperating Witness 1, had agreed to cooperate with federal prosecutors and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

The cooperator’s name was not mentioned in the complaint unsealed on Wednesday, but several people with knowledge of the matter said it was Jona S. Rechnitz, a central figure in one of the half-dozen continuing federal corruption investigations focused on Mayor Bill de Blasio’s fund-raising.

Mr. Rechnitz, who has generously supported several of Mr. de Blasio’s interests and served on the mayor’s inaugural committee, has pleaded guilty to fraud conspiracy charges in connection with the corruption case against Norman Seabrook, the influential leader of the union that represents the city’s correction officers, and another defendant, according to the complaint.

But the significance of his decision to join the roster of government witnesses could go far beyond the case against the union leader, and have wide-ranging consequences for Mr. de Blasio.

The complaint in the corruption case, along with statements by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York (whose office brought it), and interviews with people with knowledge of the fund-raising inquiries, strongly suggest that Mr. Rechnitz could serve as an important witness in at least one of the fund-raising matters.

At a news conference on Wednesday announcing the charges against Mr. Seabrook, Mr. Bharara declined to answer questions about the identity of CW-1 and the degree to which the witness could be helpful in other cases.

But he noted that “the complaint does say that he is assisting other investigations as well; that’s all I’ll say.”

Almost all of the fund-raising investigations are being conducted by the same group of F.B.I. agents and federal prosecutors — two squads of agents known as C4 and C14 and the prosecutors in Mr. Bharara’s public corruption unit — that handled the case against Mr. Seabrook, who was arrested along with Murray Huberfeld, a hedge fund financier.

While Mr. Bharara also declined to answer questions about the fund-raising inquiries during the news conference, he left little doubt that there were more public corruption cases on the horizon.

“As those of you who come here often appreciate, it is seldom the case that the bringing of a particular charge at a particular date is the end of the matter,” he said. “We’re still investigating lots of different things, and you should expect to see me again.”

The accusations in the complaint do not involve Mr. de Blasio, nor are they related to any of the possible improprieties that are under scrutiny in the more than half a dozen inquiries swirling around the mayor and his aides. Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, has steadfastly defended his fund-raising efforts.

However, the complaint notes that Mr. Rechnitz has pleaded guilty in connection with the corruption case, “among other things,” and is “providing information to the government in the hopes of obtaining leniency when he is sentenced.”

It also says that Mr. Rechnitz has undergone “extensive debriefings,” and that the information he has provided has been “reliable and corroborated by independent evidence.”

A lawyer for Mr. Rechnitz, Alan Levine, declined to comment.

Investigators and others briefed on the matter have said the fund-raising inquiry that had once been focused on Mr. Rechnitz now centers on whether city officials provided him with some benefit for his real estate business in exchange for campaign contributions.

The development represented a stark turn of fate for Mr. Rechnitz, 33, who came to New York from Los Angeles to build things: condominiums, hotels and the like. But as he gained a footing in the city, he found that it was easier to build relationships, often founded on money.

He and another businessman, Jeremiah Reichberg, who also raised money for the mayor and served on the committee that planned his 2014 inaugural celebration, spent a good deal of time cultivating roughly a score of senior police officials, lavishing some with gifts and trips.

Mr. Reichberg, according to people briefed on the matter, is the man identified in the criminal complaint as Co-Conspirator 1 or CC-1, and also was involved in the alleged scheme, although he was not charged.

The complaint details a series of trips to the Dominican Republic, Israel and elsewhere that Mr. Seabrook took with Mr. Rechnitz, Mr. Reichberg and a top police official. All were paid for by Mr. Rechnitz.

The investigation has so far uncovered misconduct by nearly a dozen mostly senior police officials, including five chiefs who have filed for retirement as a result, and a number of other senior officials, who have been transferred to administrative posts pending possible discipline. One detective has been fired.

Few of them are likely to be happy about their interactions with Mr. Rechnitz. Indeed, they may share the feelings Mr. de Blasio expressed on Wednesday, which seemed to tumble out when a reporter asked about his connection to the businessman.

“I wish I never met the guy,” the mayor said.


