


In this episode, the Haggler takes a second and longer look at the American Truck Group, the company in Gulfport, Miss., that has been the focus of dozens of complaints from truckers in a rent-to-own program.

Why dive back into the same subject? Quite simply, the Haggler has never encountered a company that has elicited more rage and sadness. In a series of conversations with ex-customers, the Haggler heard, time and again, variations of “They ruined my life” or “I have not been the same since.” How this occurred should concern everyone who cares about consumer fairness.

To recap: American Truck’s rent-to-own program is for truckers who lack the credit rating to get a bank loan. For a down payment ($4,000 to $10,000) and then a year or so of weekly payments ($500 to $1,000), a driver can become a self-employed trucker, known as an owner-operator. At the end of the year, the driver has an option to buy the truck outright for an additional lump sum.

This is a fine idea in theory. But a few dozen American Truck customers have told the Better Business Bureau that they spent thousands on a down payment and on rental fees — in some cases a total of $50,000 or more — only to have the truck repossessed before they had the chance to buy it. Some contend that the company’s business model is to milk as much as possible from renters, grab the truck, then rent it out again.

Rent. Grab. Repeat.

A manager at A.T.G. said in our previous episode that it had always acted within its rights under a contract signed with drivers. The Haggler has no evidence to the contrary. But it could be that the truck company abides by the law and still fails its customers.

Hoping to get a view from inside the company, the Haggler spoke on the phone with two former A.T.G. employees. One of them is Charlie Claburn, a former manager who left the company in 2013 after deciding that he could not abide his employer’s tactics.

“The whole thing is a setup,” said Mr. Claburn, who is now a trucker. “I was flat out told: ‘The goal is not to let them complete the program. The goal is to get the truck back.’”

The biggest problem, Mr. Claburn said, comes from unexpected out-of-pocket expenses. A.T.G.’s fleet is made up entirely of used trucks, and they tend to break down. (That is hardly unusual.) A.T.G.’s service agreement covers 100 percent of towing costs, as long the truck is within 250 miles of one of its dealerships. (In addition to Gulfport, the company has locations near Atlanta and in Phoenix.)

As for repairs, half the cost is covered if they’re performed at A.T.G. dealerships, or in other shops as long the company assists in choosing the location. But even inside that 250 miles, A.T.G. renters say the company has told them that it will take a few days for their tow to arrive. Truckers can’t afford to wait, so they often spend their own money.

“The last six weeks I drove that truck, it broke down every week,” said David Robbins, a former American Truck customer who said he spent $97,000 renting and repairing a truck that he was ultimately forced to surrender when he couldn’t keep current on payments. “I was spending my last dollars.”

Many A.T.G. renters hover close to the brink of destitution. So once they start spending a few thousand dollars on towing and repairs, they begin to miss payments. And when that happens, the company has the right to take back the vehicle.

This can happen just about anywhere. In 2013, Willie Herringshaw was awakened in his truck at a service plaza in Albany on the New York State Thruway, he said. It was about 2 a.m. and a pair of men were standing outside his vehicle, their pickup truck blocking him in. He was one payment in arrears, he said.

Mr. Herringshaw said he was able to talk the men into delivering the 44,000 pounds of steel he was hauling to a destination a few miles away. Others are not that lucky: In some cases, according to Mr. Claburn, the repo agents just unhitch the trailer where they find it and drive away.

How does the company know where these vehicles are? It installs two GPS tracking devices in its trucks, Mr. Claburn explained

“When a driver falls behind on payments, he might get a call that says, ‘We know you’re in New York,’” he said. “Now the driver realizes there is GPS on board. If he finds it and disables it, there’s another. It’s hidden under the dashboard.”

The Haggler heard American Truck’s side of this story in an interview with Louis J. Normand Jr., its owner and founder. Mr. Normand said it wasn’t true that the company rents trucks intending to repossess them, in part because that makes no economic sense — it costs about $4,500 a retrieval — and because it goes against his foremost goal.

“I want to be part of the solution for truckers, not part of the problem,” he said. “I’d rather a driver stay in his truck and build a relationship.”

As for those GPS devices, Mr. Normand said those were pretty much standard industry practice. The company and its financial backers need to know where their property is.

The Haggler asked how many customers had successfully segued from renter to owner. About 100, Mr. Normand said. This seemed like a pretty small number, given that the company opened in 2000 and says it rents dozens of trucks a month. Then again, it’s more than zero.

So the Haggler asked to speak to someone who had managed to buy a rented A.T.G. truck. The next day, a publicist for the company emailed three names.

One of them was Rolando Venereo. His story is not exactly a tale of triumph. A trucker since 2006, he made a deal with American Truck in 2013, renting a Volvo 780 for a down payment of $3,900 and weekly payments of $625. At the end of the year, he bought the truck outright for $23,900, its fair market value at the time, the company told Mr. Venereo — according to Mr. Venereo. (This is a matter of contention.)

“I am angry, I am sorry, and I am sad,” Mr. Venereo said. What bothers him most, he continued, is that the $3,900 down payment he made at the outset didn’t count toward the final purchase price, as an A.T.G. salesman had led him to believe.

The Haggler asked why Mr. Venereo didn’t walk away rather than give the company an additional $23,900. The reason, he said, is that by then he had made enough repairs to the truck to know he could drive it for a while without it breaking down again.

Surviving that year of renting required some financial assistance from his father, he said. Asked if he would sign the same deal with the company again, given what he knows now, he didn’t hesitate: “Of course not. I have a family, sir.”

American Truck’s publicist, John David, offered a different version of events. He said Mr. Venereo did get credit for his down payment. It was put toward the final purchase price, which was just shy of $28,000, Mr. David said.

In a follow-up call, Mr. Venereo said he had no idea where the company had gotten that figure.

As it turns out, American Truck’s reputation precedes it. Some trucking firms will not work with drivers who have rented from A.T.G. One of the firms is Bruce Oakley Inc. of North Little Rock, Ark., which has deals with about 700 owner-operators. A.T.G.’s lease agreement,” said Jeremy Kellett, Bruce Oakley’s director of recruiting, “sets a guy up for failure.”

What we have here may be one of the great lessons in buyer beware. Time and again, the Haggler heard former A.T.G. customers say that they were left with one impression while they were being sold the rent-to-own program and a very different impression once they started driving. This just underscores a reality: It’s all about what you sign, not what you hear.

Then again, what a salesman says ought to matter, and it would if buyers were to make an audio recording of their negotiations. Now that everyone has a smartphone and every smartphone has a voice recorder, this is pretty easy to pull off. The Haggler isn’t suggesting that anyone do this surreptitiously. Put your smartphone where it can be seen and announce that you are recording, to minimize misunderstandings.

If any of the heartbroken and now impoverished former American Truck Group customers had done that, their stories might have different endings.


