


COPENHAGEN — The artist Olafur Eliasson explores the relationship between humans and their environments through visual spectacles that are as elemental in material — water, light, soil — as they are grand in effect.

In 2003, Mr. Eliasson transformed Turbine Hall at Tate Modern in London into a makeshift solarium; he built waterfalls on industrial scaffolding in the East River in New York City in 2008; and for the COP 21 climate conference in Paris last fall, he left 12 blocks of a Greenlandic glacier to melt in front of the Pantheon.

For his next installation, Mr. Eliasson has turned to the Château de Versailles outside of Paris and its majestic gardens. The 49-year-old Mr. Eliasson, who was born in Denmark to Icelandic parents, is the 10th contemporary artist invited to create a site-specific exhibition on the 17th-century palace since 2008.

“At Versailles, people tend to think only about King Louis XIV, but it is actually the ground from which our modern idea of democracy grew — ideas of unity, freedom of speech, freedom of thinking,” Mr. Eliasson said over coffee in his studio in Copenhagen this week.

Rather than encouraging visitors to experience Versailles as a “commercial, historically objectifying” vestige of the past, Mr. Eliasson said he would like his work to provoke a more active kind of visit. “Versailles has not been standing still since the French Revolution,” he said. “It has been going through all the significant phases of history like the rest of us.”

Although Mr. Eliasson is still working out the details of his show, which runs from June 7 through November 2016, he described a series of sculptures and installations both inside the palace and outside it. A mock-up for one work was to be tested this week at Versailles, “and then we will know if it will happen or not,” he said.

The museum’s boutique will also be selling his solar-powered Little Sun lamps and phone chargers, “so I can make every person a Little Sun king, the Roi du Soleil of the common man,” he said.

A triptych of works in the gardens will feature water in its three physical states, “to celebrate the ephemeral, dematerialized state of things,” Mr. Eliasson said. In the central Great Canal, a towering waterfall will cascade from a yellow construction crane.

Two circular groves, L’Étoile and La Colonnade, will present water as a gas and a solid. In l’Étoile, a ring of nozzles 16 feet high will produce a halo of mist that responds to the weather, refracting the sun on bright days and disappearing with the wind.

The fountain in La Colonnade will be filled with moraine, granite that was ground to a fine silt by glaciers in the last ice age. Also an effective fertilizer, Mr. Eliasson said, it offers an abstract commentary on “the gardens’ role as a symbol of the king’s fertility, the idea of fertility at the expense of our society.”

“I was very curious about the gardens as a way for the king to exercise the illusion of power, and to stabilize the idea of his own hierarchical position to the point that he could make nature work according to his wishes,” he said. “And while I don’t think it’s necessarily healthy to totally deconstruct this amazing garden, you might say I wanted to nudge the castle a little bit.”

Inside the chateau, five works will be integrated into the architecture in subtle ways, producing disorienting reflections of space. Some will be mirrored, Mr. Eliasson said, “not exactly a kaleidoscope, but something like that.”

“The great legacy of the Baroque was that it was not ashamed of trying to influence people,” Mr. Eliasson said. “It had absolutely no problem being highly manipulative, and that’s what makes it comfortable.”

“My work can also be baroque in a way,” he added, “because the spectacle is still present, even though it’s done with very little.”

One of the works, “The Gaze of Versailles,’’ two eyeball-size golden spheres that will extend into the viewer’s space from the wall on brass stalks, has not yet found a precise location, he said, but it will “resonate with the subconscious of the castle.”

“The luxury for me, in a project like Versailles, is that I will see these pieces there for the first time on opening day,” Mr. Eliasson said. “You, the visitor, and me, the artist, will stand in front of my work and go, ‘Oh, that’s how it looks.’ ”


