


A federal judge on Monday awarded control of the nation’s oldest synagogue, in Newport, R.I., to the congregation housed there, ruling against a New York congregation that had claimed ownership in a four-year legal fight between two of the oldest examples of America’s religious pluralism.

The Touro Synagogue in Newport, built before the Revolutionary War and with a connection to George Washington, is a landmark of American Jewish history, but its congregation, Jeshuat Israel, suffers from dwindling membership and resources. Pitted against it in District Court in Providence was the oldest Jewish congregation in the United States, Shearith Israel of New York, which predates the synagogue by a century.

The ruling clears the way for Jeshuat Israel to sell a pair of Colonial-era silver ornaments called rimonim, valued at more than $7 million, to raise money that it says is needed to keep the synagogue operating. The ornaments, adorned with small bells, were made by a noted 18th-century silversmith, Myer Myers, to go atop Torah scroll spindles.

“Because of the financial situation, we’ve been unable to do necessary maintenance,” said Louise Ellen Teitz, a co-president of the congregation, which has 130 members.

Shearith Israel, with a synagogue on West 70th Street in Manhattan, argued that it was the rightful owner of the Newport synagogue and its contents, and sought the congregation that has used the building for more than a century. Leaders of the New York congregation did not reply to messages seeking comment.

Judge John J. McConnell Jr. sided firmly with Jeshuat Israel, ensuring that control of the synagogue and its contents will remain with the Jewish community in Newport.

“The central issue here is the legacy of some of the earliest Jewish settlers in North America, who desired to make Newport a permanent haven for public Jewish worship,” Judge McConnell wrote in a 106-page decision.

Those settlers were primarily Sephardic, descended from Jews who fled the Inquisition in Spain and Portugal; in the 1650s, one group settled in New York, becoming Shearith Israel, and another in Newport. In 1763, the Jews of Newport consecrated what became known as the Touro Synagogue for the community’s leader at the time, Isaac Touro. In 1790, Washington wrote a letter to the Newport congregation in praise of religious freedom, referring to “the government of the United States, which gives to bigotry no sanction, to persecution no assistance.”

But Jews were leaving Newport, and Touro fell mostly dormant for generations. Some congregants moved to New York and joined Shearith Israel, taking with them the keys to Touro and its valuables, including the Torahs and rimonim. After a new wave of Jewish immigration, Touro reopened in the late 19th century, the objects were returned and the congregation Jeshuat Israel was formed.

The historical record showed that the people named on Touro’s original property deed were trustees for the community, not owners of the land or the structure, Judge McConnell found. In turn, he wrote, Shearith Israel became the trustee, not the owner.

The judge chastised the New York congregation for claiming ownership and removed it as Touro’s trustee, awarding that power to Jeshuat Israel.


