


Seven years ago, Chris King, known around hockey rinks as Kinger, was cut loose from the Islanders’ radio team because, well, it had actually ceased to exist. To save costs, the team opted to simulcast MSG television broadcasts on two Long Island radio stations.

“It was a disaster — just a terrible decision — and everybody realized it immediately,” King said recently.

So, a year later, King was brought back to a new spot on the radio dial, but with an unusual new partner — or, to be more accurate, partners. Games were to be presented on WRHU-FM, the Hofstra University station, and the broadcasts would largely be produced by Hofstra students.

King, 54, is unfailingly enthusiastic, but he knew that a lot of long-suffering fans were snickering. To involve a college radio station in a professional hockey team’s broadcasts seemed, to many Islanders fans, to be not only cheap, but also bush league. King pushed on.

Islanders games can still be heard on WRHU. But with the team in the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs, facing the Tampa Bay Lightning, the broadcasts are also simulcast on WFAN (when the Yankees are not playing at the same time) or WCBS — two king-size New York radio stations.

King has become a mentor as well as a play-by-play man, and he now says of working with students: “It’s one of the best parts of my job. I never saw that coming, because most professionals don’t have to do that.”

The unusual Hofstra-Islanders double team has worked, but the Islanders’ recent success could jeopardize the arrangement.

“We created the Islanders Radio Network in order to hit the New York and Long Island market, and Hofstra is our Long Island station,” Barry Baum, the chief communications officer for Brooklyn Sports and Entertainment, which operates the Islanders’ arena, Barclays Center, said in a statement. “It’s a one-year deal, and there’s been a lot of interest from 50,000-watt stations in New York for next season. Our plan is to explore all options, with the focus on providing the widest possible distribution for Islanders fans.”

Nevertheless, Radio Hofstra University, with help from professionals like King and John Mullen, a 39-year-old producer, has helped the Islanders find a loving home. Dozens of students have also gained hands-on experience in the last six years.

This is the first season that color commentary for King on the broadcasts has not been provided by a rotating team of students; Greg Picker, formerly of the Islanders’ communications department, is now the analyst.

But many students have benefited, among them Mark Weiner, a senior journalism major from the Bayside neighborhood of Queens, who will graduate this month. Weiner has done a little of everything: producing in the studio, analyzing games and reporting from games and practices.

“It’s everything I’ve ever dreamed about,” said Weiner, who has also done broadcasts of Hofstra sports events. “Kinger has probably been the best mentor I’ve ever had. He doesn’t treat us like college students — he treats us like professionals. He’s a mentor for everybody. There are a lot of pro broadcasters who wouldn’t have done that.”

There is virtually no difference between the broadcasts in the regular season on WRHU (also carried on WRCN-FM in Suffolk County and WNYE-FM in New York) and those in the playoffs on WFAN and WCBS. King, though, has found a new audience.

His joyous call of John Tavares’s game-winning and series-winning goal in the second overtime of Game 6 against the Florida Panthers in the first round of the playoffs, punctuated with a “Yes, yes, yes!” was played to television and Internet audiences in the United States and Canada. The playoff series win was the Islanders’ first since 1993.

“You can kind of call me the jinx because 1994 was my first year on the Islander broadcasts,” said King, a former software engineer who became a disc jockey before joining the Islanders as a host of pregame, intermission and postgame broadcasts.

King, a Long Island native, and Mullen essentially design the broadcasts, and, Mullen said, “RHU uses the same model that a regular major network would use.”

Students collaborate at the studio and on-site, mixing sound, operating the board, producing commercials, cutting highlights and gathering interviews with players that can be broadcast before, during and after games or turned into features.

Mullen said: “The people we have, instead of 25, they’re 18, 19, 20, 21. The things that the students have displayed are maturity, professionalism and dedication. Becoming a member of the broadcast team has become competitive among students.”

He added: “Once people hear the broadcast, we get positive feedback. If they didn’t know anything about it, they’d think it was a standard, deep network product.”

Hofstra students did not join King and Picker in Tampa, Fla., for Games 1 and 2 of the series against the Lightning, but they and Mullen were in the studio, pitching in as they prepared for final exams.

Of his changing cast of teammates for six seasons, King said, “They do have classes — I forget that, too, at some point.”

He added: “I love seeing the students progress. They’re raw, but they’re talented. It’s fun to see what they can do.”


