


Don DeLillo’s “Zero K,” published earlier this month, is his 16th novel, which means he may have more books under his belt than public appearances. The rarely seen author recently showed up at the 92nd Street Y in New York to read from the new book, and to talk about his life and work with fellow novelist Dana Spiotta.

After reading a few pages at a lectern, DeLillo sat down next to Spiotta. “I’ve lost my voice,” he said. “Can I go home now?”

No such luck. He had to stay and chat, and what he said could make one wonder if a memoir is in the offing. “I think of myself more and more as a kid from the Bronx,” he said. “The memories become more and more clear.” He recalled working as a park attendant when he was a teenager. He never wore his uniform, so visitors wouldn’t know he was there to help. “I would sit on a bench and read,” he said. “The guy who ran the place didn’t seem to mind.”

His personal motto, taken from James Joyce, was “silence, exile, cunning. . . . Even though I never went into exile and I’m not that cunning. It’s the silence part.”

Generously (and evasively), DeLillo attempted to steer the conversation toward Spiotta’s work, but his interlocutor wasn’t having it. When she told him that naming things and knowing the names of things was “incredibly important in your work,” DeLillo wryly shot back: “It is?”

Spiotta asked about the humor in his work, and his method of deploying it. “It comes or it doesn’t,” DeLillo said. “I don’t know what else to say.” The audience laughed.

Quotable

“Writing a novel strikes me as a lot like raising a child, in the sense that you have a certain amount of control, or you hope you do. And your job is to guide it to a place where it will leave you.” — Justin Cronin, in an interview with Houstonia magazine

A Slow Cure

The acclaimed novelist James Salter died last year at 90, and now a small new book, “The Art of Fiction,” collects three lectures he gave at the University of Virginia near the end of his life. He spoke about his favorite writers, the importance of style in prose and the darker moments in a creative career. He mentioned a “devastating” review in The New York Times of his novel “Light Years,” followed by a second, “indifferent” review in the paper. When his editor broke the news, Salter looked for a silver lining. “Was there something in it though, some phrase or a couple of words that could be used in an ad?” There was not.

“It’s a rare writer who doesn’t experience rejection at one point or another,” Salter said, “and the book was after all not anything sacred, though it had been sacred to me. But this is philosophically speaking and was of no use at the time. Philosophy is a slow-acting cure.”


