


LONDON — For some clubs that lead the way, the hardest thing seems to be closing out a long season’s worth of work.

In Spain, Barcelona has blown a 9-point lead and now is tied with Atlético Madrid and a point ahead of Real Madrid. It travels to Deportivo La Coruña on Wednesday night in what has become a desperate search to regain the joy of being the best soccer team on earth.

In England, Leicester City is still on top after its fairy-tale season, but the Foxes are being chased down by a vibrant Tottenham Hotspur team whose young players on Monday night scored four goals at Stoke City and could have scored seven.

“Leicester, we’re coming to get you,” the Spurs fans sang. Tottenham’s two young British players, Harry Kane and Dele Alli, both scored twice Tuesday, and they should each have had a hat trick.

“We’re on their tails,” Kane said on television. “We always seem to be playing on Monday nights, a day and a half after watching Leicester. But we think we can catch them; we’re itching to play.”

Hard work and desire to win the chase are energizing Spurs, while fear of failure is weighing on Leicester.

Leicester is still the romantic tale, the underdog that never before has won England’s top league and might never be this close again. Now just four games to the finish line, Leicester is leading by five points and needs to hold its nerve and hang on to the principles of spirit and opportunism that have gotten the club this far.

The Foxes should still win it. But Spurs, striving for the club’s first title since 1961, are running with gusto, with youth leading the charge and playing with the fearlessness of having no great expectations placed upon them until now.

The title is Leicester’s to lose and Spurs’ to snatch. And with 10 wins in its last 13 games, Tottenham has the momentum.

Public opinion is switching, too. Leicester was accused of trying to cheat at both ends of the field during its 2-2 draw with West Ham on Sunday. The defenders Robert Huth and Wes Morgan came up against a referee who was determined to stop them from grappling with their opponents like wrestlers.

This referee warned Leicester’s he-men and subsequently gave a penalty to their opponents. Jamie Vardy, the player whose sudden rise from obscurity to fame is the subject of a Hollywood script, was red-carded by the same referee in the same game.

Vardy fell too easily and too theatrically in the penalty area and was sent off for “simulation,” which is FIFA’s word for blatant diving to gain a penalty kick. The referee, Jonathan Moss, was right, but Vardy made his situation worse by walking up to the official and jabbing a finger at him.

That gesture will likely double his punishment and turn an automatic one-game ban into at least two. The striker, who has not missed a single league match all season, could now miss half the remaining games.

A phrase about a self-wounding gesture comes to mind.

All of this seems a world away from Barcelona. The club — which won every trophy possible a year ago and which went unbeaten in 39 straight games this season — has ground to a standstill.

Four losses in five games have wiped the joy out of the most enjoyable team around. Lionel Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez were scoring for fun before. Now they appear to have hit the wall with fatigue. Andrés Iniesta, one of the most meticulous passers in his sport, has lately sprayed them a fraction too short or long.

The defense, long Barcelona’s Achilles’ heel, has perhaps tightened up, but the club now looks less jubilant, less able to ignore its weakness at the rear.

Barcelona’s hierarchy knew the team was tiring. Its president, Josep Bartomeu, told me last month that the board knew the team had reached “saturation,” and that it would not embark on a long-haul tour to either America or Asia this summer.

Barcelona has some of the best players in the world, maybe some of the best of all time, but even Messi and company have a breaking point. They are flying too many miles and playing too much soccer — and the legal problems some of them face over taxes is not helping either.

The coach, Luis Enrique, told reporters over the weekend that he has stats that tell him that this Barcelona team is nowhere near as tired as it was last season.

But is that fatigue physical, or might it be mental?

Neymar and Messi carry double the normal weight of expectations because they are the captains of their national teams, Brazil and Argentina. Neymar finds it difficult to avoid yellow cards while playing for Brazil, while Messi has to face up to the expectation that he should be messianic for his country.

There are the trans-Atlantic flights taking them to games in different hemispheres, in different climates and in different time zones. Flying first class may ease the transition, but it doesn’t eliminate it, as they are asked to play with different colleagues in a different style from their club.

Even Messi looks drained, bemused and overrun. No matter whether “saturation” is the explanation or the excuse, his coach (along with Leicester’s) knows that the title is still theirs to lose.

Win their remaining games and they are champions. Lose, and the pursuers will overtake them.

“Football,” Luis Enrique told reporters on Sunday, “is capricious. We just have to get back up, handle adversity, and depend upon ourselves.”


