


ROME — When it was founded seven years ago, the Five Star Movement was the voice of anti-establishment protest in Italy, and its biggest voice was the movement’s often bombastic founder and president, the comedian Beppe Grillo.

Today, it is a measure of the movement’s maturity that its most prominent new face may be Virginia Raggi, a 37-year-old lawyer and municipal councilor who appears poised to become Rome’s mayor in a runoff election on Sunday.

In a first round of voting almost two weeks ago, Ms. Raggi, a lawyer whose campaign website describes her as a Catholic and bicycle enthusiast, got more than 35 percent of the vote, but not enough to win outright. She now faces Roberto Giachetti, a longtime lawmaker backed by Italy’s governing party, the Democrats, in a runoff on Sunday.

How Ms. Raggi came this far, despite her relative inexperience (she was first elected three years ago), has much to do with the widespread disenchantment with traditional political parties that still pervades in Italy.

But it is also an acknowledgment that the Five Star Movement has positioned itself as a viable option for moderate voters, with the ultimate goal of leading the country.

“I think voters see us as an alternative. They understand we’re not just a protest movement,” Ms. Raggi said in a recent interview in her electoral office in Rome.

Ms. Raggi’s campaign has been decidedly more restrained than the take-no-prisoners approach of Mr. Grillo, who has grown detached from the movement — even removing his name from the party logo — apparently in an effort to let it step outside his outsize shadow.

“He’s said for some time that he was stepping aside,” Ms. Raggi said. “In the meantime, the movement has grown and is able to walk with its own legs.”

Still, the movement has not lost its bite, and continues to denounce the political and institutional classes and to demand their renewal with a new generation unsoiled by what it views as the country’s corrupt establishment.

In the two houses of Parliament, where it holds 126 of 945 seats, the movement has ceaselessly censured government policies and produced numerous, though often ignored, bills to push its agenda. That includes a referendum on the euro, a guaranteed income for all, environmental sustainability and free access to the internet for Italian citizens.

The movement has elected mayors in 15 cities, including Parma and Livorno, receiving mixed reviews. A Five Star Movement mayoral candidate is in a runoff election in Turin, but Rome is the main prize, a steppingstone to a direct challenge to Prime Minister Matteo Renzi.

Like other candidates, Ms. Raggi has peppered her pledges about local administration with hints of the movement’s broader vision for the country. She attributes her success so far to years of grass-roots campaigning and political activism.

But her good showing was also undoubtedly helped by back-to-back political disappointments and unfulfilled promises, first with the center-right government of Mayor Gianni Alemanno, now standing trial for corruption, then with the center-left government of Ignazio Marino, who resigned after two years under the shadow of fiscal improprieties. Rome has been run by a commissioner since November.

Both the left and right have been tainted by the Mafia Capitale scandal, in which a de facto criminal organization infiltrated various aspects of Rome’s municipal services.

Born and raised in Rome where she studied law, Ms. Raggi works as a civil lawyer in a Rome studio and lives in a suburban area with her son, Matteo. Her political activity dates from 2011, just after his birth, when she understood that she “couldn’t sit back any longer and just watch,” she said in the interview.

“In the spirit of mothers who want to change the world for their children,” she became involved with a neighborhood group and then with the movement.

Her challenge, if elected, will be to show that she and the movement can govern a city as complex and problematic as Rome.

By all accounts, Italy’s capital is a mess. The transportation system is hobbled and nearly bankrupt. The government administration is bloated. Public works remain unfinished, and streets are filled with potholes. Garbage collection is spotty. Municipal debt has soared to at least 13 billion euros, about $14.6 billion, and could be much higher, even as Romans pay the highest property taxes in Italy.

“We don’t know what the debt is; there’s never been an audit,” said Paola Taverna, a movement senator who has been advising Ms. Raggi.

Even worse, suburban areas of the city have been neglected, and their problems must be addressed urgently, according to Daniela De Leo, a professor of urban planning at Sapienza University of Rome.

“We have to counterbalance the deficiencies and disparity that have made Rome unlivable for entire sectors of the population,” Ms. De Leo said, warning of a potential chain reaction that could have even more widespread decline. “Potholes are just the tip of the iceberg.”

For many, the Five Star Movement — which has made honesty and legality its political calling card — is a way to break with the system that led to the city’s decline.

“We have unmasked a falsely democratic system,” where left and right alternate and assist each other to preserve the status quo, said Fabio Massimo Castaldo, a Five Star Movement member of the European Parliament.

Though Ms. Raggi has a significant lead over Mr. Giachetti, pollsters said Sunday’s vote was difficult to call.

“In a runoff, personalities more than political parties count,” said Enzo Risso, the research director of SWG, a Trieste-based market research firm. “Voters will opt for the force of change identified in Raggi, or Giachetti’s greater governing experience. It’s very complex.”

Already, some of Ms. Raggi’s proposals, like encouraging the use of washable diapers to decrease garbage and a return to a barter system for low-income families, have raised eyebrows. Her opposition to bidding for the 2024 Olympics — which she said was not a priority given the problems Rome faces — brings howls of protest from those who see the Olympics as a financial boon.

Ms. Raggi has been accused of being controlled by the Milanese consulting firm that co-founded the movement, and her intense consultations with other elected members has been criticized as showing a lack of independence.

She bristles at the charge that she is under anyone’s thumb. Competence before nepotism has been the guiding light of her choices, she said, as she prepared her team of City Hall councilors.

“It’s positive to have the opinion of other competent people, who share your vision,” she said.


