


John Leguizamo has, in his own words, “a great therapist,” and a while back this estimable health care professional offered his intense patient some very solid advice: Get a hobby.

“Acting was my everything,” said Mr. Leguizamo, 51, who is a new addition to the cast of the Netflix series “Bloodline.” (Season two was released late last month.) He also stars with Bryan Cranston in the feature film “The Infiltrator,” to be released July 13. “But I need distractions, because show business is stressful, man. There’s a lot of stress and pressures and criticism.”

Eight years ago, Mr. Leguizamo came up with a surefire distraction: He would sell his brownstone on the Lower East Side and buy another one in the West Village. Then, with the wavering support of his wife, Justine, 47, who he said favors apartments with doormen, he would fix it up. Eventually, this led to an idea for yet another distraction: He would become the faithful caretaker of the 150-year-old (or thereabouts) wisteria with Medusa-like tendrils in the backyard.

“I have a special business technique,” Mr. Leguizamo explained. “I wouldn’t recommend it to everyone, but I buy high and sell low. I bought this place in 2008 right after the crash. Not after the prices went down, but before the prices went down.” No word on whether he sold his previous place using the same canny tactic.

The house had been cut up into apartments, but the Leguizamos, who have been together for almost 20 years and have two children — Allegra, 16, and Lucas, 15 — could see what it had been and what it could be. “It was so rococo. It had power, man, and it had presence,” Mr. Leguizamo said. “And it wasn’t too nouveau riche. We have a picture of the original owner, who looks like someone out of a Monopoly game, standing in front of the house, and he looks like a modestly rich stockbroker.”

He diligently studied coffee table books to get a sense of how houses of the period looked — “I wanted to respect the history,” he said — and because the property next door was a twin of his new acquisition, he went knocking. “The owner, this lovely British lady, was so kind and let us walk through every room and take photographs, and we were able to use them to restore our own house,” Mr. Leguizamo said. “It was archaeological, almost.”

Back at his place, chunks of molding were broken, railings and balusters from the once-elegant mahogany stairway had gone missing, and rooms had been haphazardly divided. Mr. Leguizamo, an impassioned student of the “The Franklin Report,” a directory of contractors, architects and other specialists, used it to assemble his dream team of artisans.

“I’m from Queens, baby, so you know I’m a negotiator,” he said. “I’m going to praise everyone for their great work. I’m going to say: ‘I love what you do; you’re a master craftsman. Can you do it for half the price?’ ”

Mr. Leguizamo’s delight in the finished product is palpable. He points to the salvaged door knobs and glass-paneled pocket doors, the radiators and the fireplaces.

There are alcoves for displaying his African and Native American art, and lots of wall space for showcasing the work of a high school classmate, the graffiti artist known as Crash. And there are many ways to show how well midcentury modern (Mr. Leguizamo’s chandeliers and Womb chairs, Ms. Leguizamo’s Platner chairs) looks in a house that’s anything but.

“I don’t like the look of something that’s hyper-designed,” Mr. Leguizamo said. “It looks impersonal, like you were trying to buy taste. I like keeping things I value. They may not look the best, but I like an eclectic look.”

You’ll likely find Mr. Leguizamo in one of three places — effectively three time zones. Try the second-floor room that he refers to as the orange parlor, which would make the original owners feel right at home. It’s got the brownstone’s only original fireplace (of Carrara marble), an antique arched floor mirror and three baronial English antique chairs that the philanthropist Jayne Wrightsman left behind in a Long Island house purchased years ago by Ms. Leguizamo’s family.

There’s the cavelike dining room, which has Venetian plastering in gunmetal gray (“so it’s got an arty, ’70s, rock ’n’ roll feeling,” Mr. Leguizamo said), a wall of gray acoustic curtains that doubles down on the dark theme, an Art Deco mirror and a fireplace with faux marbling. A slender library table that was suggested as a dining table by the couple’s interior designer, Jennifer Vaughn Miller, is Mr. Leguizamo’s special joy.

“Now, at dinner parties, you can have conversations with the people across from you, not just the people next to you, which you can’t do with a regular table,” he said. “And I love to have conversations. My daughter does her studying for the SATs at the table. My wife and I will sit there sometimes to talk about the family. It’s a great place for a meeting of the minds.”

When Mr. Leguizamo wants a meeting with only one mind — his — he retreats to a basement office. Thanks to a zebra-patterned cowhide rug and Eames molded plastic side chairs, it has a 1960s bachelor-pad vibe. On the wall are Playbills from Mr. Leguizamo’s celebrated one-man shows, “Mambo Mouth,” “Spic-o-Rama” and “Freak.”

Shelves are crammed with books and photographs. “I met Prince Charles and I called him ‘man,’ ” Mr. Leguizamo said, pointing to a photo that shows him in conversation with the Prince of Wales. “And then I said, ‘Dude, I mean sir. I mean Your Majesty. Oh, man, I’m so sorry.’ He was so charming and chill.”

From his office, Mr. Leguizamo can walk out to the backyard and gaze upon his much-loved wisteria. “When I moved in, everybody from the block association said: ‘Don’t cut it down. Please take care of it.’ And I was like, ‘Sure.’ I welcome any kind of responsibility. I hired an arborist to tell me what to do. I give it vitamins. I water it.”

When the boiler broke down some weeks back, Mr. Leguizamo made arrangements to have it replaced. Ms. Leguizamo, he reported, wanted to make arrangements to put the house on the market and move to an apartment.

“We’re like an urban version of that show ‘Green Acres,’ ” Mr. Leguizamo said with a laugh, referring to the 1960s sitcom about a city dweller who buys a farm, much to the displeasure of his chic wife.

“I’ve got my yard. I go out there to decompress and sit next to my wisteria. I planted hydrangea. I planted some variegated ivy. And I’ve got my house.”

He added: “It’s kind of narrow, so it’s kind of cozy. It’s not one of those I’m-here-to-impress-you houses. It’s more like an I’m-here-to-take-care-of-you house.”


