


Five bills will be introduced in the New York City Council on Wednesday that aim to tackle the problem of unregulated flophouses catering to addicts, people with mental illnesses and others who are trying to avoid homeless shelters.

The flophouses, known as “three-quarter” houses because they are seen as somewhere between regulated halfway houses and actual homes, have spread across the city in recent years and were the subject of an investigation by The New York Times last year.

The proposed legislation seeks to make obtaining stable housing easier for three-quarter-house residents and curb many of the problems in the industry.

The Times profiled one landlord, Yury Baumblit, who forced his tenants to go to certain providers of substance-abuse treatment and a medical clinic that then paid him Medicaid kickbacks, according to current and former residents and employees. The homes were crammed with bunk beds that blocked fire exits. Bedbugs, mice and mold flourished inside.

“To have 10 people cooped up in half a room is an abomination, and it doesn’t say that we care about these people,” said Councilman Donovan Richards Jr., a Democrat, who is the lead sponsor of one bill requiring more public information on the homes and a co-sponsor of the other bills. “The state and the city have not taken responsibility for this.”

After the initial article, the city formed an emergency task force to inspect the homes and move tenants out of dangerous dwellings. But dozens, if not hundreds, of homes still operate unregulated throughout the city, housing advocates say.

Last week, Mr. Baumblit and his wife were charged with Medicaid fraud and money laundering by the New York State attorney general’s Medicaid fraud control unit. The Baumblits face up to 15 years in prison on the felony charges.

The package of bills in the City Council, also sponsored by the Democrats Ritchie Torres, Corey Johnson and Jumaane D. Williams, aims to prohibit unscrupulous landlords from interfering with tenants’ medical treatment, which in theory would prevent landlords from requiring tenants to attend substance-abuse programs by specific providers or get physicals from certain doctors.

The bills would also try to improve tenants’ access to emergency relocation services, making it easier for them to obtain stable housing. And the legislation would require the agencies in the city’s task force to compile and report information publicly every three months about inspections of identified three-quarter homes, including the number of tenants and violations issued, and where any tenants are relocated.


