


Andrew Shaw and Curt Schilling insulted the gay and transgender community in recent days. But how they responded afterward suggests that one of them (Shaw) comprehends the ramifications of what he did, and the other (Schilling) does not.

Shaw, a Chicago Blackhawks forward, was suspended for Game 5 of his team’s playoff series against St. Louis on Thursday night for shouting an anti-gay slur after being sent to the penalty box during Tuesday’s game.

“I get it,” he said after being disciplined by the N.H.L. “It’s 2016 now. It’s time that everyone is treated equally.”

Schilling did not choose the road to contrition after he shared a post on Facebook that was an apparent response to the North Carolina law that bars transgender people from using bathrooms and locker rooms that do not correspond with their birth genders. On his blog, he snarled at “all of you out there who are just dying to be offended so you can create some sort of faux cause to rally behind.”

When he shared the message on social media earlier this week, he did not seem to grasp that he had implicitly endorsed it, especially after he added a comment about which public restrooms are appropriate for men and which are not. He is a public figure with a well-developed online profile as a political conservative and Second Amendment supporter who, by the way, was a terrific pitcher over a 20-season career. His propensity for living on the third rail of social media was at odds with ESPN’s internal policy that cautions its workers to be prudent.

But by Wednesday, ESPN had had enough of him and fired him from his job as an analyst on “Monday Night Baseball.” He had been sent there from his previous, more prestigious position on Sunday night games, for retweeting a message last summer about extreme Muslims and Nazis, which earned him a monthlong suspension.

In firing him, ESPN shed itself of a nuisance who did not, or could not, follow corporate policy and could not grasp that passing around an anti-transgender message digitally might affect people who are finding their way to new gender identities. Crass words and visuals hurt.

We are in a moment when tolerance exists side-by-side with intolerance. Same-sex marriage is widely accepted, but North Carolina enacts its bathroom law. Advocacy groups like the You Can Play Project and Athlete Ally fight homophobia in sports, yet players still utter anti-gay slurs in the heat of the moment — and after the sweat dries, they say their spontaneous exhortations do not represent who they are.

“It’s not just athletic language, but in the continued images we see from Hollywood,” said Cyd Zeigler, the co-founder of Outsports.com, a website focused on the intersection of sports and issues for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. “The openly gay characters singing on ‘Glee,’ and in ‘The Real O’Neals,’ the one gay kid who doesn’t know what a basketball is. Hollywood pushes those images as stereotypes so — big shocker — our youth coaches use anti-gay language to motivate kids.”

Leagues have been disciplining players for using anti-gay slurs that not too long ago were acceptable language. In 2011, Kobe Bryant was fined $100,000 for using a familiar slur against a referee. Rajon Rondo got a one-game suspension for directing the same word at a referee who subsequently outed himself.

In a most peculiar manifestation of the use of the slur, Toronto Blue Jays shortstop Yunel Escobar took the field with the word written in Spanish in his eyeblack. His explanation underscored how widespread the slur had become: It was now part of everyday clubhouse chatter. “That’s a word used often within teams. It’s a word without meaning, the way we use it.”

But, of course, the language of bias is as hurtful as it is unnecessary.

So for Jamie Neal, a transgender sports blogger in Las Vegas, the punishments of Schilling and Shaw made for a satisfying Wednesday.

“I was proud of ESPN,” she told me by telephone Thursday. “I’ve watched ESPN since I was a kid. I was proud that they stood on the right side of history.” And, she said about the N.H.L., “If they had let Shaw off without a penalty or fine, then having joined up with the You Can Play project would have all been lip service.” You Can Play has been working with the N.H.L. and its players’ union since 2013.

Neal has been dealing with insults from Schilling’s allies on Twitter since she criticized the anti-transgender message he shared (which featured an overweight man in a wig and women’s clothing with his top cut out to show his breasts). Schilling answered her, writing: “all you clowns just dying to be offended, that’s not my post. Find another fake grievance to be offended by.” Neal said that his response jolted her.

“He called our entire group clowns,” she said. “But I’m part of this group, and you can call me a clown and tell me that I should or shouldn’t be offended. But he doesn’t know my struggles, and I don’t know anything about him.”

She added, “It was frustrating to see from a personal perspective, that someone I’ve rooted for in the past had such a vile disposition about me and people like me without knowing anything about me other than that I’ve transitioned.”


