


Bronwen Dickey’s book, “Pit Bull: The Battle Over an American Icon,” should give pause to anyone who thinks that Americans love dogs. Many of us do, of course, but as she shows, we love some dogs sometimes. We are terrified of others. And reason and facts may not play much of a role in directing our affections. (Read an excerpt.)

Pit bulls are familiar demons, and there have been campaigns by those who love the dogs to change their bad reputation. So the territory the book covers may be familiar in outline. But the case that the dogs don’t deserve to be seen as monsters lies largely in the details. And Ms. Dickey not only writes about the ebb and flow of public fear and loathing, she takes the reader on a thoroughly comprehensible tour of genetics and behavioral science to explain why breeding never guarantees an individual dog’s personality, and shouldn’t be used to condemn it.

Pit bulls were far from the first dog to wear the Cujo mantle. And among the several episodes of mania she writes about, none was half as weird as the spitz rabies panic of the 1870s.

The spitz is a small dog that looks a bit like a husky. At the time of the panic, the breed name was used loosely, she writes, “and it included what we know as the Pomeranian.” At the time doctors had no idea that rabies was transmitted by a virus in an infected animal’s saliva, and some thought that certain breeds spread the illness. So they called for restrictions or bans on the spitz, which was common in New York City, and connected to rabies cases there. On Nov. 17, 1876, an editorial in The New York Times stated, “There are but four venomous beasts among the fauna of the United States. These are the rattlesnake, the copperhead, the moccasin, and the Spitz dog, and of the four, the latter is by far the most aggressive and deadly in its hostility to man.”

Based on this and other accounts, Ms. Dickey writes: “The most unsettling aspect of the 1870s spitz panic is that Americans seemed to take so much pleasure in it. The act of hating both the dogs and the people who owned them energized large swaths of the populace.”

The spitz, of course, is no more venomous than the toy poodle, and no more likely to carry rabies.

The pit bull does, of course, have a heritage that disturbs many people. It is descended from fighting dogs, bred for a bloody and cruel sport that was considered all the more horrendous because it was seen as low class.

But as dog fighting was outlawed, pit bulls became popular pets. From the Civil War onward, they were considered beloved family members and guard dogs. They were praised as cheerful and reliable, as lovable as they were courageous.

Helen Keller loved hers. James Thurber wrote of his passion for Rex. Teddy Roosevelt was a fan. And, of course, the dog that ran with “The Little Rascals” was a pit bull.

Starting in the 1970s, stories about the dangers of pit bulls began to proliferate, many of them simply wrong, and many of them mistaken about the breed involved in incidents. Dog fighting resurfaced, and stories spread about the toughness and strength of pit bulls, some with no basis in fact, like the assertion that a pit bull bite exerts 740 pounds of pressure per square inch, more than any other dog. Ms. Dickey finds no credible source for this number. Most recent research shows that the maximum force of a bite is related to the size of the dog alone.

Ms. Dickey’s research and reporting are exhaustive, and the book does sometimes get sluggish with details, but it is this work that makes her convincing when she argues that the dogs are more victims than monsters.

Pit bulls have, of course, attacked other dogs, as well as people. But Ms. Dickey argues that the idea that the breed is more dangerous than others is weakly supported by facts. Data on dog bites are unreliable because people are notoriously unreliable at identifying dog breeds. Furthermore, only some of the dogs within a given breed behave the way they’re supposed to. Not all herders herd; not all guard dogs guard. Breeds are not different species; their genetics are often messy. And most pit bulls now come from lines that had been bred to be pets, not fighters, for many years.

She finds that pit bulls are still scorned because it is often poor people who own them. And she writes about dogs that have been killed because of cities that have banned the breed. The book includes a small but disturbing photo of a pile of dead pit bulls killed in 2006 because of what amounted to a ban on the breed in Denver.

Dogs do bite. About 35 people are killed by dogs — all dogs — each year in the United States, she notes, and children are the most frequent victims. She writes that the best safety measures are close supervision of children and dogs, laws against dogs running free, compulsory licensing and vaccinations and education.

But, she argues, picking out one breed to blame is neither warranted nor effective, and a reader of her book will be hard put to disagree.


