


LONDON — The British government presented its plans for the future of the British Broadcasting Corporation on Thursday, urging the publicly funded broadcaster to be more “distinctive” in its programming, while transforming and consolidating how the BBC is governed.

The government, preoccupied by a coming referendum on Britain’s membership in the European Union and wary of further fights with Parliament, pulled back from radical changes like influencing BBC programming, though the changes in how the BBC is overseen are a delicate topic, given its strong tradition of editorial independence.

In a move that seemed intended to assuage concerns about political interference, the new charter for the BBC would take effect in January and last 11 years, instead of the current 10, so that the cycle for renewing it will not coincide with the five-year national election cycle.

The proposed charter, as presented to Parliament by the culture secretary, John Whittingdale, secures the BBC’s funding through the next charter and allows the license fee paid by most British households, frozen at 145.50 pounds a year, about $210, to rise with inflation. The BBC now gets about £3.72 billion a year from the fee and receives £1.3 billion in commercial and other income.

The new charter also aims to close a loophole, requiring those who watch television programs after broadcast only on their computers, smartphones or tablets to also pay the license fee.

Mr. Whittingdale, concerned about the impact of the huge BBC on the commercial market, has put a requirement to provide “distinctive” content into the broadcaster’s core mission to “inform, educate and entertain.” It will also highlight the requirement for the BBC to be “impartial” while promising to maintain its independence.

The new mission statement will read, “To act in the public interest, serving all audiences with impartial, high-quality, and distinctive media content and services that inform, educate and entertain.”

The power of the BBC is immense and the government “is emphatically not saying that the BBC should not be popular,” Mr. Whittingdale said.

“With a 33 percent share in television, a 53 percent share in radio and the third most popular U.K. website — and with only 27 percent of people believing that the BBC makes lots of programs that are more daring and innovative than other broadcasters,” he said, editors should ask themselves whether new programs “are sufficiently innovative and high-quality,” and not just, “How will it do in the ratings?”

The government will also require the BBC to disclose the salaries of its highest-paid talent if they receive more than £450,000 a year, which is the current salary of the director general, Tony Hall, and to do more to ensure diversity of programs and hiring.

The most important change will be in how the BBC is governed.

The current structure, with internal management overseen by the BBC Trust, with members appointed by the government, is flawed, having to act as both cheerleader and regulator but without editorial control, and will be scrapped.

Instead, the government proposes a unitary BBC board of 14 members, including nonexecutive members, responsible for budget, content and editorial decisions. After squabbles about independence, the BBC would name at least half the 14 members and the government no more than six.

The government is insisting that the current head of the BBC Trust, Rona Fairhead, lead the new board at least through her current contract, which runs through October 2018.

But for the first time, the BBC will be regulated by Ofcom, the body that regulates the telecommunications industry, from phones and radio licenses to the Internet and the post office.

And the BBC will be audited by the National Audit Office, which audits most public institutions.

The BBC, though largely supportive of the proposed charter, said in a statement that it still had concerns. Those include how the BBC should be audited, and the new unitary board appointed.

Mr. Hall, the director general, said: “We have an honest disagreement with the government on this. I do not believe that the appointments proposals for the new unitary board are yet right.”

“It is vital for the future of the BBC that its independence is fully preserved,” he added.

The opposition Labour Party accused Mr. Whittingdale of “ideologically driven meddling,” and said his proposals were “totally out of step with the license-fee payers who value and support the BBC.”

The publication of the white paper will be followed by further debate in Parliament and outside and could be amended, but the charter does not require a vote of Parliament and is meant to be ready to replace the old charter that runs out at the end of the year.


