


The Yale basketball player who was expelled in February after a university committee found that he had raped a fellow student sued the university on Thursday, accusing it of a “deeply flawed process.”

In the lawsuit and an accompanying statement released by a public-relations firm, the player, Jack Montague, who was once the team captain, suggested that Yale had chosen to make an example of him because of public criticism over its handling of the hot-button issue of campus sexual assault.

“Montague — captain of Yale’s basketball team and one of the most prominent male students on campus — was Yale’s ticket to restoring its tarnished image,” the statement charged.

The complaint, filed in federal court in Connecticut, named Yale and two Title IX coordinators as defendants.

“The lawsuit is factually inaccurate and legally baseless, and Yale will offer a vigorous defense,” a Yale spokesman said in a statement.

Montague, 22, was a guard who, until his expulsion in February, had helped the Bulldogs to an especially accomplished season that culminated a month later in the Ivy League title and the team’s first appearance in the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament since 1962. (Yale upset Baylor in the first round before losing to Duke.)

Montague’s expulsion, which originally had been presented only as his departure from the team, gained attention in part because his teammates showed solidarity with him, at one point wearing shirts before a game bearing his nickname. That episode prompted anger at the team on campus, with critics accusing it of furthering “rape culture.”

Yale Coach James Jones, who, according to the lawsuit, was Montague’s sole representative at the disciplinary hearing that led to his expulsion, has tended to stick up for Montague, telling ESPN after the team clinched its tournament berth in March, “He’s a great young man, and we love him.”

The team subsequently released a statement saying that it “supports a healthy, safe and respectful campus climate where all students can flourish.”

The subject of campus sexual assault received new national prominence five years ago when the Department of Education’s Office of Civil Rights highlighted the applicability of Title IX, the federal law mandating gender equity in higher education, to sexual violence. Some of the national discourse since then has focused attention on whether athletes in prominent sports receive more lenient treatment.

As the complaint noted, the conversation on campus sexual assault has been particularly contentious at Yale. Last year, a study by the Association of American Universities found that nearly one in four undergraduate women at a large group of leading universities said they had been sexually assaulted — and pegged Yale’s rates as higher than the average found at the 27 colleges.

In part, the lawsuit reiterated a statement from Montague’s lawyer in March, when he asserted that Montague and his accuser, a woman whose name has not been made public, had had a prior sexual relationship that included one instance of consensual intercourse, and that she later returned to Montague’s bedroom with him on the evening in October 2014 when she said the assault had occurred.

The accuser said that she did not consent to sexual intercourse, tried to communicate this verbally and, according to an impartial fact-finder, “pushed him, but not very forcefully,” the complaint said.

Montague, who had several drinks that night, was not aware that the woman did not consent, according to the complaint.

The lawsuit also cited several instances in which it said Yale undergraduates had been found responsible of sexual misconduct by the university’s committee but had not been expelled.

It also laid out a narrative in which the accuser had been pressured to cooperate with a formal complaint — filed on her behalf by one of the Title IX coordinators also being sued — after being misled, according to Montague’s lawyers, into believing that she had not been the first student to accuse Montague of sexual assault.

In fact, the lawsuit said, that understanding had been based on a previous incident in which Montague was disciplined for sexual harassment related to an incident during his freshman year. Not only should that incident not have been adjudged as sexual harassment, the complaint said, it also should not have had any bearing on the current case and should not have been revealed to the accuser.

The dean who eventually confirmed the committee’s decision to expel Montague also misunderstood Montague’s history, the complaint said.

“Yale targeted and ultimately expelled Mr. Montague in order to make a public example of a prominent male figure on campus and demonstrate that, contrary to the opinions of Yale’s internal and external critics, the university is indeed tough on men who ‘victimize’ female students,” the lawsuit said.

Charging breach of contract and defamation, Montague is seeking reinstatement to Yale — he was expelled a few months before he was expected to graduate — or the reopening of the disciplinary proceedings, as well as damages.


