


LONDON — While Zinedine Zidane will always be associated with being one of the most majestic players of Real Madrid’s long and beautiful history, he has now demonstrated that as a coach, he is prepared to organize pragmatic defenses to stay in the game.

And because he is Zidane, he might not lose his job as a consequence of that negative method of play.

Playing without Cristiano Ronaldo, who was out with a thigh injury, and with Karim Benzema fit for only half the game, Real Madrid shut up shop and played out a 0-0 tie at Manchester City on Tuesday. This was only the ninth goalless game involving Madrid in European competition since it won the initial European Cup (now the Champions League) 60 years ago.

Goalless but not guileless, the game was governed by fear on both sides. Fear of conceding a goal and fear of committing players into forward positions to score.

It takes two sides to contrive a stalemate that borders on soulless disregard for spectacle. Zidane declared himself happy with the result; so did Manuel Pellegrini, a former Real Madrid coach now attempting to take Manchester all the way to the final before he relinquishes his job to the next City manager, Pep Guardiola.

The players complied. “We have to be smart,” Madrid’s other star attacker, Gareth Bale, had said on the eve of the contest. “We must not go for the kill straightaway.”

The kill? No player on either side attempted anything so rash in the 90 minutes — or 93 minutes, given that City’s one shot on target came in the third and final minute of time added on for stoppages at the end.

What Bale meant, and what Zidane and his coaching team drummed into the players, was that Madrid must not dare to presume that it could get away with the same offensive approach that it attempted in Germany in its quarterfinal against Wolfsburg. Madrid lost that game 2-0, and it took a Ronaldo hat trick, one of his best, to turn the situation around in the second leg.

On the eve of the game in Manchester, Ronaldo had practiced and Zidane had described him as ready for action. “Cristiano felt something after that last training session,” Zidane said following Tuesday’s game. “We didn’t want to gamble with his fitness.”

And perhaps, though it was never spelled out, Madrid felt more comfortable going for a negative result in which every man on the team was prepared to defend like a soldier on guard duty. The player Madrid feared, Sergio Agüero, was barely given an inch of space the whole night and was crowded out, by means both fair and foul.

Both Pepe and Sergio Ramos went to the extreme with their kicks around the ankles of Agüero and Kevin De Bruyne. But City adopted no less physical methods, and it was particularly fortunate that Cuneyt Cakir, the otherwise excellent referee, failed to give a penalty and a red card to Manchester’s captain, Vincent Kompany, when he hauled down Bale late in the game.

By that time, Madrid was in the ascendancy. Its game plan, which subdued City and quieted the crowd, was to score, if it could, an away goal.

Madrid came close twice, off corner kicks, but both times, Joe Hart, the Manchester City goalkeeper, got his body in the way of what looked like certain goals that would let Madrid steal a victory. The second of those, when Pepe had the goal seemingly at his mercy from barely four yards out, was saved by Hart’s chest.

In truth, it was goalkeeper’s head and heart that denied the chance, as Hart was determined to smother the opportunity and block Pepe’s scuffed shot at point-blank range.

“We’ve set it up for a good old-fashioned rumble in the Bernabéu,” Real’s stadium in Madrid, Hart said on television.

His captain, back in the defense after a season ruined by recurring calf injuries, went further. “Nil-nil is a very dangerous score,” Kompany insisted. “From the moment we score in Madrid, it will be a different game. It’s too close to call.”

Contentment, it seems, is mutual. Zidane, the great showman of skilled attacking play, took pride in the pragmatic way that his men had blanked City. Pellegrini, now a professor of the Beautiful Game though he once was a defensive player, sounded similarly pleased.

The game of two legs has been reduced to one game. Manchester City believes its form has been better away than at home during European play, but after losing playmaker David Silva to another hamstring injury during the first half, it will need to find creativity from somewhere or someone.

Madrid pins its hopes, as always, on Ronaldo playing at home. Manchester will work on the fitness of Yaya Touré, the giant midfield player who missed the game Tuesday.

At some stage, one or both teams has to let go of the safety rail and go for the win, unless they are content with their chance to win on penalty kicks.

This is not the Real Madrid style, and certainly was not Zidane’s in the past. “It was 50-50 before the start,” Zidane concluded Tuesday. “It’s 50-50 now, so I’m happy with that.”


