


Before Alexander Wang declared athleisure “the uniform now” and leggings became the new jeans, casual clothing meant American sportswear. The look was relaxed, a little preppy and only loosely athletic — think Jordan Baker in “The Great Gatsby” or Diane Keaton in “Annie Hall.” “America just killed that,” says the designer Cate Holstein, 32. “Ralph Lauren, Donna Karan — they used to just lead the way.” But now, says Holstein, “there’s a need for a newer, fresher perspective.”

Holstein hopes that her new label, Khaite, which launches exclusively with The Line next week, will answer this need. Grounded in clean-lined basics, the designer’s fall collection is elevated by subtle contrasts: Airy crepe blouses and dresses are cut in long, masculine silhouettes; sporty, cropped knits are made from a rich, felted cashmere. The clothing has “a strong, feminine perspective,” says Holstein, but “doesn’t go girly or precious or pretty.” A muted color palette of buttery cream, hunter green, deep navy and crisp white evokes ‘90s-era Gap (where Holstein designed knitwear in her 20s), and makes for deceptively simple pieces punctuated by eccentric accents like oversize velvet bows, woven necklines and extra-long sleeves.

These and other details — double-needle stitching, fabric-covered buttons — may pop, but as Holstein says, “the feeling I’m going for, it comes from the materials.” As a result, the creative process behind Khaite is a collective one: “I essentially consider myself a filter,” she says, “the textile designers are the real artists in this equation.” For the upcoming collection, Holstein homed in on a few key fabrics: satin-backed crepe (with “just a little bit of shine”) a drapey twill and felted cashmere. These textures, she recalls, made her think: “I want to build the world around these.”

When talking about Khaite, Holstein’s focus on material makes her sound less like an auteur and more like an industry wonk — an effect that is emphasized by her near-obsessive knowledge of fiber sourcing, fit testing and different wash processes. To create a thick, ultra-soft cashmere, “I have the factory boil it much more than they were really willing to do,” she laughs, “I really kind of forced them into it.” She also makes monthly trips to LA to observe the denim sanding process, which the workers now refer to as “Khaite sanding.” “I’m very hands on with our washes,” she says. “I sit in the factory.”

Holstein’s attention to denim — which she expects to lead the brand — goes well beyond the factory walls. A self-described “jeans junkie,” the designer and her team (she has one devoted entirely to denim) have spent years in pursuit of the perfect pair. The three resulting styles have a structured, vintage feel that’s softened by feminine details: high waistlines and delicate brass-and-lacquer buttons. In the current terrain of over-processed, shredded denim, Holstein hopes to offer a more wearable option that women of all ages will feel comfortable in. The classic design is meant to “hit this spot of nostalgia,” but it also nods to contemporary tastes: each pair contains 2 percent elastane, because, she says, “I don’t think women are ready to give up stretch yet.”


