


A torrent of online reaction followed the release on Friday of federal guidance to public school districts in the United States that for the first time addresses how they should enforce the rights of transgender students.

The joint directive from the Department of Justice and the Department of Education says that schools must allow students to use bathrooms based on their gender identity and touches on issues including housing, locker rooms, pronouns and gender references on identity documents.

The measure, which is the Obama administration’s latest to address the civil rights of gays, lesbians, bisexual and transgender people, has attracted both criticism and support, much of it reflecting bipartisan lines.

Representative Steve King, a Republican from Iowa, said the directive was “executive overreach.” He told CSPAN: “And it’s a topic we’re likely to bring up in a future hearing before the task force that I chair.”

In Texas, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick told superintendents not to enact the directives: “We will not be blackmailed.”

Rodney Cavness, a school superintendent in Port Neches, Tex., told 12 News: “He ain’t my president and he can’t tell me what to do. That letter is going straight to the paper shredder. I have five daughters myself and I have 2,500 girls in my protection. Their moms and dads expect me to protect them.”

Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader, said on Twitter: “Thank you @USEDGov for standing up for transgender students by ensuring all students feel welcome and safe!”

Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, said on the “Today” show that he did not believe it was an issue for the federal government.

“Let the states decide. I think it’s much better as a local issue. I don’t think it’s a federal issue where the federal government gets involved. And I see what’s happening. It’s become such a big situation. Everybody has to be protected and I feel strongly about that but you’re talking about a tiny, tiny group of population.”

Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina, who has sued the Justice Department in a dispute over public restroom access, said the executive branch “does not have the authority to be the final arbiter” on bathrooms, Colin Campbell, a reporter in North Carolina, wrote on Twitter quoting a copy of the governor’s statement.

The key word “transgender” was trending on Twitter. It had been tweeted more than 44,000 times from early Friday morning until about noon, according to Dataminr data.

Mark Ruffalo, the Oscar winning actor, praised the move.

The Transgender Law Center’s executive director, Kris Hayashi, expressed gratitude: “Transgender students, like all students, just want to be able to go to school, be with their friends, and get an education without having to worry about being singled out and made to feel different.”

Thousands of people wrote in response to the new directives in comments on The New York Times’s Facebook page and on NYTimes.com.

“Regardless of the transgender issue, I have a problem with the President being able to authorize the ‘loss of federal aid’ to government bodies that behave contrary to his wishes,” wrote Christian Miller of Saratoga, Calif.

“Thank you to the Obama administration for taking a stand against bigots and bullies. Children need support, love and understanding. For Trans kids this is a vulnerable age. We don’t need any more tragic deaths,” wrote Michelle Franca on Facebook.

“It is not legal for the president to order there to be discrimination in public schools. If transgender people can choose their preferred bathroom regardless of their gender, then the same should apply to everyone who is not transgendered. Obama gets another one wrong,” Chris Palsz wrote.

“I hope they sue the administration WHEN, not IF a case of sexual assault/voyeurism occurs. Children’s rights and safety trump political correctness! The common sense thing to do is create another bathroom for whatever the heck a transwhatever identifies as, not let them go in the girls/boys bathrooms,” Driena Sixto wrote.


