


OAKLAND, Calif. — Jason Terry had learned enough from 114 career playoff games and had seen enough in 17 N.B.A. seasons to know that his teammates could use a motivational boost against the Golden State Warriors. More than anything, he realized that he and his teammates had nothing to lose — nothing, that is, except another game.

And so, with the Rockets’ dysfunctional season teetering on a cliff before Wednesday’s Game 5 in their first-round playoff series against the Warriors, Terry broke the emergency glass and guaranteed that the Rockets would win to prolong the series, if only for a couple of days. They were just words, of course, but Terry could only hope that they resonated.

Instead, like so much else for the Rockets, whose season bore more than a vague resemblance to a late-night telenovela, Terry’s guarantee had as much life and lift as an anvil. It was not going to make a difference, not with this collection of misfits and certainly not against a team as cohesive as the Warriors.

“I’m the super motivator,” Terry said Wednesday night. “That’s been my M.O. throughout my career. It just didn’t hit home with this group.”

The gulf between these two teams was almost alarming. Just one season removed from the Western Conference finals, the Rockets floundered for months. It was merely more of the same against the Warriors, whose 114-81 victory clinched a lopsided series and, perhaps just as important, ended their opponents’ suffering.

Afterward, in a quiet visiting locker room at Oracle Arena, James Harden alluded to the Rockets’ having had “too many distractions.” Dwight Howard mumbled something about “ups and downs.” Terry, on the other hand, cut straight through the static and pointed to the frayed partnership between Harden and Howard, who had most likely played his final game with the Rockets.

“They just couldn’t coexist to have success this year,” Terry said. “Chemistry was a big issue for us all year long. We just didn’t have it.”

Chemistry can be a nebulous, over-cited concept in pro sports, but Terry is a believer. And he could see the difference between the Rockets and the Warriors, especially given how the Warriors had compensated for the absence of the best player on the planet. Nothing changed. They looked like the same team that had won 73 games during the regular season.

“That team over there is truly an example of team,” Terry said. “They all play well together. Someone’s down? Someone else steps up.”

The Warriors played terrific basketball without Stephen Curry in the series’s final two games. In fact, after Curry sprained his right knee at the end of the first half of Sunday’s Game 4, the Warriors went on to outscore the Rockets by 60 points for the remainder of the series. On Wednesday, the Warriors led by 17 points after the first quarter. It was never close.

This should all come with a huge caveat, of course: The Warriors were playing the Rockets, whose mere presence in the playoffs seemed to defy both logic and good taste. And Golden State needs Curry as it moves forward. Perhaps not so much against the overachieving Portland Trail Blazers or the injury-ravaged Los Angeles Clippers, who are still vying to advance out of the first round for the right to face the Warriors in the conference semifinals. But the Oklahoma City Thunder and the San Antonio Spurs loom on the same side of the bracket.

“We do feel confident that we can win games without him,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said of Curry, “but we don’t really want to have to. So hopefully Steph will be back soon.”

Kerr added: “We just don’t have the fireworks that Steph provides. So we’ve got to make sure we’re more solid, which we have been the last couple games in particular. But it’s good for our guys’ confidence. I think what pleases me the most is literally every single guy on our roster contributed during this series.”

One of those key contributors was Shaun Livingston, an unflappable point guard who scored 16 points in each of his three starts in Curry’s absence — first when Curry missed two games in the middle of the series with an ankle sprain, and later when Curry hurt his knee. Livingston is almost serene on the court. Little affects him, and it is a luxury for the Warriors to have someone who can so capably help fill the void. (The Warriors announced Monday that Curry would be re-evaluated in two weeks.)

“We are blessed,” Kerr said. “We are really lucky. You lose your point guard, you lose the M.V.P, and to be able to put Shaun Livingston out there? He’s a fantastic basketball player.”

At about the same time, not far from where Kerr was speaking, Terry was circling back to the notion that it helps when teammates actually like each other, that there needs to be a “tightknit bond” for players to achieve something special. That was clearly the case for the Warriors last season when they won the championship. And it appears to be happening again.

Consider their willingness to share, a grade-school concept that still applies to millionaires in the N.B.A. In five games against the Rockets, the Warriors assisted on 70.6 percent of their field goals. The Rockets, by comparison, assisted on 54.5 percent of their field goals.

“Move the ball,” the Warriors’ Draymond Green said, “because it just creates rhythm. Even if you don’t shoot, just touching it and moving it on creates rhythm for everyone.”

Without their top player, for now if not forever, the Warriors are continuing to play the only way they know how: together. It might just be enough.


