


As the horrors of the shootings in Orlando continue to dominate the presidential race, the Clinton campaign is beginning its advertising campaign for the general election on Thursday morning with new ads offering an optimistic message.

Themes of togetherness, unity and family dominate Mrs. Clinton’s ads, part of an eight-figure, six-week initial buy, with a particular emphasis on her record of working for families and children.

The first of the ads, a 60-second spot titled “Always,” serves as a biographical introduction and a platform for her work with families. Mrs. Clinton, the ad says, is “one of the most recognizable women in the world, but less well known are the causes that have been at the center of her life.”

The ad describes her work as a private lawyer, as the first lady working for children’s health care and as secretary of state fighting human trafficking.

The second ad, a 30-second spot titled “Quiet Moments,” focuses more on her work with children, with a narrator saying at one point, “It’s always been about kids.”

Both ads make Mrs. Clinton’s work as first lady central to their argument, in particular her effort to get the Children’s Health Insurance Program passed by Congress.

Mrs. Clinton’s campaign had already released on 60-second ad over the weekend, titled “Who We Are,” that focuses mostly on Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, and on calls for unity.

The Clinton campaign’s early and aggressive advertising buy suggests it is confident that it can either build on or establish early leads over Mr. Trump.

The initial campaign is spread across eight battleground states: Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio and Virginia — the same eight states where Priorities USA, a super PAC that supports Mrs. Clinton, has spent about $9 million on negative ads against Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump has not countered with his own ads so far, and the only super PAC support he has is a national cable advertising buy from the Rebuilding America PAC.


