


In the ballet world, pregnancy is no longer the secret that a dancer has to hide from the boss. It’s no longer a potential career-ender. But the question remains: How hard is it for a new mother to turn back into a ballerina?

The experience is different for every dancer, but in the case of Maria Kowroski, the statuesque New York City Ballet principal, it’s been humbling. Ms. Kowroski, who had a son with her husband, the actor and former dancer Martin Harvey, in November, has been dealing with a chronic ankle injury, along with the usual physical issues — depleted muscles, less stamina and a loss of strength. “After I gave birth, I did nothing for six weeks and I literally felt like mush,” said Ms. Kowroski, who gained 35 pounds during her pregnancy and took the barre portion of ballet class until a couple of weeks before her due date. “I’ve never felt my legs like that before.”

She’s still working up the confidence to dance her first ballet on point. (That will likely come when the company performs in Paris at the end of June.) But for Ms. Kowroski, whose comeback performance took place on May 10 in George Balanchine’s “Vienna Waltzes,” there’s a new factor in the mix: the emotional pull of her son, Dylan, which made her wonder if she ever wanted to dance again. “I was so happy watching him change and grow every day,” she said in mid-April. “I don’t want to miss anything. I don’t want to have anyone else watch him. What is ballet? What do I do for a living?”

Her existential crisis made her laugh. Ms. Kowroski, 39, has been sucked into motherhood — happily so. But ballerinas like Julie Kent, Alessandra Ferri and Jenifer Ringer (whom she has relied on for advice) have proven it’s possible to succeed at both. As Ms. Ringer noted, “I almost feel like it freed me up to love dancing even more.”

Beginning in early February, I followed Ms. Kowroski’s progress from ballet class to private Gyrotonic sessions and her return to the stage. Her work is far from over. “There is the fear that maybe I won’t do the parts as well,” she said. “Maybe my legs won’t go up as high. Maybe I’m going to look old. I want to bring something new to everything, too. I do feel like a different person. I am a different person. I’m a mom.”

Big eyes, big hands, big feet. Ms. Kowroski took it slow as she raised her feet to relevé and scrutinized herself in the mirror at Ballet Arts, biting a lip when she couldn’t maintain balance. After, at Studio Spiratis for Gyrotonic training (a movement system for balancing and realigning the body), Emily Smith, her instructor, asked her how far she had gotten in class that morning. “I did the center,” Ms. Kowroski said, referring to the adagio portion. “Very horribly.” Everything is harder when you’re as tall as Ms. Kowroski, who, at 5 feet 9 inches, is flexible and loose — which can be a problem in maintaining strength. “I’m really noticing how long my legs are now, because they feel really heavy. I put on my point shoes and I was like, oh my God, I’m so tall! The ground is so far away.”

Ms. Kowroski is hoping to use her time offstage as a way to rehabilitate her right ankle, which bothered her long before her pregnancy. It is stronger, but she’s still having difficulty. After a class with her longtime teacher Wilhelm Burmann at Steps on Broadway, Ms. Kowroski returned to the theater to work by herself on point when she heard a pop. At first she hoped that she had cracked her ankle back into place — it had been feeling jammed — but then it started to swell. Instead of panicking, she took it easy. “I think the difference is my mentality of being an older dancer,” she said. “I didn’t want to freak out.”

After about three days, her ankle stopped aching. At her apartment, as Dylan played nearby, Ms. Kowroski said: “As long as I don’t have any more setbacks, I should be fine. I feel like my strength is getting better. I put on my point shoes in class, I’ve been jumping a little bit. Jumping is just so hard. It’s not my thing. I’m not an Ashley Bouder.”

Ms. Bouder, a fellow City Ballet principal who recently had a baby girl, has posted videos of herself knocking off fouettés while pregnant. Ms. Bouder is the Olympian of ballerinas. But when Ms. Kowroski performed during her pregnancy, up until her fourth month, something more mysterious happened: layers of tension melted away as she danced with strength and control but was also utterly free. “There was something so amazing about dancing pregnant,” she said. “One great thing was, in the beginning nobody knew, so I had this little secret of I’m dancing with a baby growing inside of me.”

And that feeling of transformation continued even after she spread the word. “It was almost like I felt like I could do no wrong,” Ms. Kowroski continued. “This is going to sound weird, but it almost felt like there was a glow inside of me.”

Ms. Kowroski pinched her ankle in mid-April; toward the end of the month, she returned to Mr. Burmann’s rigorous class. “She is almost there,” he said. “She is ready physically. Is she mentally ready?” But after it soon happened again, Ms. Kowroski made a decision to have an M.R.I. Ever since she had foot surgery in 1996 to remove an extra bone, she has experienced many sprains and now has loose ligaments. The injury had plagued her for years, and she wanted to know the worst.

On the evening of her comeback, Ms. Kowroski still hadn’t seen the results of her M.R.I., even though they were available. “Do I find out before I go onstage?” she asked. “I don’t think that’s so smart.”

All the same, she was in a good mood. (She would soon learn that the M.R.I. revealed only cartilage damage; surgery was not necessary.) Seated in front of her dressing room mirror at the David H. Koch Theater, Ms. Kowroski laughed at her reflection. “A ponytail is an instant face-lift,” she said. “Wow, I look younger.”

Because she had rehearsal until 5:30 p.m., there wasn’t time to go home to see her son before returning for that evening’s performance of “Vienna Waltzes.” She meditated and plotted her course to warm-up during the program’s second ballet. Sometimes a costume can mean the difference between a good and bad show. The rehearsal dress, she discovered, was heavier than the one used in performance. When she first wore the actual costume, “it was really light and it just felt strange. I’m probably going to put it on and work with it because” — her voice lowered to a whisper — “it was kind of a disaster.” During the rehearsal, she flashed too much leg. “Not good,” she said.

“I’m all emotional,” she said, fanning her eyes. “Everything floods back.”

In the “Rosenkavalier” finale of “Vienna Waltzes,” the ballerina crosses the stage slowly in a long white gown. When Ms. Kowroski stepped onstage, she cut a fragile, vulnerable figure. She could feel that, too. “It was dark,” she said. “I was like, I can’t believe I’m out here by myself and that I do this for a living and there are people watching me right now. Sometimes it hits you.”

She later continued: “I’ve danced my whole life, but it was so weird. I didn’t really feel like a ballerina. I felt I was returning home, but at the same time I felt so different. I don’t even know why I was overcome with emotion. I didn’t know what was coming out of me.”


