


A linebacker for the Green Bay Packers understood exactly why we love the enduring, family-run Italian restaurant. The October 1974 issue of Esquire magazine included a feature on where N.F.L. players liked to eat, in which that linebacker, Jim Carter, gave this description of a Chicago favorite: “Food keeps coming, and they’re insulted if you don’t eat everything — or spend less than three hours on a meal.”

Happily, four decades later, restaurants like that still exist in Westchester County, not as dusty relics, but as welcoming redoubts where the table is yours for as long as you want, portions are plentiful and having a good time is pretty much a sure thing. Here are three of the best.

I was sitting at the bar at Sam’s a few weeks back, contemplating the menu over a glass of Chianti when a customer a few seats down (a regular, I learned later) began extolling the virtues of the restaurant’s calamari Siciliano. He took a sip of his cocktail and asked, “If I order some, will you share it with me?” Who could say no to that? It disappeared, pronto. I offered to buy, or at least split the charge; he declined.

“A little Dobbs Ferry hospitality,” the bartender said.

Sam’s has been in business on Main Street since 1952, when Sam Ciancio opened it in two tight rooms, and it has gradually expanded over the years. Maurice Giliberti, who bought the restaurant in 1986, knew it well. He grew up on Main after his family moved to the United States from Calabria in Italy when he was 9 years old, and Mr. Giliberti worked as a busboy at Sam’s as a teenager. He went on to own restaurants in Yonkers and Wappingers Falls with his brothers. When the Ciancio family asked if he was interested in buying Sam’s, he said, “I didn’t have to think about it too much.”

Mr. Giliberti, 57, works six days a week, arriving in the morning to set the specials and make sure the kitchen is ready. He is in the dining room in the evenings, greeting a stream of customers, many of whom he has known for years.

His kitchen turns out standards (Caesar salad, penne alla vodka, chicken parmigiana), but he enjoys going beyond the basics: short-rib ravioli; branzino topped with shrimp, mussels and clams over capellini; pasta Christiana, the sheets rolled with spinach and ricotta and topped with Gorgonzola and a bright marinara sauce.

And then there’s the celebrated pizza — “We’ve been doing the same pizza for 50 years,” Mr. Giliberti said. His brother Albert supervises the pie-making, his brother Sam sometimes works as a host, and Mr. Giliberti’s adult daughters Christina and Melissa often help out on weekends.

One Saturday night, before diving into the excellent Italian cheesecake they make here, I poked my head into the other dining room and told a waiter I was checking it out. “You’ve never been here before?” he asked. It had been a few years, I said.

“Oh, man, you have to start coming back!” he replied.

Francesco Spinali started working as a waiter at the restaurant that now bears his name in 1964. When the chef left, Mr. Spinali, who is from Florence, volunteered to run the kitchen for a while, and in 1970, he bought the place. He has never stopped cooking in its compact kitchen, where everything is within easy reach. He is 77.

Mr. Spinali makes a good pizza, fine Franceses and a satisfying rack of lamb. His penne alla vodka is a standout, lush but not overly rich (get it with shrimp).

For years, Francesco’s was a hockey hangout, when many New York Rangers players lived in the area. Adam Graves and John Vanbiesbrouck were regulars, Mr. Spinali said, and Nick Fotiu and Steve Vickers will occasionally come by. One signed portrait, to Mr. Spinali from Anders Hedberg, reads, “a friend we can all trust and turn to in good and bad times.”

“A lot of the guys, they give a nice poster,” Mr. Spinali said.

Men and women who once came to Francesco’s with their parents bring their children for dinner. “I used to put them on the seat, now they come with their own kids,” he said.

Mr. Spinali’s son and daughter work with him. Paolo, his son, runs the bar, sets up the kitchen for the day and makes the soups. Francesca Varga, his daughter, works in the dining room with the paintings of Venice and chalkboard menus; you may wait for a table, but it’s yours until you decide it isn’t.

Once, when I couldn’t figure out what to order, I asked Ms. Varga about the lasagna.

“What can I say?” she said. “It’s a brick of love.”

Sly Musilli remembers the day he realized how much his family’s restaurant meant to him.

Mr. Musilli’s father, Jerry, one of the owners of La Manda’s, was in the hospital, and Sly Musilli, who was working at an executive search firm in Boston after graduating from Tufts University, had come to visit.

At one point, Sly Musilli said, his father and his father’s business partner “went behind the curtain, and I could hear them talking — ‘Maybe it’s time to sell, we’re getting older.’ I’m sitting there on the other side going, ‘Wow, life without La Manda’s.’”

He didn’t like the sound of that, so Sly Musilli came home to work with his father.

Now they are co-owners. Sly is 46; he is at La Manda’s six days a week, making sure everybody is happy. Jerry, 87, is in the restaurant on Monday nights, doing the same. “I grew up in the place, so this is more than just a job for me,” Sly Musilli said. He did his math homework sitting behind the register, washed glasses behind the bar, bussed tables. “As I got older, I’d put a tie on and help my dad out as the manager.”

Jerry Musilli, who grew up in a village in Abruzzo, Italy, bought La Manda’s with partners in 1967. It had been owned by the Albanese family, who began serving pizzas in the 1930s. The brick oven from that era (coal then, gas now) is still in use.

For a while, pizza continued to be the main draw at La Manda’s. “We used to make 2,000 pizzas a week,” Jerry Musilli said. But when there was a “pizza joint on every other corner,” he said, more dishes were put on the menu, including La Manda’s most popular entree (for good reason), chicken scarparo, with garlic, white wine and red wine vinegar. There are all sorts of possible additions, but I’m firmly committed to sausage, potatoes and hot peppers. Roasted red pepper pesto with rigatoni — that’s nice, too. And the pork chops. And the pizza with the ciabatta-like outer crust.

Those pizzas come out of the oven behind a window in the dining room, a window that has had a crack in it for 50 years. It’s like the Liberty Bell, only with pepperoni.

What’s the story?

“We don’t know! Shocker!” Sly Musilli said, laughing. He theorized that it had been the result of the building settling. By now, the crack is as much a signature of La Manda’s as the neon sign out front, the scarparo, the mixed salad and the wooden booths.

“When someone walks in and the place looks the same 30 years later, that makes me happy,” he said. “Occasionally I’ll get somebody who walks through the door: ‘I haven’t been here in 25 years. Is it still the same owners? Do you know Jerry?’”

To which Sly Musilli said he would answer: “‘He’s still here. That’s my dad.’ And that’s awesome.”


