


Developers wanting a bigger slice of the buyer market are now attracting signature restaurants, often backed by a globally recognized brand or Michelin-starred chef.

In the same way that high-end spas and gyms have become a must-have within top residential developments, fine-dining restaurants are a key component of the upscale residential scene.

This is partly because consumers have become generally more food-aware, latching onto popular concepts like farm-to-table dining. Extensive media coverage has also contributed to the rock-star prominence of chefs like Ferran Adrià, the former chef of El Bulli in Spain, and Wolfgang Puck, the owner of the Spago and Cut brands.

“A high-end restaurant without doubt makes a project more attractive to buyers,” says Jacob Sullivan, head of sales at the Berkley Group, the developer of One Tower Bridge in London.

Berkley recently announced a deal with the company that operates The Ivy, the famous 100-year-old restaurant in Covent Garden, to open a branch of its offshoot brand The Ivy Market Grill. The venue will have a riverfront site with a terrace and mezzanine level.

Residential units at One Tower Bridge retail from £1.47 million, or $2.14 million, for a one-bedroom apartment, to £14.5 million for a four-bedroom penthouse.

“An internationally branded restaurant may not be the only reason buyers purchase in a development, but it improves the offering,” Mr. Sullivan said. “Wealthy people are used to the finer things in life and enjoy having a quality restaurant on their doorstep.”

Just as chefs chase Michelin stars, so do diners, which is why it is the one accolade many developers in commercial and residential real estate want to bring on board.

The MahaNakhon building, nearing completion in Bangkok, the Thai capital, is the city’s tallest and has 194 residential units. Restaurants run by internationally acclaimed chefs feature in the adjacent MahaNakhon Cube.

A branch of Joël Robuchon’s L’Atelier is on the fifth floor, with Vincent Thierry’s Vogue Lounge on the sixth. Both chefs are French and have solid global pedigrees, including Michelin stars.

The residences will be sold under the Ritz-Carlton brand and cost from 36.2 million baht, or $1 million, for two bedrooms, with the top-level Sky Residences from around 94.2 million baht.

In the Middle East, developers of mixed-use projects, with retail, residential and hotel components, have also worked hard to create the quality restaurant scenes found in cities like New York and London.

The Palazzo Versace hotel and residential complex in Dubai, for example, plans to operate what may be a world first in fine dining. Its Enigma restaurant will host a series of one-time, three-month visits from globally recognized chefs, including Quique Dacosta of Spain and Bjorn Frantzen of Sweden, both holders of several Michelin stars.

The 169 apartments in the Palazzo Versace sell fully furnished from around 5.9 million dirhams, or $1.6 million, for a two-bedroom property of 185 square meters, or 2,000 square feet.

Owners of residences in Dubai’s 160-story Burj Khalifa, the tallest building in the world, have access to At.mosphere, on the 122nd floor. The restaurant is run by Jérôme Laguarde, who has decades of international experience in Michelin-rated establishments.

Residences on the ninth to the 16th floors are sold under the Armani brand. Available properties are listed from 4.6 million dirhams for one bedroom but can exceed 20 million dirhams, depending on specification. A further 900 residential units are on Floors 19 to 108 and range from studios to four-bedroom apartments, priced from around 5 million dirhams. Luxhabitat, a local agency, is listing one penthouse in the Burj Khalifa for 102 million dirhams.

The trend is not limited to urban locations. There is now a climate in which resort-based and regional developments are enlisting restaurants and chefs recognized by Michelin.

Casamia, a Michelin-starred restaurant in Britain, recently moved into The General, a new residential development in Bristol, in the west of England.

Prices at The General, a redeveloped historic site, start from £399,500 for a two-bedroom unit. A further phase is expected to be introduced this spring.

“It is a perfect match,” said Helen Moore, managing director for The General’s developer, City and Country. “A Michelin-recognized name like Casamia brings a cachet to a project. It gives confidence to buyers that we offer a premium product.”

Similarly, the developer of the golf resort Monte Rei, on the Portuguese coast, has employed the chef Albano Lourenço to oversee its signature restaurant, Vistas. Mr. Lourenço previously ran the Michelin-rated restaurants São Gabriel and Arcadas da Capela, both in Portugal.

Before the appointment of Mr. Lourenço, Vistas featured Jaime Perez, a protégé of Mr. Adrià at El Bulli, as head chef. Both appointments were considered a coup.

Monte Rei has a Jack Nicklaus-designed golf course that is one of Europe’s top-rated, but it is at the eastern end of the Algarve coastal region, which has a lower level of development but also less tourism. Recognized names like those of Mr. Perez and Mr. Lourenço have helped raise the resort’s profile.

“The idea is to create destination dining for visitors, residents and potential buyers,” said Ramon Lopez, chief executive of Monte Rei. “Albano Lourenço is one of the most respected chefs in Portugal. His Michelin status is a good indication for potential buyers of the quality the resort can offer over all.”

Property prices at Monte Rei are attractive compared with some of the better-known but more densely developed golf resorts farther west. Three-bedroom villas start at €1.25 million, or $1.4 million.

The services of a Michelin-ranked superstar do not come cheap, according to Elodie Casola, marketing director for developer Arum Group, which is constructing the residential component at the Abama resort on Tenerife, in the Canary Islands of Spain.

“It is difficult to secure a Michelin-starred chef,” she said. “The bigger the name, the more expensive they or their brand can be. It can be hard to recover that investment, so developers have to consider if it is worth the outlay.”

The Abama is managed by Ritz-Carlton and offers apartments from €390,000, and villas from €1.35 million. So far, around 100 properties have sold to clients from Britain and northern Europe.

The resort has two Michelin-ranked restaurants: the two-starred M.B run by Martín Berasategui, and the one-starred Kabuki, an Asian-influenced restaurant headed by the Spanish chef Ricardo Sanz.

“Wealthy international buyers are very demanding when it comes to standards,” Ms. Casola said. “The presence of a top chef or Michelin award is a guarantee of quality and value across the whole product.”


