


James Bullard, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, doesn’t know when the American economy will fall into another recession. But he says it’s increasingly likely that it will happen before the Fed has a chance to return its benchmark interest rate to a historically normal level.

Indeed, Mr. Bullard has fretted for years that the United States and other major economies may be stuck with low interest rates for some time to come. In an interview last week, Mr. Bullard said he wants to raise rates. He really does. It just seems as if the necessary conditions keep slipping away.

After pushing to raise rates at the beginning of the year, he voted against a rate increase in April and he said he’s still thinking about June. “If you talk to people in Tokyo, they say, ‘Well, we’ve been through this and tried all these things and you guys are just following us,’ ” he said in the interview. “I hope that’s not exactly true.”

Mr. Bullard also talked about his distaste for the Fed’s “dot plot” and why he’s not afraid of a little Brexit.

And I asked Mr. Bullard, the most talkative of the Fed’s current crop of officials, whether he talks too much. Read on for his answer. The text of our conversation is lightly edited for clarity.

Q: The Fed’s latest policy statement, following your April meeting, didn’t say much. Was it meant to signal that you’ve become a little more likely to raise rates in June, or a little less?

A: My idea was to keep options open for June. We are data dependent. We’ll get quite a bit of information between now and the June meeting, and then we can make a decision.

Q: You said in March that if job growth remained strong you might be ready to raise rates in April. Job growth has been strong, but now you’re not sure about June. What changed?

A: I think the main issue from a data perspective is that the tension between slow economic growth and relatively strong labor market data is becoming more intense. If you just look at the G.D.P. growth rate — 1.5 percent over the four-quarter sequence, if you believe the tracking estimates for the current quarter — to me, that’s below my estimate of potential growth. That does not sound very good to me. And here at the St. Louis Fed we were projecting above trend growth. So I think this growth outcome has been disappointing from our perspective and I’ve had to dial back some of my projections about policy because of that.

Q: Is it possible the jobs data is painting a more accurate picture right now?

A: It’s possible. The general rule of thumb within the Fed is that labor market data trumps G.D.P. data. But when you’re talking over a four-quarter sequence where you’ve had weak growth, that starts to become more suspect. We’ve projected 3 percent growth around the corner for the last several years in a row. But that just hasn’t materialized, and I think at some point you have to take the signal that’s being sent.

Q: What about the possibility you’re still overestimating the economy’s potential?

A: I think it’s hard to make a case that potential growth is as low as 1.5 percent or 1 percent. We have moved potential growth down. Years ago it used to be 2.8 percent and then it came down to 2.5, 2.4, 2.2, 2.0. But I don’t think it’s much lower than that. I would take slow growth at face value.

Q: What’s wrong?

A: Low productivity growth.

Q: That’s why you’ve marked down potential growth. But why are we falling short even of that?

A: That’s an open question. We’ve certainly got some headwinds the committee has cited: the big increase in the exchange rate in the second half of 2014. When I talk to C.E.O.s in manufacturing or businesses that are related to energy, they certainly talk about things not being great in their sectors. Still, you’d think the economy is pretty big and diverse and we’d be able to overcome sectoral challenges. And that doesn’t seem to be happening.

Q: But your models say most of the exchange rate impact should have happened already. And oil is supposed to be a net positive.

A: We know the models are highly uncertain. All I’m saying is I’m taking a little more signal than I would have taken in the past from the weak G.D.P. growth.

Q: You’ve described low inflation as the major surprise of this era, economically speaking. What’s your best understanding of why inflation has stayed so low?

A: Once major central banks hit the zero lower bound, the key issue was whether central banks would be able to keep inflation expectations consistent with inflation targets. I think the U.S. has done a moderately good job of that, but other central banks have lagged, the European Central Bank in particular, and the Bank of Japan. They have not been able to convince markets that they were going to be able to defend their inflation targets. This has led to relatively low inflation expectations and low inflation outcomes.

Q: How consequential is the difference between promising 2 percent and delivering 1 percent?

A: I think it’s very consequential in terms of central bank credibility. If you say I’m going to hit a 2 percent inflation target and you’re unable to do it, that’s very consequential in terms of confidence in the central bank and your ability to meet your commitments. It means stabilization policy is not going to work as well because confidence in the central bank has eroded. When shocks hit the economy, you’re just going to have to suffer with the shocks. It means you can’t cushion the shocks as well as you otherwise would have been able to.

Q: Even in the United States, inflation expectations have fallen sharply and, despite a recent rebound, they remain low by historical standards. Are you O.K. with the current levels?

A: We’re not really even today at the right level for inflation expectations. I think it’s very difficult to look with a sober eye at the TIPS-based inflation compensation and say that we’re at a good level given our 2 percent inflation target. I think they’re too low. Ideally, you’d like to be where you were in the summer of 2014, which is the last time these were really at a sufficient level. It makes me nervous to have a normalization cycle in the face of these very low inflation expectations.

And one thing you can say about them is, “Gee, they seem to be very highly correlated with oil prices and so they’re not as meaningful as you think they are.” And certainly for about a year, 18 months, after oil prices started to decline — so this is summer of 2014 — all the way through the end of last year, I kept saying, “Yes, but they’re highly correlated with oil prices.” I was expecting prices to decorrelate. And it still hasn’t happened. We’re coming up on two years. I’m starting to feel like you just have to take the signal at face value.

[Further reading: A recent St. Louis Fed analysis finds inflation expectations basically imply that the price of oil will fall to zero. This suggests markets may be underestimating inflation.]

Q: Isn’t this an argument for expanding the Fed’s stimulus campaign?

A: I think the low inflation expectations suggest a somewhat moderated path of rates compared to what we previously laid out. The question is how much do you really have to do to get expectations back into line.

Q: The weakness of the global economy is one reason you’re moving more slowly. Are you worried about the outcome of the British referendum on European Union membership?

A: I think the Brexit vote, there are a couple of aspects of this that make it much less of an international macroeconomic event. It’s a scheduled event; you can track which way the vote is going to go by looking at polling; and it’s a long-term strategic vote on the part of the U.K. The day after Brexit — even if they vote to leave — nothing would actually change in terms of the trade arrangements. Those would continue for at least two years. It’s certainly momentous in some sense for the European project, but I don’t see it as a kind of global shock event in the way that the Chinese devaluation was last August, which was a surprise move that seemed to signal something about Chinese policy and the Chinese situation. This is a very different kind of event.

Q: You’ve suggested that the Fed should stop forecasting policy developments. Why?

A: My views have been affected by our experience in the December-January time frame. Before we did liftoff, we would routinely use the dot plot [a quarterly projection of future interest rates] as an implicit commitment on what the Fed was going to do going forward. We would ask the committee, “When do you anticipate that you’re going to raise rates?” and my interpretation of that is that it was a commitment.

Now, when we lifted off, we did the same thing. And if you look at past behavior of the Fed, once we start moving we keep moving in the same direction. That’s the way the Fed works. So it looked like a quasi-commitment to raise rates four times in 2016. And we put language around it saying, “This is all data dependent.” But from the market’s point of view they were saying: “In the past, whenever you started moving, you kept moving. So you’re giving us guidance about what you’re going to do and you’re going to stick with it.”

It was very hard for us to break that off in the January-February time frame, to convince markets that we really are data dependent. So this whole experience convinced me that there is more commitment embedded in the dot plot than we would really like, and certainly more than what has been the norm for the Fed in other eras when we’ve had successful policy-making. Greenspan never said anything about what the committee might do in the future. The norm in central banking, away from the zero bound, is to say, “We have set the policy rate exactly where we think it should be for today, given everything that’s going on in the economy, and in the future we’ll look at the data.” You didn’t do this kind of dot-plot thing.

I’ve wondered if we should get back to something that’s more akin to that. We don’t want to give unintentional commitments. We’re doing it with good intentions. We’re trying to be transparent. We’re saying this depends on the economy. But I’m wondering if it’s really working all that well.

Q: But aren’t you still effectively at the zero lower bound? Didn’t you just say that low inflation expectations have convinced you to wait and move more slowly?

A: But I’m wondering if I should give that in my dot plot.

Q: So that might be your intention, but you wouldn’t seek to shape expectations by announcing that?

A: Exactly.

Q: On the other hand, you’ve argued the Fed should hold news conferences after each policy meeting.

A: What’s disturbing about the press conference/no press conference cycle is that you have a meeting sitting out there in the future, like November, and who knows what the data will be showing but people already are discounting the probability of moving at that meeting. That’s not right. Sitting here six or eight months ahead of time, that should be just as likely as December. All meetings should be the same ex ante. They should all have a press conference. Other central banks have press conferences more often than we do. I think markets crave communication from the chair. Even if there is no particular message, they still want to know that there is no particular message. I’m not sure why we’ve gotten into a situation where we’re not meeting the international standard on this dimension.

Q: Do you think markets are sometimes confused by the voices of other Fed officials. Specifically, do you think you talk too much?

A: Obviously not. I have views as a policy maker. I do have an agenda which is to match up the research on monetary economics more closely with the policy discussion. My view is, if you’re going to put a man on Mars, you would want the best engineering. If you’re going to make good monetary policy, then you would want the best economic research brought to bear on the issues. If you look at the research in monetary economics on policy at the zero lower bound, it’s unsatisfactory, so we’ve got a lot to discuss. I can play that role and I intend to play it.

Q: You argued earlier this year the Fed should raise rates because the economy performs better in an environment of higher nominal rates. Are you asserting that low rates are dragging on the economy?

A: Suppose you could choose, you can either be in the Japanese situation over the last 20 years or the U.S. situation as it existed between 1984 and 2007.

Q: Is that a choice one gets to make?

A: That’s a good question. But suppose you could get back to that 1984-2007 equilibrium. The good thing about that is you could conduct a stabilization policy through nominal interest rate adjustment that made sense to everybody. You could cushion the economy from shocks by adjusting the rate. You would have the tools to be able to stabilize the economy. If you stay at the zero bound, it’s very unclear. We certainly have unconventional policy moves. I’ve actually argued that unconventional policy works reasonably well. But it’s far less clear how it works, or how effective it is. We have much less experience with it. So if you could get back to the higher equilibrium you’d be in much better shape.

Q: Sure, but what do you do to get there?

A: The way to work your way back is when you get good news on the economy you should nudge the nominal interest rate higher, and if you get enough good news you’ll be all the way back.

Q: Isn’t it possible that you don’t get enough good news?

A: I’m sort of the original guy on this argument. In December of 2008, I circulated a graph that illustrated two steady states for the economy, including one that has low nominal interest rates and low inflation in perpetuity, and I said you’re taking a risk that you would get stuck in this situation. I think very few people at that meeting understood that risk. Here you are seven and a half years later, and it’s certainly looking like the probability that we would get stuck is much higher than it was seven and a half years ago.

I’ve always been worried that the long run here is the Japanese outcome. I still hold out hope that that’s not the case, but I am worried about it, and it’s been going on for a very long time. If you talk to people in Tokyo, they say, “Well, we’ve been through this and tried all these things, and you guys are just following us.” I hope that’s not exactly true. I do think we’ve been able to do better than the B.O.J. did in implementing some forms of unconventional monetary policy. I thought QE2 was particularly effective. We’ve been able to keep expectations of inflation relatively high. I still hold out some hope.

Q: Could stronger fiscal policy help you to escape?

A: I’m not as big an advocate of fiscal policy as some other people. It’s very hard to do very much on a business cycle time scale, given the fact that you’ve got to work with Congress. It’s better to think about fiscal policy — your tax plans, your spending plans — over the medium and long run.

Q: Do you worry the next recession arrives before you normalize policy?

A: I think that’s a significant risk and even a likelihood at this point. At some point something will happen and we’ll be back in recession, and by almost any reckoning we will not have much that we can do in the way of lowering our policy rate. I have been more of a fan of unconventional monetary policy than others. I do think we have some ways to react; one is through balance sheet expansion. I think those kinds of policies are effective. You can argue about how they work and what they do. Also you’d have forward guidance. I do not think negative rates are likely even if the economy is hit by a fairly large shock.


