


After losing her job at LivingSocial, the online deal company that went nearly bankrupt three years ago, Kate Levenstien decided to take a chance on a business that combined two things she loved: bacon and beer.

Her plan was to hold an event celebrating the two in a baseball stadium. So she called ballparks in major cities, and the first one to agree was Safeco Field in Seattle, a city she had never visited. Without hesitation, she put down a deposit.

She started selling tickets online just as she had helped other people sell their events on LivingSocial. And in May 2014, 6,000 people in Seattle paid about $60 each to eat bacon-themed morsels and sample beers until their arteries cried uncle. Two months later, 8,000 New Yorkers did the same thing at Citi Field.

Thus was born the Bacon and Beer Classic.

While successful entrepreneurs have plenty of stories about the early risks they took, Ms. Levenstien said she learned something from that first event that helped her build her business and put her on the path to personal wealth: the security of getting money in the door months before people attend an event and using those proceeds to finance the company’s growth.

It’s no secret that banks are hesitant to lend to small business owners with unproven ideas, and when banks do lend, they are usually pretty conservative.

“When the business owner wants to establish that second practice, but there isn’t enough cash flow coming from the first location to finance that build-out, we’ll say not now,” said Noreen Bishop, senior vice president and regional executive for Chase Business Banking. “If the second location will put that business owner and the first location at risk, we’ll say let’s give it one more year.”

And that may be sound advice. The stories that get told about entrepreneurs who struggled but eventually succeeded are full of survivor bias. The stories of those who failed — unless they are on the scale of a tech bust like LivingSocial, which was once valued as high as $4.5 billion but today is worth little — do not get discussed.

For entrepreneurs who are not in hot sectors like technology, growing their businesses and putting themselves on the path to wealth will have a lot more to do with their tolerance for risk and how they think about cash flow and partnerships.

“The things that you noticed about people who succeed was that many of them were not great innovators,” said Scott Winget, senior managing director of the Center for Wealth Impact at Ascent Private Capital Management, which often works with business owners after they’ve been successful. “They have a degree of optimism, problem solving skills, but mostly, it’s sheer doggedness.”

While Ms. Levenstien’s early success was funded by cash flow — she has produced 15 bacon and beer events, as well as beer-themed events at several zoos and lower-key events like river tubing in Indiana — she is thinking about her next options. One has been searching for partners, like the stadiums where the San Francisco 49ers and the Denver Broncos play.

“It’s a lot of work and a lot of risk to go to another city,” she said. “So new venues have joined us as partners. They guide us on what we do. It made us a much more seamless event so we’re don’t say, ‘We didn’t sell tickets and now we’re on the hook for $70,000.’ ”

Jimmy Bernstein, the chief executive of Howl at the Moon, a chain of live-music bars, said he opened the first 10 locations using cash flow but the cost of each one slowed how fast he could grow.

About a decade ago, he brought in investors who have allowed him to focus on running the business, while supplying him with the capital to open new locations. He credited that partnership with helping him to continue building his business when a Seattle location failed in 2006, costing him $1.1 million.

“They said, ‘Fail fast and move on,’ ” he said. “I set my sights on the next project, which was very exciting. It all came back to where it was before.”

Yet partners can only go so far. Jim McCann, founder and executive chairman of 1-800-Flowers, bought his first flower shop on First Avenue in Manhattan 40 years ago. And then, for 10 years, he said, he opened a new flower shop every six months, giving the store managers an ownership stake in each one.

In 1998, in the middle of the boom in internet initial public offerings, he said executives at AOL mentioned to him that he could grow more quickly if he took his company public. In late 1999, the company did just that, right before the markets began to cool.

“We got public on a multibillion-dollar valuation,” Mr. McCann said. “I remember sitting at a big sidewalk cafe on Third Avenue and saying to my brother Chris, ‘Can you believe we’ve raised this money to meet all our capital needs for the next five years?’ ”

For most entrepreneurs, taking their company public is a dream that will remain just that. More realistic types of financing are likely to come as bank loans or lines of credit.

“If it’s just a working capital line, we’d make a recommendation for what they would need to support that business over a 30- to 45-day period,” Ms. Bishop said. “If it’s equipment, we could finance up to 100 percent of that equipment. If it’s a building that we’re purchasing, generally it’s 80 percent.”

Lines of credit can be helpful tools for cash flow, but they are generally not an option until a business has been running for several years. And even then, they are going to be limited in size.

“If your business is doing $100,000 revenue, a $100,000 line of credit is not realistic,” said Robert Schapira, the Southwest small business leader at Wells Fargo. “Ten to 20 percent of your revenue is the most a business should expect to healthily do this and to pay the line off consistently.”

And the criteria banks place on making loans often force entrepreneurs bent on creating something quickly to look elsewhere.

At an earlier stage in his company, Gregory Zamfotis sought equity investments from family members for his first six Gregorys Coffee locations, which he opened from 2006 to 2013.

“We felt that the banks we had spoken to at the time were not willing to give us the amount of money to really change our lives, and the loan covenants that would come along with that money did not seem that appealing,” he said. “They might have been willing to give us $1 million, but that was two and a half stores to us.”

So in 2014, he partnered with Hexagon Hospitality, a venture firm specializing in restaurants, to get financial backing and opened his 17th Gregorys Coffee shop in Brooklyn Heights on Friday.

Hexagon “was more aggressive in their ability to provide financing and more capable of financing at a faster rate,” he said.

Ms. Levenstien said that she had been holding off on seeking outside financing, preferring to test out new concepts on her own. This summer, she will run a private Bacon and Beer Classic event at the Republican National Convention and start a new whiskey and fried food festival in Brooklyn in July.

She is also planning a new festival this fall called Ramen Festival, which pairs beer and sake with ramen noodles. “We’re bringing in these sumo wrestlers who are awesome — these 400-pound guys who are just picking each other up.”

And that is the entrepreneur’s spirit, which may just lead to great wealth down the line.


