


For weeks, as Mayor Bill de Blasio has sought to fend off a flock of investigations into his political fund-raising, he has clung to a potent defense: A confidential report about one of the inquiries was leaked to a reporter at the behest of his chief political rival, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.

In the labyrinthine world of New York politics, the accusation appeared to have legs. The leaked memo described how the State Board of Elections had found potential campaign-finance violations in Mr. de Blasio’s efforts to raise money for Democratic candidates for the State Senate ahead of the 2014 elections, and its appearance in the pages of The Daily News in April added to the mayor’s mounting troubles. The report’s author, Risa Sugarman, the election board’s chief enforcement counsel, is an appointee and ally of Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat who has a well-documented habit of undercutting the mayor — a connection that Mr. de Blasio has taken pains to highlight.

The squabble, however, took a turn on Tuesday that hinted at more chapters to come. Releasing the results of her own investigation into the leak, the New York inspector general, Catherine Leahy Scott, announced that John Conklin, the election board’s spokesman, had admitted to providing the report to a News reporter, Ken Lovett. Before joining the board, Mr. Conklin was a staff member for 16 years for several Republican senators, including the Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan.

The news provided more political intrigue to a situation already laden with it, raising the possibility that the Senate Republicans, rather than Mr. Cuomo, were behind the leak. Republicans had made the complaint that prompted Ms. Sugarman to investigate, a detail not lost on Mr. Cuomo, who suggested to reporters in early May that it was the Republicans, rankled by Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising for their opponents, who were responsible for the leak.

Ms. Scott was appointed by Mr. Cuomo.

Mr. Flanagan and other Senate Republicans have not hesitated to punish Mr. de Blasio for trying to oust them from the majority in 2014. They have used the Senate’s authority over New York City and the state budget to block the mayor’s agenda on issues including mayoral control of public schools and state aid to the City University of New York.

In a statement on Tuesday afternoon, Ms. Sugarman said that she had asked the inspector general to investigate the leak immediately after The News’s article appeared. “Allegations were made primarily by the New York City mayor that I leaked the report due to political motivations,” she said. “Now that we know the facts, I hope the mayor will apologize for maligning my integrity and professionalism.”

This drew a quick retort from Laurence D. Laufer, the election lawyer who has represented Mr. de Blasio during his mayoral campaign and his re-election bid.

The inspector general’s report “confirms that Ms. Sugarman’s office failed to secure the confidentiality of the memo and raises serious questions about the B.O.E.’s management and policies,” he said in a statement. “If anyone should apologize, it is surely the B.O.E.”

Other staff members at the board denied being involved in the leak, the report said, though several, including Mr. Conklin, testified that because of the board’s conflicting and imprecise policies, they had not been sure whether documents produced by its enforcement division, such as the memo, were confidential.

The report found that testimony about such confusion “lacked credibility,” noting that the board’s employee handbook and other regulations include policies governing how to treat confidential materials.

Still, the inspector general’s office recommended that the board clarify its policies about how the enforcement division’s documents are handled and that the board require employees to receive training on the procedures.

The inspector general’s office interviewed more than 25 elections board employees and commissioners under oath, according to the report, and also reviewed documents and computer records. The inquiry concluded that after Mr. Lovett asked to see documents relating to the allegations against Mr. de Blasio, Mr. Conklin emailed him the confidential memo without consulting anyone else at the Board of Elections first. Mr. Conklin also sent the memo to a spokesman for the Senate Republicans, the report said.

A lawyer for Mr. Conklin, Michael Koenig, declined to comment.

The Manhattan district attorney and the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York have opened inquiries into Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising; the inspector general has referred its findings to the Manhattan district attorney and the State Joint Commission on Public Ethics.


