


RE: ROCK ‘N’ ROLL

In an adaptation from his new book, “But What if We’re Wrong?” Cluck Klosterman ponders who future historians will remember from the 20th century’s most popular musical genre.

The mistake in discussing who will last in rock ’n’ roll is to assume that what rocks your world is what is likely to stand for all time. It’s all context and perception, and I think Klosterman nailed it in the line “everybody who was around for punk and disco is dead and buried, and no one is left to contradict how that moment felt.” Right: You had to be there. But be where, exactly? Everything is relative to myriad cultural, psychological and historical factors.

What Klosterman leaves out of the discussion is the primordial soup out of which the genre grew. That’s where, from a white perspective, the real transgression lay, in rhythm and blues, race music, black vocal groups, gospel, blues and even in early country and western and hillbilly music.

Which is why, for my money, if we are going to suggest transgression as a criterion for rock durability, we can’t overlook Little Richard. While nothing shocks us today, what could have been more rebellious and shocking in a 1950s context than a black man pounding out secular gospel music to a white audience? Like his contemporary Jerry Lee Lewis (who was also eventually pulled apart by trying to exist in the contradiction between the sacred and the profane), Little Richard violated perhaps the ultimate social decree of the time: using a sacred musical format to praise the lowest of secular concerns. He offended everyone. Now that’s transgressive. Michael Aubry, Evanston, Ill.

Your article stops short of recognizing what will be clear 300 years from now. Bob Dylan will be sung, read, discussed and performed as the embodiment of the rock era in all its forms and permutations that he created or inspired. We already recognize that “Like a Rolling Stone” is by acclamation the greatest rock song. It was the tip of the Dylan iceberg. He “never made an album that ‘rocked’ in any conventional way”? In some sense, true — in every one of his albums, he forged the essential rock reality that there is no conventional way. There is Shakespeare, and there is Dylan. Hugh E. McKay, Solon, Ohio

RE: KAMALA HARRIS

Emily Bazelon profiled California’s attorney general: a candidate for the U.S. Senate who is trying to chart a middle course on criminal justice.

Emily Bazelon’s profile of Kamala Harris suggests another example of what I like to call the “axis of difference” political theory — that politicians can afford to differ from the mainstream political norm along one axis of difference, but rarely two or more, while maintaining national prominence. So, for example, Bernie Sanders can run far to the left and remain viable: As a straight white man, fringe liberal views are his only axis of difference. Conversely, Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama are constrained politically because they have already “used up” their allowable difference on the immutable characteristics of gender and race. In the case of Kamala Harris, who is positioning herself for national politics from the underdog starting point of difference along two axes, the theory suggests even less ability to stray from the political center. If the theory is compelling, and examples do abound, those who support more sweeping criminal-justice reform should not demand leadership from Harris at the cost of her political career. If this means that national politicians withhold support for causes they believe to be just, the fault lies not with people like Harris, Obama and Clinton, who take a pragmatic approach to pursuing their political goals while maintaining political ambitions. Instead, the true culprit is a political climate that tolerates so little difference. Avi Frey, Brooklyn, N.Y.

Sometimes you get to an unintended destination, and so I wonder if the editors and writers intended for this issue to be a statement on the influence of women globally? From the article on Kamala Harris, candidate for U.S. Senate; the photo of female Kurdish fighters; the photo of African health workers, some of whom are female and are the first line of defense against disease; the image of a female figure as a scarecrow guarding the harvest; to your cover of a grieving woman, perhaps having lost a husband or a son to war; what powerful statements. Bravo! Well done! Beverley Morgan-Sandoz, Pasadena, Calif.


