


Günter Seeger NY Several New York restaurants are trying to evoke the feeling of dining in someone’s home. That’s the idea behind the look of Aldo Sohm Wine Bar, the service at L’Appart in Le District, the new Graffiti Earth (see below) and now the chef Günter Seeger’s first restaurant in the city. “This is supposed to represent an elegant home,” Mr. Seeger said. “When you walk in, there’s a bar cart but no real bar, and you get a drink as you walk in.” The rest of the space, once a shop, is completely open, with an enormous kitchen to serve a mere 42 seats in a subdued setting. The chef, who built his reputation in Atlanta and closed his restaurant there in 2007, will serve a tasting menu that changes daily and emphasizes vegetables. He said he would also draw on his German heritage for inspiration. (Opens Friday): 641 Hudson Street (Gansevoort Street), gunterseegerny.com.

Eastfield’s This sibling to the East Pole on the Upper East Side, from Tom and Anthony Martignetti, has Joe Capozzi as executive chef preparing Scotch eggs, cauliflower gratin with crispy leeks, chicken parm with yellow tomato coulis, and a macrobiotic plate. (Wednesday): 1479 York Avenue (78th Street), 646-964-4918, eastfieldsnyc.com.

Graffiti Earth Jehangir Mehta builds on his tiny East Village establishment, Graffiti, for this makeover of what was Mehtaphor, in the Duane Street Hotel. Now the 20-seat restaurant has a separate street entrance, a small bar and a compact private dining room. Mr. Mehta’s approach remains long on vegetables, and he is more determined than ever to promote sustainability. “We have eight-inch napkins made from fabric scraps, the tumblers are made from wine bottles, and my soups are made from vegetable trimmings,” he said. (Thursday): 190 Church Street (Duane Street), 212-542-9440, graffitiearthny.com.

Hail Mary This is about as eclectic as it gets. Ham el-Waylly, a chef and owner, whose father is Egyptian and mother is Bolivian, grew up in Doha, Qatar. His wife, Sohla el-Waylly, who is also a chef and owner, was raised in Los Angeles by Bengali parents. They have worked at Atera, Rotisserie Georgette, the Empellón restaurants and Corton. Their diner-style restaurant gives comfort foods daring twists: chicken-fried beef tongue, duck soup with foie gras matzo balls, homemade blood sausage and onions, and Bolivian-style hot dogs. (Wednesday): 68 Greenpoint Avenue (Franklin Street), 347-422-0645, hailmarybk.com.

Halifax The executive chef, Seadon Shouse, is from Nova Scotia, hence the name of the restaurant. His food will reflect what he calls the Northeastern Coast, in a dining room of weathered blues, greens, grays and white. He will serve seafood certified by the Marine Stewardship Council, an international nonprofit organization that promotes sustainability, and some foraged ingredients. Look for smoked pollock rillettes, lobster rigatoni and salt cod quenelles. (Monday): W Hoboken, 225 River Street, Hoboken, N.J., 201-253-2500, halifaxhoboken.com.

Josephina A seasonal outdoor taqueria and Mexican market will be in business Thursdays though Sundays behind the Pines restaurant. (Saturday): 284 Third Avenue (Carroll Street), Gowanus, Brooklyn, meetjosephina.com.

Karasu Tucked, speakeasy style, behind their restaurant Walter’s, Danny Minch and Dylan Dodd have turned an Art Deco room into a Japanese izakaya with a more elegant approach than usual. Nibble togarashi potato chips while you consider tagliatelle with uni and smoky butter, kampachi crudo with koji and shiso, crisp fried duck wings and prime rib-eye. The chefs are Yael Peet and Josh Goldstein. (Wednesday): 166 DeKalb Avenue (Cumberland Street), 718-488-7800, karasubk.com.

Luzzo’s Pizza Add this to the list of Luzzo’s Pizza outlets. There are other Italian specialties, and a wine list by the consultant, Laura Maniec: 310 Bowery Bar, 310 Bowery (First Street), 212-477-1166, 310bowery.nyc.

The Mark Hot Dog by Jean-Georges The cart stationed outside the Mark hotel this season offers the chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten’s chicken franks with kimchi relish.: 25 East 77th Street, 212-794-4300, themarkhotel.com.

The Norm The restaurant that was Saul’s at the Brooklyn Museum has been redone with less formality and renamed for Norman Feinberg, the museum trustee who bankrolled the renovation. The chef, Saul Bolton, is still in the kitchen, working for the caterer Great Performances. His new menu is international in scope, with dishes like chicharrones al pastor, curried cauliflower, a burger and tonkatsu-style ramen. (Thursday): Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway (Washington Avenue), 718-230-0897, thenormbkm.com.

Sushi Ginza Onodera This is the New York branch of a high-end global chain based on the Ginza, the Fifth Avenue of Tokyo. Its 32 seats are divided between a sleek cypress sushi counter and tables. Walls crafted in a material made with sand, handmade tiles as a backdrop for the sushi bar and finely wrought serving and dining accouterments provide the setting for omakase menus at $300 and $400 per person. (There is a $200 option at tables, and lower prices at lunch, which will start next month.) The chefs are using mostly wild seafood imported from Japan. Another branch is to open this year in West Hollywood, Calif. (Friday): 461 Fifth Avenue (40th Street), 212-390-0925, sushi-onodera.com.

Northeast Kingdom Dinner on May 28 will be the last for Paris Smeraldo and Meg Lipke at this 10-year-old pioneer in Bushwick, Brooklyn. The couple say they want to spend more time with their children at their upstate farm: 18 Wycoff Avenue (Troutman Street), Bushwick, Brooklyn, 718-386-3864, north-eastkingdom.com.

Tasca Chino After struggling to find its focus, this fusion restaurant on Park Avenue South has closed.

Telepan This Upper West Side anchor with an accomplished farm-to-table approach has closed after 10 years. The chef and an owner, Bill Telepan, said its revenues could no longer cover expenses, and raising prices did not resolve the problem.

Nina Clemente This New York chef, who was born in Italy and worked in Los Angeles, St. Bart’s and Italy, is running the outdoor kitchen this season at the Standard Plaza at the Standard, High Line. Her menu includes wood-fired pizzas, and combines Mediterranean and Californian influences.

Brooklyn Brewery The pioneering brewery in Williamsburg plans a new brewery, headquarters and a rooftop beer garden and restaurant, covering 75,000 square feet in the Brooklyn Navy Yard development to open in 2018: Building 77, Paulding Street and Clinton Avenue.

Sushi Bouhadana As David Bouhadana, formerly of Sushi Dojo in the East Village, put it, “I’m on my own now.” The liquor license came through, and he plans to open a 12-seat omakase bar with a 15-seat bar and lounge with a separate menu and a sushi chef in September: 217 Eldridge Street (Stanton Street).


