


HONG KONG — A poet in Myanmar who wrote in October that he had a tattoo of the country’s president on his penis was found guilty on Tuesday of defamation and sentenced to a six-month jail term.

The poet, Maung Saungkha, 24, had been held since November and was released on Tuesday based on time served, according to a court in Yangon, Myanmar’s largest city.

A short poem in which he made his assertion, apparently about U Thein Sein, who was president until the end of March, received wide attention last fall because of its off-color material and its timing.

Mr. Maung Saungkha posted the poem on Facebook in October, one month before the landmark election that brought the Nobel Peace laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and her National League for Democracy to power.

He has said he does not have such a tattoo. But he said by phone on Tuesday that he was inspired to write the poem by the images of political heroes like Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi that some supporters have inked on their bodies.

“I thought, Where would they tattoo those whom people are embarrassed by?” he said. “That’s why I wrote the poem.”

“I am happy that I have been released,” he added. “But the verdict is unfair since I just used ‘Mr. President’ in the poem. I didn’t mention U Thein Sein.”

The court in Yangon found that Mr. Thein Sein had been defamed, however, and that by posting the poem on Facebook, Mr. Maung Saungkha had violated a telecommunications statute.

“I am totally disappointed with the sentence, despite his release,” Saw Wai, another poet in Yangon, said by telephone on Tuesday. “I expected his unconditional release because it was not an act of terror, it was just writing a poem.”

Although Myanmar has seen a dramatic end to censorship as part of a broad liberalization, human rights advocates say restrictions on free speech still exist. And violating them can be perilous.

Last year, a bar manager from New Zealand and two local men were sentenced to two years in prison for posting an online ad with an image of the Buddha wearing headphones, which was ruled denigrating to Buddhism, the country’s majority religion.

Also last year, the activists Chaw Sandi Tun and Patrick Kum Jaa Lee were arrested and later sentenced to six-month prison terms for Facebook posts deemed insulting to the military. They were released in March and April, Human Rights Watch said.

The Facebook users Hla Bhone, Nay Myo Wai and Ya Pyae were also arrested separately over the past four months for posts seen as mocking the military chief, Senior Gen. Min Aung Hlaing, and Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi.


