


MOSCOW — When people disappear in the Russian republic of Chechnya — rights activists, journalists and government critics — there is usually no public discussion.

Certainly, no word about it appears on the bizarre if strangely compelling Instagram account of Ramzan A. Kadyrov, the local strongman who became a Kremlin darling by suppressing, with ruthless methods, the long-running Islamic insurgency in the northern Caucasus republic. Only the objects of Mr. Kadyrov’s affection attain that distinction: close associates, his gunmen, his workout routines.

And now his missing cat.

The cat is an expensive variety known as a Bengal or toyger, bred to look like a small tiger, real tigers being the kind of beast usually featured on the Instagram account.

A week ago, Mr. Kadyrov, dressed in trademark camouflage, posted a picture of himself hugging the toyger.

Given the cat’s penchant for playing with children, the post said, it was odd that it would disappear for 10 days.

“Now we have started to seriously worry,” the post informed Mr. Kadyrov’s 1.8 million followers. Did someone have the missing cat and not know where to return it, he wondered. The post became a television news headline with all residents of the republic urged to look for the cat.

Apparently, some Instagram followers were worried too. People wrote in from Vladivostok in Russia’s Far East, saying they thought maybe they had seen the cat there, more than 5,500 miles away. They wrote from Japan, from Iceland, from New Zealand.

Even John Oliver, the comedian, expressed concern. (His concern was couched in terms that it was not a good idea to leave Mr. Kadyrov feeling anxious. Among other incidents, the 2015 murder of a Russian opposition figure, Boris Nemtsov, has been linked to figures close to Mr. Kadyrov.)

On the HBO program “Last Week Tonight,” Mr. Oliver described Mr. Kadyrov as a “Monster Energy drink come to life.”

After mocking the Chechen leader for his seemingly endless wardrobe of Vladimir V. Putin T-shirts, he suggested that viewers should message Mr. Kadyrov directly to tell him they had seen his cat, they had not, or they were not sure. Mr. Oliver posted a picture of himself holding a cat and wondering if it was the missing animal.

He apparently hit a nerve, because Mr. Kadyrov responded with a post in English, albeit slightly fractured, a rarity. He Photoshopped a picture of Mr. Oliver wearing a Putin T-shirt with the caption: “I am tired of jokes. I want to care for cats in Chechnya. By the way, Putin is our leader!”

He also wrote a paean to the Russian president.

“Yes, millions of people rejoice T-shirts with the image of the national leader,” the post said. “Thanks to Putin, we have crushed terrorists among whom there were also citizens of the USA, and European citizens. The country directed by Obama under the guise of peacekeeping operations spark new wars and bloody internal conflicts, in which die millions of people.”

While he was at it, Mr. Kadyrov decided that his cat was not exactly missing, either. The toyger, the post said, was likely out tomcatting and would probably reappear any day now, perhaps with a new lady friend.

The last nuptials celebrated in the Kadyrov family included a procession of hundreds of Bentleys and Mercedeses weeks ago, according to a recent Instagram post. No pictures yet indicating whether similar festivities might greet the mating of a Kadyrov cat.


