


To the many things you can say about Donald J. Trump’s presidential bid, add this: Running for president can be bad for business.

Last year, NBC and Univision declined to telecast the Miss Universe pageant. Trump, now the presumptive Republican nominee, was essentially forced to buy out NBC, which had been a partner in the venture, and then sell off the pageant a few months later. The federal lawsuit over Trump University has exposed some unsavory business tactics that he appears to have approved. Also last year, Nascar moved an awards banquet from the Trump National Doral Miami resort after one of its key sponsors, Camping World, said it would boycott the event if it were held on the Trump property. The reason, said Marcus Lemonis, Camping World’s chief executive, was “blatantly bigoted and racist comments from Donald Trump in regards to immigrants of the United States.”

(Brian France, Nascar’s chief executive, endorsed Trump in March, then faced intense blowback.)

On Wednesday, the PGA Tour announced that a World Golf Championships event was moving from Doral — which has a history of holding PGA events that goes back more than half a century — to Mexico.

Yes, Mexico.

Doral is one of America’s best-known golf resorts. It has four courses, including its crown jewel, the Blue Monster, where most of the professional tournaments it hosts are played. Built on swampland acquired in 1959 by a New York developer, the resort was sold to Morgan Stanley, the investment bank, in 2007 for $500 million. But then came the real estate bust, which had a devastating financial effect on Doral, causing the resort, by then somewhat run-down, to file for bankruptcy in 2011.

The Trump Organization, meanwhile, had decided to go all-in on golf; today it owns 17 resorts, up from three in 2007, and its golf resort business is most likely the largest fief of the Trump empire. Many of those properties were bought in the wake of the financial crisis, when the golf business was struggling, and many of those involved believe that golf owes Trump a debt of gratitude for investing in the sport during such a tough time.

“I’ve been very good for golf,” Trump has said. Few would disagree.

Trump’s purchase of Doral was typical of his approach: Seeing a chance to buy a distressed property, he scooped it up for $150 million, a discounted price Forbes magazine later described as “almost unbelievable.” He then sank $250 million into renovating it, including an overhaul of the Blue Monster.

Although he lists its revenue, perhaps implausibly, as nearly $132 million in the most recent financial disclosure he submitted as part of his presidential run — up from $49.4 million in last year’s financial disclosure form — it is probable that Doral is his highest grossing and most profitable golf resort. Among his properties, only his Turnberry golf resort in Scotland ranks with Doral in terms of prestige.

Well before Trump bought Doral, the PGA Tour had used it to host one of its four annual World Golf Championships — tournaments that, unlike most tour events, are restricted to the top players in the world. Beginning in 2011, Cadillac was the chief sponsor. (From 1962 to 2006, Doral hosted a more traditional PGA tournament, the Doral Open.) But Cadillac let it be known that it would be dropping its sponsorship. The 2016 tournament, which was held in March, was its last as a sponsor. And though it sought a new sponsor for over a year, the PGA Tour was simply unable to find a company to replace Cadillac.

On Wednesday, when the tour commissioner, Tim Finchem, confirmed that the tournament was moving to Mexico City, he went out of his way to say the decision to leave Doral had not been a political statement. “From a golf standpoint, we have no issues with Donald Trump,” he said, adding, “The PGA has never been involved nor cares to be involved in presidential politics.”

In earlier statements, the tour noted that it had a 54-year relationship with Miami and Doral — something it was reluctant to walk away from. Finchem said at Wednesday’s news conference that the problem was that Trump was such a huge brand: He was likely to overshadow any company that was interested in sponsoring the tournament. And it’s true that after he had bought Doral, Trump would invariably make a showstopping appearance at the tournament, landing his helicopter for all to see and making the rounds like a conquering hero.

But corporations hate controversy, and they especially hate political controversy. Companies sponsor golf tournaments precisely because they offer a way to market to upscale customers in a setting where the only controversy is about who is going to win. Although there are certainly chief executives and other corporate executives who support Trump, corporate entities on the whole don’t want to be associated with polarizing political positions, whether on the left or the right. And corporations now embrace diversity.

Grupo Salinas, a major Mexican conglomerate, will now move the tournament to Mexico City. Ricardo Salinas, its billionaire chief executive, has been openly critical of Trump. He told CNBC last year that Trump’s comments about Mexicans had shown “the worst face of America.” He added, “It’s a disgrace that someone could speak in terms like that.” Landing the tournament was not only a coup for Grupo Salinas and Mexico, but a way to one-up Trump.

On Tuesday evening, when Trump told Sean Hannity, the Fox News host, that the tournament was moving to Mexico City — “I hope they have kidnapping insurance,” Trump said — he claimed that it would allow him to make more money because he would be able to charge full price for his hotel rooms during the prime tourist season. Maybe. But losing the tournament hurts nonetheless. Being part of the PGA Tour adds luster to a golf resort, making it more appealing to amateur golfers. A tournament brings in money from fans and corporations. It raises money for charity. People who travel to the tournament spend money in the community.

(Doral is not the only Trump property being deprived of a prestigious tournament. The Turnberry resort, which he bought in 2014, has traditionally been in the rotation to host the British Open. But the R&A, which organizes the British Open, indicated last year that Turnberry was out of the rotation after Trump’s comments about Muslims.)

On Wednesday, Trump angrily suggested that the PGA Tour’s decision was akin to other corporations abandoning America — and American workers — for Mexico. “The PGA Tour has put profits ahead of thousands of American jobs, millions of dollars in revenue for local communities and charities and the enjoyment of thousands of fans,” he said.

But he’s wrong to blame the PGA. In this case, the only person Trump has to blame is himself.


