


The Anti-Defamation League added a new symbol this week to Hate on Display, its database of prominent white supremacist imagery. It’s called the “echo,” and it is used online to call attention to Jewish names in the news.

The symbol originated in 2014 on an anti-Semitic podcast, “The Daily Shoah,” which applied a novelty sound effect to Jewish names that made them echo ominously.

That practice then spread to blogs and Twitter, where the podcast’s creators and fans created a visual translation of the echo sound effect by placing three sets of parentheses around a Jewish name, like (((Cohen))) or (((Goldberg))). The parentheses later turned up in a Chrome browser extension called “Coincidence Detector,” which found Jewish names in text and automatically trapped them in the echo. (Google has since banned the extension from the Chrome store.) Enterprising white nationalists are now printing the echo on T-shirts.

This is how a hate symbol rises in 2016: A podcast sound effect becomes a Twitter meme and a browser extension before it finally slithers into the physical world.

The “echo” is the first officially recognized symbol to emerge from the “alt-right,” a movement of white-and-proud extremists who are as obsessed with cultural memes as they are with white nationalism. They play fast and loose with white supremacist iconography, remixing it with pop culture and the sardonic tone of internet subculture. Their regressive message, cloaked in an ultramodern skin, is being spread online to a new generation of race warriors.

“There’s now an unlimited number of white supremacist memes, just like there’s an unlimited number of cat memes,” said Mark Pitcavage, an expert on right-wing extremism who also maintains the Anti-Defamation League’s hate-symbol database. “They’ll take all sorts of pop culture memes and white-supremacize them.”

Modern white supremacist memes recast unwilling recruits. With the help of digital photo editing, Guy Fieri becomes a Nazi soldier, and Taylor Swift turns into their “Aryan Goddess.” (Ms. Swift’s lawyers recently shot off a letter to an alt-right blog asking it to cease and desist associating her image with anti-Semitic rhetoric.) The most recent episode of “The Daily Shoah” podcast (itself a twist on “The Daily Show”) kicks off with an anti-Semitic parody of Poison’s ballad “Every Rose Has Its Thorn.” Even a Twitter ad for DiGiorno pizza (“Do you ever find yourself just staring into the oven?”) can be reframed into a reference to the Holocaust, just by being retweeted by an alt-right account.

“It shouldn’t surprise us that bigots are early adopters of technology,” said Jonathan Greenblatt, the chief executive of the Anti-Defamation League. “Their noxious views are difficult to circulate openly.” But on social media, “they can post something to Twitter or Facebook and achieve exponential reach under a cloak of anonymity.”

Old-school bigots have been recycling offensive images electronically for decades. “The white supremacist movement is very visually and symbolically oriented,” Mr. Pitcavage said. “Once symbols are established, they don’t tend to die.”

He has watched racists translate Klan codes into email addresses and spread Nazi insignia on message boards since the 1980s. “As each new element of the internet emerged, white supremacists were right there with it,” Mr. Pitcavage said.

The echo symbol is emblematic of a new class of bigotry born and bred online. “Anti-Racist Is Code for Anti-White,” a slogan that was lifted from an early-2000s pro-segregationist tract called “The Mantra,” has proliferated online as a piece of white supremacist copypasta — text that’s obsessively copied and pasted across internet forums. The mathematical sign for “not equal” has been repurposed as a statement against racial equality. Like the echo, it leverages the computer keyboard to create the new supremacist symbolism for the modern era.

The Anti-Defamation League has called the alt-right “the new white supremacy,” and its figures poke fun at their grandfathers’ displays of white pride even as they create their own. The hosts of “The Daily Shoah” performatively pronounce “white” as “huh-white,” a mocking imitation of a good ol’ boy. The podcast’s echo winks at the cheesy sound effects favored by old-school right-wing radio shock jocks.

Much of the alt-right’s language and imagery is borrowed from 4chan, an anonymous, ephemeral message board that revels in politically incorrect jokes and nihilistic posturing. The roiling discussion on 4chan “tends to represent a libertarian, white, male perspective,” said Ryan Milner, a communications professor at the College of Charleston who studies online groups. “Its humor plays with outright stereotypes that veer into white supremacy.”

Both the alt-right and 4chan share favorite insults, like “cucks” (feminized men) and “normies” (the unsophisticated masses) and work from the same meme palette, dealing out pop cultural barrel-scrapes that perpetuate racist and anti-Semitic tropes. Pepe the Frog, a favorite cartoon character on 4chan that has since become a mainstream teenage idol on Tumblr, has emerged as an unofficial alt-right mascot. It’s just that on alt-right accounts, Pepe appears with an exaggerated hook nose or comes adorned with a Trumpian toupee.

The alt-right takes the online subculture’s discourse and dials it up to the level of political agitation. The Southern Poverty Law Center has charted fervent support for Donald J. Trump among “right-wing extremists,” who share “exultant memes celebrating Trump’s ascension.” In April, the center reported that some of Mr. Trump’s rhetoric can “drive mainstream attention to racist memes.”

Take it from the alt-right bloggers themselves. The movement is “winning the meme war,” an alt-right blogger calling himself Lawrence Murray wrote last month.

Jewish public figures are fighting back. On Twitter, Jewish writers have reclaimed the echo, adding parentheses around their Twitter handles in a show of defiance. In turn, white nationalists like Lana Lokteff have flipped the symbol to signal their non-Jewish heritage: )))Lana Lokteff(((.

Out of the depths of online culture, new hate speech rises: “Cuckservative,” a portmanteau of “cuckold” and “conservative” (it’s a long story) has now been acknowledged by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a racist slur.

But at the same time, the sardonic sheen that coats everything oozing from internet subcultures helps provide cover for white supremacists. True bigotry is often excused as nothing more than crude humor or nihilistic trolling. The echo symbol “started as a joke among us,” a host of “The Daily Shoah” said on the podcast this week. He chided the news media for taking it too seriously.

To them, it’s humor. To everyone else, it’s hate. “In online collective communication, you don’t always have a lot of context to understand the motivations behind a message,” Mr. Milner said. “Is this earnest? Is this serious? Does it even matter?”

Online, white supremacists spread their message “not through crosses burned on front lawns, but through little bits of conversation shared on Twitter,” Mr. Milner said, “that then spread to classrooms and bars and living rooms.” Who cares if the Klansman is smirking beneath his hood?


