


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Let’s cut to the chase. We’ve introduced a terrific new guide to knife skills on Cooking, by the indefatigable Julia Moskin, that we think will benefit everyone from the novice cook to the experienced one. It’s beautiful to boot. So take a gander at that, study on its videos and practical prose, and then slice and dice your way through Julia’s new recipe for a celery salad for dinner. Get your brunoise on.

Or don’t! It’s the middle of the week, and you’re exhausted with the trials and tribulations of life in 2016. The idea of cooking a complicated recipe after work today may be anathema. You just want to eat.

Two ideas. One is, pick up a heat-lamp roast chicken at the market on the way home. (Don’t think too much about its provenance.) Tear it apart for four, or half of it for two, shredding the meat with your fingers. Then mix the chicken with a few handfuls of baby arugula, a large handful of sliced scallions and a lot of chopped cilantro. Cut an avocado or two into the mix if you have one on hand. Then make a dressing out of lime juice, garlic and olive oil, and season it with salt and pepper. Drizzle that over the top and serve. Dinner in 15 minutes, tops.

But if that’s too complex, here’s a second option, which a number of readers have asked about since I published this exegesis on excellent sandwiches in The Times Magazine: a peanut butter and gochujang sandwich. (Gochujang is a Korean hot-pepper paste. If you don’t have any, sriracha offers similar joys.) It’s most delectable on sesame bread, but really any high-quality loaf will do. Toast the bread, then apply a thick spread of peanut butter to it, and a thin coating of the gochujang (or a lively squirt of sriracha) on top of that. Sandwich and serve. Extra points if you add kimchi or pickles. It’s shockingly good with a cold glass of milk.

Those looking for more concrete recipes can of course find thousands on Cooking. To keep things simple, maybe make Melissa Clark’s fine recipe for spicy roasted shrimp with broccoli rabe. Or her recipe for vegetarian skillet chili.

Have you tried Martha Rose Shulman’s recipe for penne with peas, pea greens and Parmesan, which of course you can make without the pea greens if you don’t have any? Or Florence Fabricant’s recipe for monkfish with caper butter? We’re thinking that may work crazily well with lobster. And we love a twice-baked potato on a Wednesday night, always, particularly when the recipe includes both milk-braised cauliflower and plenty of cheese.

Scroll through our database and see what grabs your fancy. Save the recipes to your recipe box, send them to friends, or post about them on social media as we do on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest. Rate them (highly, we hope!) and leave notes on them for yourself or for others if you’ve discovered a shortcut or substitution worth sharing. And if anything goes wrong, please don’t hesitate to reach out to us for help. We can scramble out of cookingcare@nytimes.com just like the Granite Mountain Hotshots.

Now, make sure to carve out some time for Kelefa Sanneh’s look at Paul Simon’s endless comeback in The New Yorker. (Here’s “Cool Papa Bell,” off Simon’s forthcoming album, “Stranger to Stranger,” out in June.) Read Mary O’Donoghue’s “Kiddio at the Wedding” in Granta.

And, if you thrilled as we did to Bryan Miller’s short dispatch from Hawk’s restaurant in Rayne, La., this week, take a look at this cool flyover video of the town and crawfish farms that surround it. We want to go to there. See you soon.


