


The Yankees are most exciting when their best players go back in time. They can still do it now and then. Jacoby Ellsbury, who stole home against the Yankees in 2009, did it for them on Friday night.

“When you’re aggressive, you have to take chances, you know?” said Brett Gardner, who went on to win Saturday’s game with a home run. “Not everything’s guaranteed. You have to maintain that aggressiveness.”

Bold, headlong dives have been a staple of the Yankees for more than 40 years. Ellsbury did it with a daring dash against the Tampa Bay Rays, and the Steinbrenners have done it with dollars since the advent of free agency. That is how Ellsbury joined the team.

Aggressiveness, taking a chance — every fan loves it in the winter. When the Yankees signed Ellsbury in December 2013, he had just propelled the Boston Red Sox to another championship, batting .298 and leading the majors in stolen bases. Two years before that, he had led the majors in total bases and was the best position player in the American League.

Now, as he starts the third season of his seven-year, $153 million contract, Ellsbury, 32, finds himself in a curious spot. He is paid like a superstar but has not played like one for a year and a half. Since the All-Star break in 2014, through Friday, Ellsbury’s on-base percentage was .312.

“He’s a good, impact player,” said Carlos Beltran, who arrived as a free agent with the Yankees the same month as Ellsbury. “He’s a guy who can play defense, he’s a guy who can steal bases, he has speed, and when he’s feeling good at the plate, he can put himself in the base path, too. As a player, you’re going to go through ups and downs. Last year his knee injury limited him a little bit. This year, he’s healthy.”

So he is, which is why it is still somewhat odd to see Ellsbury or Gardner resting against left-handers. Gardner, like Ellsbury, is a 32-year-old left-handed-hitting outfielder with speed and an All-Star past. The lineup is designed for the veterans in the middle to take advantage of their everyday presence at the top.

Five years ago, that would have been easier. But while the Yankees declined to give a 10-year deal to second baseman Robinson Cano in December 2013, they could not resist the allure of Ellsbury, Beltran and catcher Brian McCann. Players over 30 need rest to stay strong, and integrating younger players is Manager Joe Girardi’s annual challenge.

General Manager Brian Cashman traded McCann’s young backup, John Ryan Murphy, to Minnesota in the off-season for outfielder Aaron Hicks, who is 26. Hicks hit .225 for the Twins, but he is a former first-round draft pick who hit .307 against left-handers last season. Girardi is determined to use him, and weary of defending his rationale.

Before Friday’s game, in which Hicks started in center over Ellsbury, Girardi explained the need to play Hicks with the Yankees facing left-handed starters through the weekend.

“We feel that he’s going to produce, and produce at a high level,” Girardi said of Hicks, who has two singles in 22 at-bats. “Not just singles. A high level.”

After Hicks hurt his shoulder diving for a hit on Friday, Ellsbury replaced him and gave a virtuoso performance. In the fifth inning, he singled, advanced to second on a hit, took third on a balk and stole home — with two outs and two strikes — when Matt Moore ignored him and stayed in the windup. Later, Ellsbury drove in two runs with a double.

Perhaps he should just start all the time, no matter who is pitching. But the Yankees — who sat Ellsbury in the wild-card game in October against the Houston left-hander Dallas Keuchel — planned for this sort of platoon.

“We could go over this all day,” Girardi said, rubbing his forehead and referring to his earlier comments on Hicks’s skills. “Everyone talked about ‘everyone got tired last year; everyone got tired last year.’ So now, when I sit a guy, everyone wants to know why he’s not playing. It’s give and take. It’s a long season. It’s a process, and I’ve got to make sure our guys are healthy the whole way through.”

Gardner said he understood the philosophy of using Hicks against left-handers. For parts of three seasons, Gardner said, he watched Ichiro Suzuki prepare for every game as if he would start, no matter what the lineup said.

“He was doing his everyday routine as if he had played 300 games in a row,” Gardner said. “When you look at a guy like that, who’s accomplished what he’s accomplished in his career — and you look at how little I’ve accomplished — it kind of makes you realize, hey, don’t worry about tomorrow or next week or next month or September. Let’s worry about today.”

Ellsbury said he was not bothered, either, because he would still play a lot of games and would not sit against every left-hander.

“It just means we have four good outfielders,” Ellsbury said. “That’s what it means. You can give us rest. We’ve seen that with the infield as well — give some guys a rest on a lefty.”

Then he added, as a somewhat pointed reminder of his résumé, “And I mean, over my career, I’ve swung the bat against lefties well.”

Ellsbury and Gardner have essentially been the same hitters against lefties and righties in their careers. Before Friday, Gardner had a .266 average against right-handers, .260 against left-handers. For Ellsbury, the numbers were .290 and .284.

They are everyday players. The hope, for the Yankees, is that they will play every day in October. With a losing record in April, that seems like a distant mirage. Understanding the calendar is essential.

“There’s a big balance that we’re trying to create here,” Girardi said.

It is the balance of what was and what is, and how to maximize what remains.


