


Julia Hlinka’s mother was tired of making pierogies. She’d already dug up the potatoes on her small Slovakian farm, harvested the wheat and milled the flour, so who could blame her for enacting a pierogi succession plan? She gathered her kids around. She kneaded and rolled the skins out thin. She mashed potatoes with sheep’s cheese and drew the dough around them, dumpling after dumpling, hundreds at a sitting. One day, she turned the task over to the children. Hlinka was 10.

She’s 87 now, and she still makes pierogies every Friday. She told me this, her granddaughter Helena Fabiankovic translating, as she peeled potatoes with an eight-inch chef’s knife in her Brooklyn kitchen, the motion seemingly hard-wired into her fingers.

Fabiankovic made a face, though, when Baba, as she calls Hlinka, pulled out milk for the dough. “That’s not how she taught me,” she said, before continuing in mild protest: “She told me to use sour cream and water.” It’s a difference that goes beyond dairy choices; last year, Fabiankovic quit her career as a preschool teacher to open a restaurant in Gowanus with her boyfriend called Baba’s Pierogies, dedicated to her grandmother’s specialty. But Baba just kept kneading. Sometimes, mastery of a dish means that you make it the same every time, and sometimes it means that things change, you wing it and you know it’ll work out in the end.

Baba has seen a lot of change. She told me stories from her years in her village, Litmanová: about the government-assigned teacher whose pedagogy included making his students catch frogs for him to cook for his girlfriend; about the songs her mother and aunt sang in the fields; about the call she got, in 1969, from her husband, Mikulas, who’d set out for America two years earlier to make a living away from the eyes of the Communist regime. “Come,” he told her. “Bring the children. And open the barn; set the animals free before you go.” (“Grandpa always cries when he tells that story,” Fabiankovic said.)

Baba came to Brooklyn, living alongside Scandinavians in Sunset Park. There were more Slovaks in Astoria, and among the Polish families of Greenpoint, and clustered with the Germans in Yorktown, communities as old as the 1880s. But if New York is actually a galaxy of tiny cities, in 1969, Sunset Park was out of those orbits. Some of Hlinka’s in-laws lived nearby, though, and a few Slovak friends. “Still, Grandma cried a lot in the early days,” Fabiankovic said. Baba mentioned that she couldn’t find the sheep’s cheese for her pierogies. A friend took her to the grocery store and pressed a pack of American singles in her hand.

After the fall of communism in Czechoslovakia in 1989, Fabiankovic remembers, Slovak families began moving to her neighborhood and nearby Bay Ridge. “It was great,” she says. “I got to experience my culture head-on, get smacked in the face with it.” They all went to the same church, shopped at Polish markets for almost-tastes of home, made pierogies, sang and danced. But over time, those families moved away.

Fabiankovic, who has lived her whole life in Sunset Park, used to make “pierogies” with her Baba as a little girl, using Play-Doh and a gumball as the filling, but is also at home around won tons, pot stickers and shiu mai. For as long as she can remember, her neighborhood has been Brooklyn’s Chinatown, as Chinese immigrants started arriving in the ’80s. I asked whether her community ever felt any tension, being suddenly surrounded by such a different culture, but her grandfather replied from the couch: He’s always felt a connection to the Mexicans, the Chinese, to the immigrants they’ve seen move into their neighborhood; he feels as if he understands how they came here and are trying to figure out their lives. “There’s a word in Slovak: susid,” Fabiankovic said. “It means ‘neighbor,’ but where they grew up, your neighbor is your family, so I think they brought that feeling with them. My dad cooks lo mein at home.”

We finished making the pierogies, Baba and her granddaughter showing me how to knead the dough so it has just the right amount of chew, how to pack them full but not-too-full. We ate them: a pliant, tender skin giving way to a smooth, creamy mash of potatoes, delivering the gut-level satisfaction of starch on starch. The salty bits of bacon and lashes of fat on top were, strictly speaking, unnecessary, but why resist?

I was lucky, I thought, to have this moment. Not only because I got to compulsively eat a dozen superb pierogies, but because Baba and Grandpa were just about to go back to Slovakia for six months. “Do they ever think about just staying there?” I asked.

“Nah, they like it here,” Fabiankovic said. “They love that there’s someone selling vegetables on the corner, and that there’s a bus you can take anywhere.” This is their home now. Then I remembered something else Fabiankovic told me: “They can get sheep’s cheese here now, but Baba still makes her pierogies with American.”

Recipe: Potato-Cheese Pierogies With Bacon


