


OTTAWA — All of Toronto is talking about the daring breakout. Mayor John Tory went to the scene of the escape on Wednesday to quiz officials about their plans. Everyone in town has one eye out for the fugitives, but no one wants to meet them in a dark alley.

Who’s on the loose? A pair of capybaras.

The animals, native to South America, are the world’s largest rodent — picture an oversize tail-less beaver, or maybe a 125-pound guinea pig. A small zoo in High Park, on the city’s west end, already had one and was taking delivery of two more, a mating pair bred in Texas, when they bolted early Tuesday morning.

A passer-by reported glimpsing them in the area Tuesday night, but when Mr. Tory arrived on Wednesday, park officials seemed no closer to recapturing the as-yet nameless young lovers. The mayor was left to look over the zoo’s remaining capybara, Chewy, who sat in the grass in an otherwise empty fenced-in enclosure.

Mr. Tory said a dragnet was being mounted. “We are deploying the full resources of the zoo team, and others that they have brought to the cause,” he said.

Much of High Park is forested, providing plenty of cover for the two escapees, both about 6 months old. Ponds and creeks also make good hiding places: Capybaras are semiaquatic and can remain submerged for long periods with only their nostrils poking above the water’s surface.

The animals are docile herbivores, but officials still urged citizens not to try to capture them.

And the city made no move to bring in trained hunters from Venezuela, where the creatures are regarded as a delicacy and are widely hunted before Easter.

Megan Price, a spokeswoman for the Toronto parks department, said the plan was to lock Chewy up on Wednesday night and then leave the capybara enclosure open, with a trail of food leading in. Park workers with nets were to hide in a van watching.

Mr. Tory said he was willing to take a shift, “but they probably decided that’s beyond the competence of a mayor, as they would suggest many things would be.”


