


Ben Bishop stopped 34 shots and Alex Killorn scored with less than two minutes remaining Thursday night as the Tampa Bay Lightning advanced to the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs with a 1-0 victory at home over the Detroit Red Wings.

Killorn’s second winning goal of the series was set up by Ryan Callahan, who retrieved goalie Petr Mrazek’s bad pass behind the Detroit net and centered the puck in the crease for Killorn’s backhander 18 minutes 17 seconds into the third period.

The Lightning eliminated the Red Wings in the first round for the second straight year. Detroit pushed Tampa Bay, the defending Eastern Conference champions, to seven games a year ago but could beat them only once in five attempts this time, with Killorn, Tyler Johnson and Nikita Kucherov picking up the offensive slack for Tampa Bay with the star Steven Stamkos injured.

Detroit scored only eight goals in the series, though not because of a lack of opportunities.

The Red Wings finished 1 for 25 on the power play, and their futility was never more evident than Thursday night, when they failed to even get a shot on goal during a 5-on-3 advantage early in the opening period.

BLACKHAWKS 4, BLUES 3 Patrick Kane’s first goal of the playoffs saved the defending Stanley Cup champions’ season.

Kane scored on a backhander early in the second overtime, and Chicago avoided first-round elimination with a victory in St. Louis Blues.

It was Kane’s fifth career overtime playoff goal, tied for third on the career list. Kane, who led the N.H.L. in scoring with 106 points, circled the net to corral his own shot that slowly slid wide, and poked it past Brian Elliott at 3:07 to send a standing-room crowd of 19,956 home unhappy.

Elliott’s stick got tangled up with defenseman Jay Bouwmeester’s skate on the play, so he was late crossing the crease.

Jonathan Toews still has no goals in the series for the Blackhawks, but Kane and Toews assisted on Artemi Panarin’s goal in the final second of the second period for a 3-1 lead.

But the Blues rallied in the third with goals from Robby Fabbri and David Backes, who tied the score at 3-3 on a deflection that slipped past Corey Crawford with 5:10 to play.

Crawford made 43 saves, and Marian Hossa and Artem Anisimov also scored for Chicago, which takes the series back home for Game 6 Saturday night.

The Blues are trying to end a string of three consecutive first-round playoff exits. In 2014 they had a 2-0 lead on Chicago and then lost four straight.

Chicago played without Andrew Shaw, suspended for one game for making an anti-gay slur during Game 4.

DUCKS 4, PREDATORS 1 Nate Thompson and Jamie McGinn scored about two minutes apart late in the second period, and Anaheim won at Nashville to even their first-round Western Conference series at two games each.

Ryan Getzlaf and Andrew Cogliano also scored, and Frederik Andersen made 30 saves to pick up his second straight win.

Mike Fisher scored for Nashville.

The Ducks will host Game 5 of the best-of-seven series on Saturday in Anaheim. The road team has one each game so far.


