


Sabbath Elevators

I live in a large co-op complex with Sabbath elevators: On Fridays, Saturdays and Jewish holidays, some elevators stop at every floor to accommodate observant Jews. But no one seems to use them. When I suggested that the co-op board phase them out, I was told the building could get sued if it changed the rules. Is that true? Doesn’t the board have the authority to make these kinds of decisions? Some of my neighbors and I feel that the demographics in the neighborhood have changed, rendering the elevators anachronistic.

Lower East Side, Manhattan

For Jews who observe the Sabbath and holidays like Passover, living in a high-rise building poses a quandary: How do you get to the 23rd floor without pressing the elevator button, a task that would violate a prohibition against creating sparks and fires? Enter Sabbath elevators, a modern accommodation for an ancient restriction. Such elevators are programmed to stop diligently on every floor, delivering residents to their apartments, albeit very slowly.

Waiting for a pokey elevator can be frustrating. Waiting for one that stops on every floor could trigger an existential crisis. “It takes a little bit longer, but I make that my moment of Zen,” said Jacob Goldman, the owner of LoHo Realty on the Lower East Side, a neighborhood with a high concentration of buildings with Sabbath elevators.

As you wait, try to remember that these elevators are vital for observant Jews, particularly seniors and families with small children. Without that option, “it would be impossible for them to leave their apartments,” said Rabbi Aviad Bodner of Stanton Street Shul on the Lower East Side.

In recent years, some of the co-ops have discovered a workaround, programming the elevators to stop automatically only on the floors with residents who use the service. This upgrade speeds up the ride, at least a little bit. If your co-op has not implemented such a feature, it might want to consider doing so.

As for ending the practice altogether, your board should think carefully about making any drastic changes to a policy that probably dates back decades, perhaps even to the original co-op conversion. “The decision of whether to phase out Sabbath elevators should not be made hastily,” said Slava Hazin, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. Any missteps could result in a lawsuit against the co-op for discrimination or violation of housing laws.

The board should check its governing documents, which might mandate Sabbath elevators. Even if the rules say nothing about the issue, residents might still have a reasonable expectation that a longstanding service like this one would continue indefinitely.

The board could survey residents to see who still wants the elevators. If they have fallen out of favor and residents unequivocally support a new policy, it could consider phasing them out. In the meantime, take a deep breath and try to enjoy the ride.

Prying Security Cameras

My landlord just installed a weird and creepy camera in the hallway that looks directly into my apartment, even though it appears to face the street. When I open my apartment door, the camera can see into my vestibule. Is that legal? What should I do?

East Village, Manhattan

When you walk inside your apartment and close the door, you have a reasonable expectation of privacy, which is why it would be illegal for your landlord to install a camera in your bedroom without your knowledge or permission. But when you open that door and step into the hallway, you enter the public realm and relinquish that right to privacy. So your landlord can place a camera in the hallway, even one that stares you down when you open your door.

“It may be creepy, but it does not violate the law,” said Steven R. Wagner, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. The vestibule inside your apartment is not considered private when your door is open, making it fair game for the camera’s lens.

Landlords sometimes employ these surveillance methods if they suspect a tenant is engaging in criminal activity, like selling drugs out of the apartment, or violating the terms of the lease, like subletting the place illegally. Although rent-regulated tenants are usually the target of aggressive surveillance, a landlord might also have reason to spy on a market-rate tenant whom he wants to evict.

The behavior might rise to the level of harassment if your landlord engages in a repeated course of conduct that alarms or seriously annoys you and serves no legitimate purpose, said Jonathan I. Mann, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. If you think this behavior crosses a line, write the landlord a letter saying you feel harassed by the camera, and you retain the right to file a civil or administrative complaint against him if he does not remove it. At the very least, the landlord might change the camera angle.

Creaking in the Wind

I rent an apartment in a 1960s high-rise condominium. On windy days, it creaks. I assumed this was normal until a member of the building’s maintenance staff told me that structural columns were removed during the renovation of some apartments, modifications he believes were structurally unsound. I am shocked. Could this possibly be correct? Would a contractor do this sort of work, possibly without permits? Should I report this — and if so, to whom?

Upper West Side, Manhattan

Just because your neighbors remodeled their apartments and your building makes funny noises does not mean it is facing imminent collapse. “Creaking could emanate from the building facade, or perhaps things inside the walls,” said Howard L. Zimmerman, an architect. It doesn’t necessarily follow that the building is falling apart, he added.

A condo owner who wants to remodel must have the proposed alterations reviewed and approved by the condo association’s board. An architect or engineer for the building would review those plans. Any structural work would require building permits. “No one individual has the ability to remove supporting structures in a haphazard manner,” Mr. Zimmerman said.

If you want to set your mind at ease, you could alert the managing agent to your concerns. Management could consult with the board and other professionals to determine whether further investigation is warranted, said Robert J. Braverman, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. You could also visit the Department of Buildings website to search for records of any permits issued for your building, which are available to the public.


