


LONDON — The hardest league title race to call in Europe right now is in Spain. A single point separates Barcelona, Atlético Madrid and Real Madrid with two games each left to play, and like the plot of a decent detective thriller, this one is going all the way to the wire.

The suspense is compounded by the fact that the two Madrid teams have knife-edge semifinal second legs in the Champions League this week. And Barcelona still has the Copa del Rey final to come.

Everyone should enjoy the drama, except for Vicente del Bosque, the Spanish team national coach, because every extra game, every extra effort put on heart and mind and sinew will affect the players he needs to defend the European Championship in June.

The weekend’s La Liga games were rolled out like consecutive chapters on Saturday. Gareth Bale rose to head the winning goal in Real’s 1-0 victory at Real Sociedad in the early afternoon. Antoine Griezmann came off the bench to strike Atlético’s goal, also for 1-0, against Rayo Vallecano in Madrid.

And then in the late evening, but still in 77-degree heat at kickoff, Barcelona wore down Real Betis in Seville before Ivan Rakitic and Luis Suárez scored to make it 2-0 to Barça.

If they carry on like this, Barcelona will win the title. It has the same points total as Atlético, but in Spanish soccer the first tiebreaker is the head-to-head between two teams, and Barcelona beat Atlético home and away earlier this season. Losing out to Atlético in the Champions League doesn’t count.

Real Madrid is that one point behind. “We fought, we suffered, we worked hard until the end,” Real’s coach, Zinedine Zidane, said after his match. “I’m happy we’ve picked up three points. In my head, I wanted Cristiano Ronaldo and Karim Benzema in the team, but I’m happy for Bale that he scored.”

Bale’s injuries seem behind him. Benzema has struggled for some time to finish games. And Ronaldo has reportedly been having stem cell treatment for a thigh muscle injury that kept him out of the Champions League semifinal first leg match against Manchester City last week.

Zidane can doubtless remember his own trials and tribulations with injuries, not the least when he attempted to play in the 2002 World Cup in South Korea too soon after tearing a thigh muscle.

The prizes are out there, and the athletes try to reach them, regardless of what the body is telling them.

Of the three Spanish clubs competing for the league trophy, Atlético looks perhaps the freshest and the fittest at this moment. The coach, Diego Simeone, despite being banned from the field and ordered to the stands for the final three games of La Liga, called the shots.

His ban follows a game against Málaga the previous week when Simeone appeared to tell a ball boy to throw a ball onto the field to disrupt a dangerous attack against his team. He pleaded innocence, but the worldly wise Coach Simeone still took the rap of a three-game sideline ban and a $3,000 fine.

Instead of whipping up the players and the crowd the way that Simeone normally does, he sat impassively high in the stands. Impassive, but not idle. From up there, he says, he can see the play more clearly.

He made the call to rest seven normal starters ahead of Saturday’s game against Vallecano, and he, without anyone’s seeing him do so, decided the time to make match-winning substitutions.

In the 54th minute, Atlético brought on its two main strikers, Antoine Griezmann and Fernando Torres. Less than a minute after that, with his first touch on the ball, Griezmann scored the only goal of the game.

Whatever else Simeone can be called, he is a remarkable coach. He galvanizes a work ethic in every single player, he persuades each and every one to go to his limit. And with Griezmann the improvement since he joined Atlético from Real Sociedad in 2014 has been to make him consistently the team’s most reliable goal scorer.

Just 40 seconds after taking the field, he struck with his first touch. It was a shot on the run, the body immaculately poised, the left foot driven through the ball from 20 yards, the result unstoppable.

“What was important was winning,” Griezmann told reporters. “We have to rest because there is a nice match on Tuesday.”

The nice match is in Munich, against Bayern in the Champions League.

But the wins by the two Madrid teams put the heat on Barcelona in Seville. For 50 minutes, Barça toiled, and Betis defended stubbornly on a bone-dry field that the players said inhibited their flow.

There was a lack of pace, of movement, of invention — even from Lionel Messi. But one Betis defender in particular effectively handed the points to Barcelona.

Heiko Westermann is an imposing, experienced German central defender. Only he can explain his rush of blood when he clattered into Rakitic and Messi with such obvious fouls that earned two yellow cards within seven minutes, and he was sent off before halftime.

Barcelona, with Messi pulling the strings from midfield, took full advantage. An angled cross by Messi let to the first goal by Rakitic after the other central defender Germán Pezzella and the goalkeeper Antonio Adán got in one another’s way going for the same ball.

Then, the coup de grâce: Messi rolled an inch-perfect through pass for Suárez to score his 55th goal in 52 games of the season, leaving Barcelona, Atlético and Real in that order atop La Liga.


