


Jeff Van Gundy was speaking in his characteristically outspoken role as a television commentator, not as a reported candidate for the remaining N.B.A. head coaching vacancies, excluding the one in New York. He was in no way endorsing Phil Jackson as an accomplished Knicks president or Carmelo Anthony as a championship-level franchise player.

He was merely explaining why Jackson and Anthony need each other more than people think, and why those — perhaps Anthony and Jackson — wishing for the philosophically rickety partnership to conclude might want to consider the potential consequences.

“First of all, the problem with step-by-step analysis is that it obscures the bigger picture,” Van Gundy said in a telephone interview. “So I don’t care that much what you say about Phil’s decisions to trade for Jose Calderon or sign Arron Afflalo — so far, he got the biggest one right.”

He referred to Jackson’s drafting of Kristaps Porzingis — “The kid has the mental makeup to be a huge star,” Van Gundy raved — when Jackson might have succumbed to external pressure to trade down in the draft to secure a veteran player along with a lower pick last June.

With the focus on Jackson’s coaching plans — the choice is seemingly down to the holdover interim coach Kurt Rambis or the recently interviewed and more preferable (we’ll get to why) David Blatt — Van Gundy contended that the most pressing issue for the Knicks was how to best develop Porzingis, the skilled 7-foot-3 skyscraper, the most exciting homegrown foundational talent since Patrick Ewing.

For a fan base and a news media divided or dithering on continuing with Anthony, Van Gundy — fondly remembered from his coaching days in New York during the Ewing era — makes a compelling case for why the Knicks should not necessarily oblige their best player even if he decides to waive his no-trade clause.

Starting over, going for a total rebuilding around Porzingis with the hope of attracting another star in the summer of 2017 or beyond, has sounded tempting for those (me included) fatigued by the yammering about Anthony’s window to win as he approaches his 32nd birthday in May.

What, exactly, is the realistic view from that window? Within two years, the fourth or fifth playoff seeding in the Eastern Conference? Barring an unlikely 2016 superstar free-agent signing, while assuming some roster upgrade with available salary-cap space, a spot in the lower playoff echelon or a rise to its contending fringe would be the most realistic Knicks objective for next season.

But here is where Van Gundy maintained that Anthony’s continued presence would be invaluable for that modest ambition.

One never knows what might happen — Blake Griffin could soon be on the trade market after another Los Angeles Clippers playoff disaster. But with limited locations available based on Anthony’s leverage, trading him might not land anything close to a commensurate return, especially factoring in two-season salary-cap hits of about $29 million and $31 million, including a $9 million trade kicker the new team would be responsible for.

Worse, perhaps, would be the environment Anthony would leave behind, the crux of Van Gundy’s case.

“You talk about starting over, developing a young team around Porzingis, but one of the things that’s always overlooked about player development is playing meaningful games,” Van Gundy said. “Even if you don’t make the playoffs, what’s essential for guys like Porzingis is to be playing in games that count, instead of just playing out a season like they did this year.”

Exhibit A — although a worst-case scenario — would be Jahlil Okafor’s rookie misadventures in Philadelphia this season without a veteran performer to lean on. Anthony was a surprisingly soft pillar and one the amiable Porzingis seemed to genuinely enjoy playing with.

“Whatever you think about the triangle, it is a pass-first offense, and Carmelo, I think, influenced Porzingis well,” Van Gundy said. “I also think that Porzingis, because of the unselfish way he plays, influenced Carmelo well.”

When asking why Anthony would stay if Jackson fares comparably in the coming free-agent market to how he did last summer — and with no real assurance of high-stakes postseason games anytime soon — you always begin with Anthony’s obvious delight at being the brand-name basketball star at Madison Square Garden.

Then there is Porzingis, who, of course, could plateau for a season or two before reaching the threshold of stardom. But with Anthony embracing a more versatile approach as his body lectures him on its limits, Porzingis could also become an exception to developmental rule and emerge as Anthony’s co-star by next season.

Given his attachment to the Garden, Anthony should also consider the last Knicks franchise player who lobbied his way out. That was Ewing in 2000, though he was much older (37) and had had a far longer (15 years) and more successful run than Anthony has had.

Van Gundy lived through that ordeal as coach and said everyone involved had come to regret Ewing’s departure to Seattle.

“I was just talking to Patrick in Charlotte about it, and he admits he never should have gone,” Van Gundy said. “I know we would have wanted a do-over. He would have been a free agent the next season, freeing up cap space, and then we never did replace the character Patrick brought every night.”

The upshot for Ewing: Other than having his jersey retired, he never did find his way back to the franchise to which he had given so much.

So let’s assume for the moment that Anthony remains tethered to Porzingis and Jackson manages to upgrade the Knicks’ backcourt and overall athleticism, making them playoff contenders.

Wouldn’t Blatt, a winner wherever in the world he has coached, including Cleveland, be a more prudent choice than run-of-the-mill Rambis?

Speculation abounds that Jackson met with Blatt as a smoke screen, while still being all in on his buddy Rambis. But the internationally accomplished Blatt might actually appeal to Jackson’s longtime deference to being, you know, different.

Going with Blatt would dispel the belief that Jackson is too insular, trapped in his own inner triangle. It would add a defensive-minded coach to the mix while presumptively retaining Rambis as the associate and experienced chieftain of the offense.

Finally, it would be something of a New York-centered public relations coup — an American-born, Israel-relocated Jewish head coach who played college ball at Princeton with Knicks General Manager Steve Mills. There would be at least a front-office partnership in place if Jackson exercised his option to leave after next season.

Anthony probably would not get a hearty endorsement of Blatt from his good friend LeBron James or some others in Cleveland, where Blatt’s reluctance to play the grateful rookie head coach did not serve him well.

Too bad. Anthony has a hammer in his no-trade clause. The Knicks have leverage in not having to accommodate him. Anthony may want to remember that there are very few places to maximize his championship-ring chances — and how many of those teams would need or want him?

Ultimately, Anthony’s New York-loving heart may be more prudent than his head. And if Porzingis needs Anthony, so do the Knicks. That at least is the argument from Van Gundy, commentator and former coach. In the convoluted world of the Knicks, we never object to a little clarity.


