


WASHINGTON — Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter on Thursday proposed allowing highly skilled civilians in the middle of their careers to “lateral” into the military and become senior uniformed officers, like colonels.

Mr. Carter, in a speech at the Pentagon, unveiled the idea as part of a far-reaching initiative to change how the military recruits and retains people with expertise in fields like cybersecurity.

“As we all know, generations change, technologies change, labor markets change,” Mr. Carter said. “That’s why one of my responsibilities now — and a job for all of us in the years ahead — is to make sure that amid all this change,” the Defense Department “continues to recruit, develop and retain the most talented men and women America has to offer.”

The proposals — known as Force of the Future — would require congressional approval, and officials on Capitol Hill quickly cast doubt on whether legislation could be passed before January, when President Obama’s term will end and Mr. Carter is likely to be replaced.

The spokesman for Representative Mac Thornberry of Texas, the Republican chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said that the Pentagon had waited far too long to send its proposals to Congress. The House has already passed the major legislation that will govern the Defense Department in 2017, and the Senate is expected to follow soon.

“That could limit our ability to act on these proposals until 2018 regardless of their merit,” said the spokesman, Claude Chafin.

Todd Harrison, a military budget expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said that legislative proposals from the administration were almost always sent to the House and Senate Armed Services Committees in February. He said that with many members of Congress back home running for re-election this fall, it was unlikely that personnel legislation would be passed this year.

“It sure doesn’t seem like this was one of Carter’s top priorities,” Mr. Harrison said. “If he was serious about it, he would have sent it up there no later than February.”

But Peter Cook, the Pentagon press secretary, said that some of the initiatives had already been included in the Senate legislation, and that the Defense Department hoped that other proposals could be added in conference between the House and the Senate.

“We still see plenty of opportunity to work with Congress on these initiatives this year,” he said.

Mr. Carter gave his speech on Thursday in the Pentagon’s courtyard before the heads of the services. The proposals are among the most ambitious changes pushed by a defense secretary in years.

One of the measures would change an arrangement that requires officers who are not promoted to retire. Under a new system, some officers with specialties could remain in the military. Mr. Carter also unveiled other measures — including switching to electronic enlistment forms, sparing recruits from having to wade through millions of pieces of paper each year — that he could implement without congressional approval to improve personnel systems.

It is not clear why the Pentagon waited so long to send the proposals to Capitol Hill. The program’s architect, Brad Carson, resigned in April after a contentious confirmation hearing made it clear that the Senate was not going to confirm him to a permanent position at the Pentagon. Mr. Carson had also grown frustrated with Mr. Carter, who Mr. Carson believed was taking far too long to review the personnel proposals.

Mr. Carter did not address the timing of the proposals on Thursday.

“For each of these changes, we’ll need Congress’s help to provide the proper authorities, but there’s good news here, because we know some on Capitol Hill already agree with us,” Mr. Carter said.

“We’ve already been working with Congress very closely on this,” he added, “and I’m looking forward to partnering with both the House and Senate Armed Services Committees to get this done.”

Mr. Carson, a Democratic House member from Oklahoma from 2001 to 2005 who became a military officer after losing a Senate race in 2004, released a statement shortly after Mr. Carter’s speech in which he called the announcement “historic.”

“These reforms truly mark the most significant personnel reforms in decades, if not since the Department of Defense was established,” he said. “Secretary Carter deserves great credit for announcing these.”


