


The Kansas Supreme Court ruled on Friday that the state Legislature had failed to equitably fund public schools, once again giving the state until June 30 to fix its financing system or face a court-ordered shutdown of schools.

The ruling was the latest volley in a long battle over public education in Kansas. A lawsuit from a coalition of school districts led the Kansas Supreme Court to order the Legislature in 2014 to increase funding to poorer districts.

The court and the Legislature have been at odds ever since. In February, the court said that a solution proposed by lawmakers, to use block grants to allocate funds, had failed to address inequities in schools. In response, the Legislature passed a bill that it said gave poorer districts a fair share of funding. Gov. Sam Brownback, a Republican, signed the measure in April.

In a 47-page ruling, the court rejected that bill, saying the Legislature’s formula “creates intolerable, and simply unfair, wealth-based disparities among the districts.”

“This case requires us to determine whether the state has met its burden to show that recent legislation brings the state’s K-12 public school funding system into compliance with Article 6 of the Kansas Constitution,” the ruling said. “We hold it has not.”

The Legislature is expected to meet Wednesday before it officially adjourns for the session.

Ray Merrick, the House speaker, said in a statement, “The court has yet again demonstrated it is the most political body in the state of Kansas.”

“Dumping the ruling at 5 p.m. the day before a long weekend and holding children hostage,” Mr. Merrick said. “This despite the fact that the Legislature acted in good faith to equalize the record amounts of money going to schools.”

Satisfying the court could mean spending tens of millions more on public schools, a measure that Mr. Brownback said could be achieved by making more cuts to higher education and Medicaid.

Kansas’ fiscal woes, which many in the state attribute to Mr. Brownback’s deep tax cuts in 2012 and 2013, have given the governor and the Legislature very little wiggle room in the budget to devote millions more to education funding.

The court reiterated that lawmakers had until June 30 to devise a solution. “This will give the Legislature yet another opportunity to treat Kansas students fairly,” it said.

Alan Rupe, a lawyer representing the school districts that sued the state, said they were “optimistic that the Legislature will take this last, last chance offered by the court to put Kansas’ schoolchildren back on a path toward equitable school funding and perform its constitutional duty to provide adequate and equitable schooling to all Kansas kids.”

In a statement, Mr. Brownback sharply criticized the ruling.

“It is unfortunate that the Kansas Supreme Court has put at risk the education of Kansas students by threatening to close schools on June 30,” he said. “The court is engaging in political brinksmanship with this ruling, and the cost will be borne by our children. We will carefully consider the implications of the court’s ruling and its disregard for the proper role of the Kansas Legislature.”


