


SYDNEY, Australia — Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said on Tuesday that he would call for national elections to be held on July 2, meaning that he will test his popularity with the Australian public just seven months after taking office.

The announcement was not a surprise. The conservative prime minister had previously said that he planned to call a so-called double dissolution election, under which all seats in both houses of Parliament are open. In most national elections, all of the lower house, but only half the Senate, is up for election.

The result of the voting in July, analysts said, could be a more-cooperative Senate and a smoother path through Parliament for Mr. Turnbull’s initiatives — assuming that he wins.

“A double dissolution election is about giving the people their say,” Mr. Turnbull said on Tuesday. “It is an occasion when the House and Senate can’t agree, persistently, and so then everyone goes to the polls and the Australian people have their say.”

Mr. Turnbull’s governing coalition controls the House of Representatives, but minority parties and independent lawmakers hold the balance of power in the Senate and, working with the opposition Labor Party, have sometimes blocked his initiatives. In the Senate, the conservative coalition is six seats short of a majority.

In a normal election, most of those independent senators would not have had to face the voters this year. But because they will — and because of recent changes to Senate rules that make it harder for independents to gain seats — the voting in July could give Mr. Turnbull a more compliant Parliament, if all goes his way.

“It is a decisive move,” said the political analyst David Alexander from the Canberra-based lobbying firm Barton Deakin.

“Without a double dissolution, he faced another three years of a deeply hostile Senate,” Mr. Alexander said.

But that assumes that he wins. Mr. Turnbull, a wealthy former investment banker, has slipped in the polls since ousting Tony Abbott, his predecessor as prime minister and leader of the conservative Liberal Party, in September.

Mr. Turnbull has been criticized for indecisiveness, sometimes introducing proposals, including tax overhaul and funding for schools, and backing away from them.

John Wanna, a professor of political science at the Australian National University in Canberra, the capital, said that the parties’ senior figures were roughly evenly matched as campaigners, but that Mr. Turnbull, over a long campaign, could prove a more charismatic communicator than the Labor leader, Bill Shorten.

It was the Senate’s resistance to Mr. Turnbull’s initiatives that gave him the power to call a double dissolution election. The Constitution allows for one if the Senate consistently blocks legislation that has passed through the House of Representatives. On Monday, senators again rejected bills concerning the building and construction industry.

“Malcolm Turnbull is taking the bull by the horns and has gone ahead with it,” Mr. Alexander said. “It illustrates the level of frustration with the crossbench, and the prospect of another three years with a crossbench thwarting key legislation of the government.”

Crossbenchers are independent senators, who may vote for or against laws proposed by either major party.

The election campaign is likely to be a long one by Australian standards, and it risks alienating voters who have tired of politics in a country that has had four prime ministers since 2010, three of whom have been deposed by their party. Voting is compulsory for Australian citizens 18 or older.


