


A putback at the buzzer by Oklahoma City’s Steven Adams that would have won the game was disallowed upon review, and the Dallas Mavericks defeated the Thunder, 85-84, in Oklahoma City on Monday night to even their Western Conference playoff series at one win apiece.

Dallas had been embarrassed in its 108-70 loss in the opener on Saturday, but the Mavericks bounced back in Game 2, holding Oklahoma City to 33.7 percent shooting.

Raymond Felton had 21 points and Dirk Nowitzki 17 for the Mavericks. Deron Williams, declared doubtful on Sunday with an abdominal strain, scored 13 points, 11 in the game’s first five minutes.

Kevin Durant scored 21 points for Oklahoma City, but he made just 7 of 33 shots in one of the worst postseason shooting performances of his career.

RAPTORS 98, PACERS 87 Jonas Valanciunas had 23 points and 15 rebounds, Kyle Lowry had 18 points, 9 assists and 7 rebounds, and Toronto beat visiting Indiana, ending a postseason losing streak at seven games.

The Raptors had not won a playoff game since a 115-113 home victory over the Nets on April 30, 2014.

Cory Joseph scored 16 points, Patrick Patterson 14 and DeMar DeRozan had 10 as the Raptors tied the first-round series at 1-1.

Paul George scored 28 points and Monta Ellis 15 for the Pacers, who host Game 3 on Thursday.

Lowry and DeRozan both struggled with their shooting in their team’s Game 1 loss Saturday, combining to make eight of 32 attempts. Neither was particularly sharp in this one, with Lowry making 4 of 13 and DeRozan making 5 of 18.

Lowry still found a way to make an impact, providing five assists in the first quarter.

DeRozan, however, never seemed to find his rhythm and spent the fourth quarter on the bench as Lowry and Toronto’s reserves pulled away from the Pacers.

Terrence Ross was held out of the second half for precautionary reasons after being knocked down during an inbounds play late in the second quarter. Tests at halftime revealed no clear sign of a concussion, but Ross had a headache.

LEONARD IS HONORED Kawhi Leonard tends to shrug off all the accolades for his defensive prowess. He almost always credits his teammates and coach for any praise he receives.

It was no different Monday as Leonard won his second consecutive N.B.A. Defensive Player of the Year award after helping San Antonio have the league’s best defense.

Of his teammates, Leonard said: “They give me the confidence to pressure my man and get into the ballhandler. The bigs are there on the help side if the guy goes by me and I’m able to switch to other offensive players and all the other guards on my team to guard the best offensive player.”

Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich was not so sure about all of that.

“He’s a team-oriented individual for sure,” Popovich said. “But I’ve got to tell you, I don’t think he knows when those guys are back there or not, he just goes and does what he does. He just plays. He’s giving credit to everyone as he should, he’s a wonderful young man, but the things he does amaze me night after night, and the fact he does it at both ends really is something and then he rebounds on top of it. So, he’s a pretty special guy.”

Leonard beat out Draymond Green of the Golden State Warriors to become the first non-center to win the award in consecutive seasons since Dennis Rodman won in the 1989-90 and 1990-91 seasons.

The 6-foot-7 Leonard received 84 first-place votes and 547 points from a panel of 130 sportswriters and broadcasters from the United States and Canada. Green, an All-Star forward, was runner-up for the second straight year, with 44 first-place votes and 421 points. Miami center Hassan Whiteside was third with 83 points and two first-place votes.

The Spurs were a franchise-record 67-15 this season and allowed 92.9 points per game, the lowest in the N.B.A. Leonard was 12th in the league in steals and averaged a career-best 1.0 blocks. He was just as smothering in the 106-74 win over the Grizzlies to open the playoffs over the weekend.


