


It was 1970 in Harlem, a vibrant neighborhood struggling with poverty, neglect, drugs and crime amid the turmoil of the civil rights era. Against that troubled backdrop emerged a young congressman named Charles B. Rangel.

In January, for the first time in nearly half a century, someone other than Mr. Rangel, who is retiring, will represent Harlem in Congress.

While Harlem has sent the same man to Washington all these years, Harlem itself is no longer the same. The neighborhood, and much of the rest of New York’s 13th Congressional District, which also includes Washington Heights and parts of the Bronx, has been transformed by gentrification, immigration and other demographic shifts.

The political power of Dominicans is on the rise, while the influence of Puerto Ricans has dwindled. Many whites have moved in and many blacks have moved out. The district’s boundaries were redrawn a few years ago to include areas of the Bronx, adding more Hispanics as well as African immigrants.

Despite those changes, two of the more prominent candidates lay claim to vital pieces of Harlem’s political legacy, seeking to capitalize both on name recognition and on the district’s traditional black electorate. They must also appeal to — or simply survive the challenge from — the ascendant Hispanic community, a dance Mr. Rangel was adept at.

They both carry the names of famous fathers, names that resonate in the history of Harlem and are written on its street signs. One of these Harlem scions is Adam Clayton Powell IV, the son of Adam Clayton Powell Jr., a towering figure in black politics in 20th-century America; Mr. Rangel, in fact, defeated Mr. Powell, then the incumbent, in the Democratic primary in 1970.

The other is Keith L. T. Wright, the son of Bruce McM. Wright, a renowned State Supreme Court judge who crusaded against racism in the justice system and was known as Turn ’Em Loose Bruce because of his reputation for releasing defendants on little or no bail while they awaited trial.

They are among nine candidates — black, white, Dominican, Puerto Rican — in a mosaic free-for-all of a Democratic primary on June 28. The district is overwhelmingly Democratic, and the winner of the primary is virtually assured of being elected.

“We’re all pretty popular in our own little part of the world,” Mr. Wright said of the candidates, each of whom have bases, both ethnic and geographic, in the black, Dominican or Puerto Rican communities and district’s distinct neighborhoods. “It’s who can break out. It’s a study in political science.”

As the area’s population shifts, more are expecting the district to soon send a Hispanic to Congress.

The leading contender is Adriano Espaillat, a state senator who was born in the Dominican Republic and ran unsuccessfully against Mr. Rangel in the primaries in 2012 and 2014.

A “super PAC” was recently formed to support Mr. Espaillat, and a political consultant involved with the group said it would spend more than $100,000 in the two weeks before the primary to help him win. The consultant, Chad Proudlock, declined to identify the source of the money. Mr. Espaillat said he had no contact with the group and did not know who was behind it.

With Mr. Rangel retiring, and with Mr. Wright and Mr. Powell and other, less known black candidates likely to diffuse the black and Puerto Rican vote, this election could be Mr. Espaillat’s best chance.

In a diverse district with ethnic enclaves vying for power, perhaps the only thing more important than identity politics is the ability to bridge those divides.

On a recent morning, another candidate, Clyde Williams, a former political director for the Democratic National Committee, handed out “Team Clyde” leaflets at the corner of 135th Street and Fifth Avenue, in the heart of Central Harlem, just steps from the red-brick apartment buildings where Mr. Rangel and Mr. Wright live.

He aimed a rapid-fire spiel to each passer-by: “For the first time in 46 years Charlie Rangel’s not running. We need new leadership and new ideas.”

Mr. Wright, 60, has been endorsed by Mr. Rangel. He raised more money than any of the eight other candidates, and more than twice as much as Mr. Powell, according to federal election filings submitted in April. A member of the State Assembly for 23 years, he has the support of many other big names of the Harlem establishment, including the former Mayor David N. Dinkins and former Gov. David A. Paterson.

On a recent drive around Harlem in Mr. Wright’s weathered 2006 Chrysler (which has 185,000 miles on it, from so many trips to the State Capitol in Albany and back), he pointed to a section of West 138th Street named for his father: Judge Bruce Wright Place.

During a stop to court voters at the A. Philip Randolph Senior Center on West 146th Street, his audience, eating 50-cent breakfasts of hard-boiled eggs and Cream of Wheat, perked up when Mr. Wright spoke of his father.

“His father did me a hell of a favor,” George Edwards, 68, said. “Bruce cut me loose.”

Mr. Edwards said that he had been a street hoodlum as a youth and had done many bad things, but that on one occasion the police arrested him for something he did not do. He said he was brought before Judge Wright, who saw through the fraud and set him free.

“He knew it was a setup,” Mr. Edwards said, adding that he would vote to send the son to Congress.

Mr. Wright is a skilled practitioner of what politicians call constituent services. As he travels around Harlem, people repeatedly shake his hand and thank him: for help getting a job, for writing a letter to support the immigration of a wife from Yemen, for paying for a child’s funeral.

“Nobody knows this congressional district better than I,” he said. “I’ve been living it and living in it my entire life.”

Mr. Powell, who has served in the Assembly and on the City Council, has fewer endorsements than Mr. Wright but perhaps more resentments. The chip off the old block landed on Mr. Powell’s shoulder. He has run for Mr. Rangel’s seat before, and he still carries memories of previous defeats, including that of his father, whose loss to Mr. Rangel put an abrupt end to a 26-year career in the House of Representatives. The elder Mr. Powell died two years later.

“He didn’t beat my dad; they stole the election,” Mr. Powell said as he pressed leaflets into the hands of commuters at the entrance to a subway station in East Harlem, some of whom did double takes at his famous name.

Mr. Powell, 54, grew up in Puerto Rico with his mother, who is from the island. He speaks Spanish, and his political base is in heavily Puerto Rican East Harlem, where he lives. He barely knew his father, who died when he was nine, and he bristled when asked about those who accuse him of coasting on his famous name.

“Why is Andrew Cuomo governor?” he said. “Why was George Bush president? Why is Hillary Clinton running?”

Mr. Wright and Mr. Powell have similar policy positions on many issues: They deplore the effects of gentrification, soaring rents and income inequality.

Citizens Union, a government watchdog group, has praised Mr. Wright as a strong advocate for reforms intended to make government more transparent and as an effective legislative leader. Not so with Mr. Powell, whom the group censured when he was in the Assembly, saying he was disengaged from the legislative process and expressing dismay at his ethical lapses: In 2004, Mr. Powell took a 19-year-old intern to a motel room for a night of drinking and sex, which led to rape allegations that were later recanted. He was also arrested on a drunken-driving charge and convicted of a lesser charge.

Mr. Powell’s father, who was minister of Harlem’s Abyssinian Baptist Church, dominated the area’s political life and played a key role in the civil rights era until, weakened and troubled by scandal, he was dethroned by Mr. Rangel. But he is still revered in the neighborhood, especially among the older generation that witnessed his glory years.

One of Harlem’s principal streets is called Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard. The district offices of both Mr. Rangel and Mr. Wright are in a state office building named after him, at the corner of 125th Street and his namesake boulevard — where a statue shows Mr. Powell striding uphill, his coat billowing behind and his signature phrase emblazoned below him: “Keep the faith.”

Today the younger Mr. Powell — he is called Powell the Fourth because his father gave his name to two sons by different wives; the elder was called Adam Clayton Powell III — revels in taking on the establishment that by birth he should have belonged to.

“Charlie Rangel and Keith Wright don’t fight the power,” Mr. Powell said. “My father fought the power.”


