


SYDNEY, Australia — Tucked away at the end of a quiet road, with Sydney Harbor National Park for a next-door neighbor, is a home unlike any other in its residential neighborhood.

Located in Balgowlah Heights, a harborside suburb of Sydney, the architect-designed house is in many respects a classic sandstone manor, with the style of one built in the late 1800s. Yet because it is less than 15 years old, it includes many modern features.

The house sits on a 1,180-square- meter, or 12,700-square-foot, parcel of land and has five bedrooms, two studies and five bathrooms. It has 810 square meters of floor space, with an additional 185 square meters of deck area.

The house has views that stretch over Sydney’s North Harbor to the seaside town of Manly and its renowned harbor, and beyond to the Tasman Sea.

Balgowlah Heights is in the Northern Beaches region of Sydney, about 12 kilometers north of the city’s central business district. The area has a median house price of 2.27 million Australian dollars, or $1.75 million, according to a leading Australian property website, realestate.com.au. But the distinctive character of this house pushes its suggested price to between 14 million and 15 million dollars.

The current owner, a Sydney-based lawyer, had been eager to purchase the land (which then held a small brick home) for some time until, in 1996, the opportunity finally arose. A year later, a four-year project began to create a home “which would never date and would blend into the surrounding bushland landscape.” To do this, 800 tons of Gosford sandstone was used in the construction of the house and gardens. While the gardens are well maintained, it is the proliferation of sandstone that is most notable as you wind down a short sloping driveway or adjacent path to enter the house on its midlevel. The owner, who asked not to be identified, chose Penrhyn slate roofing to complement it.

The architect, John Brogan, came up with a design that not only allows the views of bushland and harbor to be taken in from most of the bedrooms and living areas but also ensures privacy.

Stepping in to the midlevel vestibule — whether through the front door or the adjacent double garage — you are immediately drawn to the view beyond the main living area. The rich tones of the Brazilian mahogany joinery that was milled on site as the home was being built are also attention-grabbing, as is a large Schonbek chandelier that hangs from the upper-level ceiling into the midlevel of the house.

The main living area includes a sandstone fireplace and flows to a large balcony that overlooks the swimming pool.

The midlevel of the house also features a study, formal dining area, a granite kitchen and a smaller dining area, as well as a laundry room with granite countertops.

The chandelier, which can be lowered for cleaning, is a centerpiece of the upper level. The master bedroom is on this level and includes a full bathroom en suite and a walk-in closet. The bedroom not only has the scenic view but also opens to an upper balcony that extends across the breadth of the house.

Also on this level is what might be referred to as a children’s wing. Three single bedrooms, each with built-in wardrobes, fan off a common playroom. The upper level features another full bathroom, a powder room and another study that could serve as a bedroom.

The lower level of the home is largely for recreation. There is a cinema room, a gym, a playroom and a sauna. The large billiards room has a bar area that includes one of the more novel features of the home: a viewing window into the swimming pool.

Another bedroom could serve as a guest quarters, and there is a 3,000-bottle wine cellar and a large storage room, as well as a bathroom.

The owner said it was a wonderful home in which to raise a family: “It is a peaceful location ideal for a growing family with a large backyard and beautiful gardens.”

The property is for sale as the owner’s children have grown and he and his wife intend to return to a rural lifestyle.

“We will miss the spectacular views over the harbor and out to the ocean, and the resort-style facilities,” he said. “We will also miss the ferries and lights at night.”


