


LOS ANGELES — Shortly after the Mets beat the Dodgers, 4-2, here on Monday night, Kevin Plawecki returned to his locker to discover a text from Travis d’Arnaud, a teammate and fellow catcher.

Out of the lineup since April 26 because of a sore right shoulder, d’Arnaud was back in New York on Monday to see Dr. David Altchek, the team physician, and to receive a platelet-rich plasma injection. Plawecki, who has taken over d’Arnaud’s catching duties in the interim, did not specify what the text said, but it was clear from his smile that d’Arnaud had sent a well-deserved congratulatory note.

In Monday’s game, Plawecki hit his first home run of the season, a solo shot off the left-hander Scott Kazmir, part of a small but continuing surge at the plate that is reassuring the Mets that Plawecki will do what they believe he can.

In San Diego over the weekend, he had four hits, including three doubles, in 10 at-bats. That means that over the last four games heading into Tuesday’s contest with the Dodgers, Plawecki had a muscular on-base plus slugging percentage of 1.186. Obviously, four games make up a tiny sample in a long baseball season. But his little streak has come at the right time.

“I’m just going up there trying to get good pitches to hit and put my A swing on them,” Plawecki said, echoing terminology favored by students of the hitting instructor Kevin Long. “I definitely feel comfortable in the box. I’m just going to keep swinging it, keep putting good at-bats together, and just keep trying to hit the ball hard.”

In the immediate future, Plawecki will have more chances as the Mets’ regular catcher because d’Arnaud’s return date is still unclear.

According to the Mets’ assistant general manager, John Ricco, Altchek advised that d’Arnaud travel to New York for an examination after d’Arnaud felt discomfort throwing in Port St. Lucie, Fla., over the weekend. The visit was just to make certain the situation had not deteriorated.

Altchek gave d’Arnaud the injection but did not change the diagnosis of a strained rotator cuff. He instructed d’Arnaud to take at least a week off before doing any baseball-related activities — throwing or hitting. He will be re-evaluated based on his symptoms.

Even if he feels no further discomfort in a week, d’Arnaud will still need time after that to get his arm back into shape. Ricco said Altchek gave no indication that surgery was an option for now, and there was no timetable for his return.

The interim, at least, is Plawecki’s time. He was drafted out of Purdue University with a late first-round pick by the Mets in 2012 and seemed, at that moment, to be the team’s catcher of the future. But six months later, the Mets acquired d’Arnaud (a first-round pick himself in 2007) from Toronto in a deal in which they also obtained Noah Syndergaard. In return, the Mets sent R.A. Dickey, who was coming off a 20-victory season, to the Blue Jays.

The highly regarded d’Arnaud immediately became the catcher to watch in the Mets’ organization, and he reached the majors in 2013. He struggled to hit at first, but in 2014 (.242 average, 13 home runs) and 2015 (.268 average, 12 home runs), he became pretty formidable at times with a bat in his hand and seemed to be emerging as a fixture in the lineup.

But he also revealed himself to be injury-prone — in fact, Plawecki made his major league debut last season when d’Arnaud broke his hand — continuing a worrying trend that began in the minors. That, in turn, has made Plawecki, who at 25 is two years younger than d’Arnaud, an intriguing option, provided he can hit.

Last week, after d’Arnaud was injured again, Manager Terry Collins expressed some urgency regarding Plawecki by saying, “He’s got to start getting some hits.” At the time, Plawecki was batting under .200, with five hits in 26 at-bats, all singles.

In the eight games since, he had a slugging percentage of .520 and an on-base percentage of .400. Collins has long said that Plawecki has the ability to hit at this level once he has a consistent chance.

“I’ll tell you what they need, and that’s once in a while the opportunity to play,” Collins said. “Thirty-four at-bats is not a great sample, and he’s starting to play and he’s starting to get more comfortable.”

Plawecki is now 11 for 48 (.229) this season. Last year, his batting average was .219 in 233 at-bats. In four seasons in the minor leagues, he batted .290 with a .432 slugging percentage and a .364 on-base percentage. Those are solid numbers, but they do not always translate to the same success in the major leagues.

The Mets can only hope they will. If d’Arnaud’s shoulder injury becomes chronic, it will make catching all the more difficult and may prompt the Mets to move him to another position and leave Plawecki as the clear No. 1 behind the plate. But that decision is not likely to come any time soon.

Based on their conversation over the weekend, Plawecki said d’Arnaud remained positive despite his shoulder trouble.

“I don’t think he’s the type of person to really get down,” Plawecki said. “But obviously, anybody in this situation wants to get healthy and get back. So, hopefully, that will happen.”


