


Control of the New York State Senate was at stake. The mayor of New York City threw his weight behind a candidate, and money from powerful unions and wealthy donors poured into party committees that quickly funneled the money to candidates in the hotly contested race.

The contours of that fund-raising strategy have become familiar, as state prosecutors and F.B.I. agents are now investigating an effort led by Mayor Bill de Blasio to channel donations to a group of Democratic candidates around the state in 2014.

But a very similar series of events played out in early 2007 during a special election for a vacant State Senate seat in Nassau County — only then it was Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor, who played a crucial role.

The Nassau race was “a very perfect example of the fact that this is an unfortunately common practice and has been for quite some time,” said Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York, a good-government advocacy group. In 2007, just as in 2014, Ms. Lerner said, money was “given to the political parties to be passed through to the candidates without regard to what the giver would be limited to if he or she were giving directly to the candidate.”

Because the Nassau race had striking similarities to Mr. de Blasio’s effort in 2014, it could buttress the argument put forth by the mayor’s allies that he was simply doing what had been done many times before. By singling out Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, they suggest, prosecutors risk criminalizing long-accepted ways of conducting politics in the state.

Yet the current investigations focus less on the flow of money than on whether Mr. de Blasio’s team went too far in trying to direct it.

Contributions to individual candidates are capped at a relatively low level. But much larger contributions are permitted to party committees, and the law allows those committees to transfer an unlimited amount of money to candidates.

It is illegal, however, for the party committees to agree with donors in advance that the money is destined for individual campaigns, a process referred to as earmarking the donations. And that is a line that investigators believe Mr. de Blasio may have crossed in 2014 by directing donations to small county committees that then transferred the money to local candidates.

“The line between legal and illegal is razor-thin,” Ms. Lerner said. “Certainly it is a critical legal difference, but in the real world, they’re practically identical.”

No one has suggested that Mr. Bloomberg’s conduct in 2007 was illegal. News accounts at the time of the special election highlighted the flood of outside money into the race, including from Mr. Bloomberg, a Republican at the time, and cited party leaders on both sides saying the election was crucial to the State Senate’s balance of power.

Mr. Bloomberg, a billionaire, supported the Republican candidate in that race, Maureen O’Connell. But instead of making the relatively small donation permitted by law directly to her campaign, he sent three checks, for a total of $250,000, to a pair of Republican Party committees.

The former mayor gave $75,000 to the New York State Senate Republican Campaign Committee and the same amount to the Republican Party’s main state committee. He also sent $100,000 to what is known as a housekeeping account for the state committee — a type of account that is not supposed to be used to give direct support to candidates, although in practice the lines are often blurred.

Mr. Bloomberg was not alone: From Jan. 1, 2007, through the election on Feb. 6, the campaign committee took in $1.4 million — a sum that, at the time, helped make the race the most expensive ever for a seat in the State Legislature.

Large donations also came from unions — Local 1199 of the Service Employees International Union sent $84,400 — as well as New York City real estate interests and wealthy New Yorkers: among them, the philanthropist Jane Forbes Clark and the businessman Andrew Saul, who sent $25,000 each.

At the same time that the money was coming in, it was going out to Ms. O’Connell’s campaign. In four transactions in January, the campaign committee transferred a total of $767,500 to her campaign. The final transfer, for $87,500, was made on Jan. 24. Mr. Bloomberg’s $75,000 contribution was reported by the state committee as having been received two days later.

The two Republican Party committees also spent enormous sums in other ways to support Ms. O’Connell. They reported spending an additional $745,120, raising the total support for Ms. O’Connell funneled through the committees to more than $1.5 million.

“It was no surprise, and we didn’t make any particular issue of the fact that the mayor of the City of New York, Mike Bloomberg at the time, was pumping in a lot of money,” said Jay Jacobs, who has been the chairman of the Nassau County Democratic Committee since 2001.

He said that because it was a special election and there were no other contests, it was clear that contributions to the party committees would go to support candidates in the race. In that sense, the conditions in Nassau in 2007 were not unlike those in the counties where donations rolled in during the 2014 Senate races; in those counties, the Senate contests were the ones with the most competition, so donations to local committees would have logically been sent in their direction.

“No one ever told us how to spend the money,” said Edward S. Lurie, a political consultant who was the executive director of the Senate Republican Campaign Committee in 2007, referring to the fund-raising for the special election, including the contributions from Mr. Bloomberg. “We did not have to spend it on Maureen O’Connell.”

He added: “That’s the key. If you direct funds for the purpose of avoiding contribution limits, then you’re violating the law.”

Ms. O’Connell, the Republican candidate in the 2007 race, who is also the Nassau County clerk, did not respond to requests for an interview.

Her Democratic opponent at the time, Craig M. Johnson, who now works at a Manhattan law firm, said he did not recall details of the fund-raising from the race. “It was really cold,” he said. “I spent my time knocking on doors trying to get myself elected, meeting voters.”

Stu Loeser, a spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg, declined to comment.

On the Democratic side, the party’s Senate Campaign Committee and its state committee took in more than $1 million from Jan. 1, 2007, through the election in February. The two Democratic committees made four transfers to Mr. Johnson’s campaign, totaling $327,200. The two party committees also reported $1.4 million in expenses to aide Mr. Johnson’s campaign.

Mr. Jacobs, who has also served as the chairman of the state committee, said the law creates a loophole that is easily exploited, allowing party committees to take in donations far above the levels permitted for candidates while letting the party transfer unlimited sums to candidates’ campaigns.

“If that’s not a legal provision to evade — if you want to use that word — to evade limits on contributions to individual candidates, I don’t know what is,” Mr. Jacobs said. “The answer to fix the problem is, fix that loophole.”

In the end, the 2007 race was similar in another way to Mr. de Blasio’s efforts, which backed mostly losing candidates and failed in its objective to swing the Senate to Democratic control. Despite Mr. Bloomberg’s contributions, Ms. O’Connell lost.


