


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

How many episodes in a row do you consider a “binge”? I prefer the term “marathon” — fewer negative connotations — but I think I’ve lost this battle, so binge it is. My standard to qualify for an official binge is five hours in a row of the same show. I think my record is 63 episodes of the same show in a three-day weekend. (It was bootlegged “Once and Again,” on YouTube, and I had a horrible cold.)

I love binge-watching. The natural habitat in which I flourish is a couch. But I find that I don’t internalize or think seriously about shows in the same way when I watch them like this; I’ve forgotten more about “House of Cards” than I’ve remembered. Mainlining shows that initially aired in the traditional week-to-week schedule presents a different sensation, too. If you’d only ever binge-watched “Breaking Bad,” you missed the auxiliary experience of sitting with a cliffhanger for what felt like forever. Maybe that’s good. Or, maybe not.

This week, we’ve got some broadcast shows that are worth making time for, the return of some streaming series and a few British shows you might have missed. I’d love to know your personal binge-watching records, too — and if you think a sweatpants day full of “Sex and the City” counts, I’ll grant the premise. I’m at watching@nytimes.com. Have a terrific week.

MONDAY

“The Return,” 10 p.m., PBS

Criminal justice reform is one of the major civil rights questions of the day, and this crushing documentary explores a facet of it: The impact of California’s Proposition 36, which shortened the sentences of people convicted under an extreme “three strikes” law. “The Return” follows men who are released from prison after serving extraordinarily long sentences for seemingly minor crimes, their lawyers and their families. It’s by no means a feel-good film, but it’s affecting and significant.

WEDNESDAY “Nashville” series finale, 10 p.m., ABC

I know, I know. Why am I so obsessed with “Nashville”? Because, like another obsession of mine (“Smash”) it was supposed to be so good. It had all the makings — including (like “Smash”) a fantastic pilot and some wonderful and memorable songs. Plus I don’t want to be on the wrong side of Connie Britton history.

But the show had no idea which of its stories to spend time on and which to speed through (Rayna’s post-accident crippling stage fright is fixed in a flash, but I had to sit through all of Teddy’s garbage life for an eternity?), and every week there was a new character for us not to care about. I live with hope in my heart, though, and the idea of Marshall Herskovitz and Ed Zwick (“thirtysomething,” “My So-Called Life,” the afore mentioned “Once and Again”) taking over for a could-be Season 5, as they were set to, was beyond tantalizing.

Alas, no dice. So Wednesday night, I’ll be pouring one out for the late, ungreat “Nashville.” Ah, what could have been.

FRIDAY

“Bloodline” and “Chef’s Table,” Netflix

Definitely watch Season 1 of “Bloodline” before jumping in on Season 2, though the series seems a lot better and more interesting than it actually is. The show’s strong performances remain in Season 2, especially from Norbert Leo Butz (and now in flashback, Ben Mendelsohn, by far the standout), but the too-pat dialogue and lapses in credibility still sting. (Watch Season 1 on Netflix.)

“Chef’s Table” continues to bounce between fetishizing tweezer-plated micro garnishes and worshiping how iconoclastic and brilliant each of the spotlighted chefs are. I love it. Tell me more about the only cheese-aging in Slovenia! Show me that sugar-balloon at Alinea 100 more times! I want to listen to the sound of chefs scratching the mega-scales on some fancy fish for forever! If you’re gonna be a thing, be that thing. “Chef’s Table” decided to be the most hard-core of all food pornography, and boy is it. I’m partial to this season’s episodes about Enrique Olvera and Ana Ros, but they’re all interesting. (Watch Season 1 on Netflix.)

If you like “Fear the Walking Dead,” “iZombie” or “Black Mirror,” try “In the Flesh”

Don’t call them zombies. They’re simply suffering from Partially Deceased Syndrome. This show is only nine episodes, but it crams in disgusting zombie horror, the kind of domestic drama you’d typically see in a story about a teenager returning home from a psychiatric facility and some solid commentary about how societies respond to disease and violence. (Watch on Hulu)

If you like “The Honourable Woman,” “Broadchurch” or “House of Cards,” try “The Politician’s Husband”

This three-hour mini-series stars Emily Watson and David Tennant, who by law is required to appear in 85 percent of all programming produced in Britain. They play a married couple whose relationship changes when her political career takes off while his falters. The show is dark and cynical, and its characters’ behavior is occasionally so disturbing that three hours feels about right. (Watch on Netflix)

Game of Thrones Hold the door, hold the door, hold the door, hold the door, hold the door and so on, as Jeremy Egner explains in his recap. (And for a little more deep reading on Sunday night’s episode, here’s a piece from Vulture explaining who those creepy-cool Children of the Forest are and a Vanity Fair article on the White Walkers.)

Outlander “Claire has lost many things since her time in Paris,” Angelica Jade Bastién writes. “This episode adds four more to the list.”

And we also have recaps of “Veep,” “Fear the Walking Dead” and “Silicon Valley.”


