


LOS ANGELES — In a letter sent to members, governors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences made one thing perfectly clear about their plan to cull inactive members from the group’s voting rolls: The new rules governing inactivity still aren’t clear.

“In our initial resolution, we tried, but failed to come up with a ‘one-size-fits-all’ definition of activity,” the governors told members in the letter, which was sent on Monday.

So, the governors said, the executive committee of the each of the academy’s 17 branches, which cover various filmmaking crafts, will use the next two months to “come up with its own way of defining” what sort of work qualifies a member for active status. Each will also define precisely what will become the starting point for a 10-year period during which a member must work to keep active status for another 10 years.

Members will be advised of their voting statuses by the end of July, the governors said.

Producers, writers and others, the governors noted, often work for long periods without receiving a screen credit. That might dictate a standard different than one covering actors, who are usually credited even for small roles.

In their letter, the governors acknowledged that this membership move, which came amid controversy over the academy’s announcement of an all-white slate of Oscar acting nominees in January, had resulted in “some anger and frustration” among members. In fact, said the governors, “few” of the academy’s more than 6,000 voters would actually be cut, and “the benefit of the doubt goes to the member” in making activity judgments.

In announcing their intention both to trim inactive voters and to add more women and ethnically diverse members, the governors on Jan. 22 called the steps a “historic action to increase diversity.”

But Monday’s letter took pains to separate the inactivity rules from any judgments about race and gender. “Despite what you may have heard, and despite the timing of our announcement, this proposal is actually not about diversity,” the letter said.


