


FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — For now, Geno Smith is the starting quarterback of a team that has been candid about wanting to displace him, and he dresses among prominent veterans who have lobbied for his successor to return.

It is a bizarre little situation, sort of like being slugged in the face by a teammate over an unpaid debt. Smith absorbed such a punch last August, prompting the promotion of Ryan Fitzpatrick, whose revelatory season, in a way, created this opportunity — however temporary, perhaps — for Smith.

“Every player in the N.F.L., I think, deserves a fair opportunity,” Smith said. “Whether or not that’s the case, who knows? But I believe that I do have an opportunity here, and I’ve just got to take advantage of it.”

On the surface, he has. Calling himself “just wiser” as he enters his fourth season, Smith said he had a deeper understanding of the offense. The offensive coordinator Chan Gailey agreed, basing his observation, he said, on the questions Smith had been asking during film reviews and meetings.

Armed with that knowledge, Smith took a majority of the first-team snaps Wednesday, when the Jets had their second voluntary workout of organized team activities. The longer Fitzpatrick’s contract stalemate lasts, the more of those reps will go to Smith — even though the Jets hope he takes none for them this season.

The Jets have been open about their desire to re-sign Fitzpatrick, who wants to be rewarded for leading them to 10 victories and setting a franchise record for touchdown passes in a season.

Whether it happens next week, next month or before training camp, the expectation is that a deal will be reached. Fitzpatrick would reclaim his starting job, Coach Todd Bowles has said, pushing Smith into a backup role, ahead of two developmental quarterbacks, Bryce Petty and the rookie second-round pick Christian Hackenberg.

In an otherwise peaceful 10-minute session with the news media, Smith bridled when asked if he wanted Fitzpatrick to re-sign.

“That’s up to the front office and Ryan Fitzpatrick,” Smith said. “Why would I speak on that? Come on, man.”

Bowles hesitated to say he was confident that the Jets would reach an agreement with Fitzpatrick.

“You’re hopeful,” Bowles said.

That has been the Jets’ sentiment since last season, expressed by General Manager Mike Maccagnan and teammates like receiver Brandon Marshall, one of Fitzpatrick’s most ardent supporters; receiver Eric Decker; and center Nick Mangold, who attended a Rangers playoff game with Fitzpatrick last month.

Marshall, Decker and Mangold were not present Wednesday for a second consecutive day, inviting speculation that they were staying away as a sign of solidarity with Fitzpatrick, but Bowles played down their absences. So did Smith.

“I think they’ve always been supportive of myself as well,” Smith said, adding, “I don’t think they’ve said anything negative about me.”

Smith declined to say whether he envisioned himself starting the Sept. 11 season opener against Cincinnati, and it seemed a prudent decision. Bowles said he does not ask Maccagnan for updates on Fitzpatrick’s contract talks.

“Just tell me when it’s done,” Bowles said.


