


Senate Democratic candidates began tying their Republican rivals to the policies of Donald J. Trump in March, when they began their “Party of Trump” campaign. Now, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee is joining in on the action.

As part of a “five-figure” digital purchase, the group is releasing a targeted ad campaign on 15 House races, tying Republican House leadership to the policy proposals of Mr. Trump.

The ad features mainly the Republican leadership, but the D.C.C.C. isn’t targeting any of the bold-Republican names like Speaker Paul D. Ryan with their digital buy. Rather, they have identified what they claim to be 15 important congressional districts where Mr. Trump is viewed particularly negatively, and targeting female independent and female Republican voters in those districts.

The targets range from New Jersey to Nevada to Florida.

The ads, which come in both 60-second and 30-second versions, rifle through some of Mr. Trump’s more contentious platforms, then cuts in with either news reports or video clips of members of the Republican House either directly or tangentially offering support.

After Mr. Trump says he doesn’t think Planned Parenthood should be given federal funding as long as it continues to finance abortions, a video of Mr. Ryan cuts in, saying, “I don’t think Planned Parenthood should get one red cent from the taxpayer.”

After a clip of Mr. Trump’s remarks calling Mexican immigrants “rapists,” it shows a video of Representative Steve King of Iowa saying “for everyone who is a valedictorian” there is another hundred out there “hauling 75 pounds of marijuana across the desert.”

Tying House Republicans and candidates to Mr. Trump is a plan that the D.C.C.C. says will continue to highlight through November.

The following is a list of districts being targeted districts:

In New Jersey, Scott Garrett; In New York, John Katko, in New Hampshire, Frank Guinta; in Maine, Bruce Poliquin; in Nevada’s third district, the Republican primary field; in Nevada’s fourth district, Cresent Hardy; in Illinois, Bob Dold; in Minnesota’s second district, the Republican primary field, in Minnesota’s third district, Erik Paulsen; in Colorado, Mike Coffman; in Iowa, Rod Blum; in Arizona’s first district, the Republican primary field; in Florida, Carlos Curbelo; in Pennsylvania, Brian Fitzpatrick; and in Virginia, Barbara Comstock.


