


News of Prince’s death stirred emotional responses across social media yesterday. And many New York Times readers took the chance to share reflections on his artistry, personality and style. You told us how his music provided a soundtrack for your lives, and how his individuality influenced the way you see yourselves and the world.

The comments below, gathered since Prince’s death, have been edited for length and clarity.

[ Read our obituary of Prince ]

“Purple Rain” was the first tape my immigrant parents bought for me. New to the English language, neither they nor I knew that it was wholly inappropriate music for an 8-year-old. But the music was that good — you didn’t need to understand the words. It’s still one of my all time favorite albums.

—Linh, Grand Rapids, Mich.

“Adore” is the most beautiful love song ever written. It’s soulful, tender, epic, sweet, towering, gorgeous. Some of my life’s sweetest moments were spent slow-dragging to this song with an amazing partner who knows what I’m talking about!

—Emily Whetsel, Oak Ridge, Tenn.

Prince played for 3 hours during his shows. He still cried when the audience sang the end of “Purple Rain” to him. He gave you all of him every time.

—Yolanda Forrest, Detroit

I’ve only seen him perform once — it was a surprise concert during the Montreal Jazz Festival in 2011. I’ll always remember what he said that night. “Who here has to work on Monday?” The crowd shouted in unison. “Tell them you’re not coming in till Tuesday. ’Cause that’s how many hits I got.” He played on for four hours.

—Tu Tram Pham, Montreal

I saw Prince perform live earlier this year in Melbourne, Australia. The night I saw him, he had just found out that his ex-girlfriend Vanity had passed away. He bravely continued with his show and had us in awe with his stage presence. He was a diminutive performer, with charisma that could fill 10 stadiums.

—Carolyn Burge, Melbourne, Australia

It was Prince’s early sound that got me, as a black woman, to play rock guitar. Not only was his music the soundtrack of my early adulthood but it also gave me inspiration to be whomever I wanted without worrying about opinions. To be creative in spite of the naysayers. He was the first person I really felt personified the attitude of “do you.” And it was liberating.

—Peggy Goodwin, New York City area

Prince burst in to my white-flight, Chicago, suburban, MTV world, androgynous and oozing sex. He made me want to run away to Minneapolis, even though the place he created there does not exist, yet it exists everywhere. Flawed, human and in constant struggle, Prince birthed a world that does not see color or income or barriers. A struggle that works hard and plays even harder.

—Mary Sharon, Washington D.C.

He was the musical embodiment of sex; a bad boy with a dual good/bad message. The music transcended age, color, creed and language.

—Jim Floyd, New York City

Prince’s music communicated openness across races, gender and genres. A genius lyricist, composer and arranger. He was provocative but not for provoking’s sake. His music was sexy and smart, and made me feel sexy and smart.

—Adrienne Lane, Cape Town

Prince’s music, to me, defined more than just a generation. His music touched on the lives of many people who felt like they flew just under the radar of society; who were just funky enough to feel the soul underlying the commonality we share; and who had the guts enough to enjoy life by singing and dancing with joy and a bit of flamboyance.

—Kathy Custren, Altoona, Penn.

Prince’s music opened my mind to the power of nonconformity. It made me dance, it made me think, it seduced and entertained me to no end. It’s the music of my life, and parts of it are woven into the fabric of my being.

—Shauna Brown, Washington D.C.

When I was younger, I was on holiday in Italy with my parents and my dad played me “Let’s Go Crazy.” The way I thought about and listened to music changed forever. I remember my dad looking at me smiling at my awe; it was as if he was giving me that record as words of advice and assurance.

—Georgie Broad, Southport, England

I never grew out of my childhood hero-worship of Prince. The world around me dimmed, shining light only on Prince when “American Idol” released the fog to his surprise performance. I jumped, I screamed, I teared up. The effect was the same when he sat down for an interview with Oprah, when he played the Super Bowl halftime, when he played on Arsenio Hall, when he dropped by on “The View.” His music, his life, his magic will not soon be forgotten by me or most.

—Rene Pierce, Avon, Ind.

Many years ago when we were playing music, but before Oren and I had officially started our band, Elysian Fields, we would play in many different clubs around N.Y. Sometimes we would play at a club called Nells, on 14th Street. One night as we were starting the set, Prince, perfectly coifed and attired, walked in along with a small entourage, and was seated at the corner booth not far from stage left. I don’t think I have ever been that nervous. His energy was magical. I summoned my courage and any gods that would listen to me to not abandon me, and went into the musical trance that comes if you are lucky. I couldn’t look over until the end. My hands trembled and my heart leaped to see he was still there — he stayed for the whole show. We played for Prince. And what a thrill it was!

—Jennifer Charles, Brooklyn

Until I moved to Minneapolis, I didn’t know how accessible Prince was. He was the mysterious D.J. in the corner. He rode his bike down the street. And he opened up his Paisley Park parties to regular people. I never got to see him jam there. It always seemed like a possibility. His last party was last Saturday. It just seemed like he would be with us for years to come.

—Chris Wogaman, Minneapolis

For the generation who suffered through the vacuous musical excesses of the ’80s, Prince was our true artist. He redeemed the entire decade. I feel a little bit older today, and more appreciative of the eccentric, brilliant genius who luckily came my way as a kid growing up in the pre-grunge, pre-Internet era. I was glad to have felt your music.

—Christopher Dessert, Seattle


