


This is the nightmare that has Republicans bolting upright: Donald J. Trump damages their party’s reputation so severely that its national competitiveness is crippled — not just in 2016, but for years.

Anti-Trump sentiment among Latino, Asian and African-American voters flashes clear warning signs. Because nonwhite voters keep growing as a share of the electorate, lingering impressions could haunt a generation of Republican candidates.

The Sacramento-based strategist Rob Stutzman warns Republicans elsewhere about what he calls the “soft racism” of Mr. Trump’s campaign: “Stand up against it now, or pay the price for decades.”

In fact, that’s precisely what has happened to the party in California for the past 22 years, after a landmark race for governor in 1994.

The Republican incumbent, Pete Wilson, seeking a second term, faced Kathleen Brown, the daughter and sister of former Democratic governors.

Amid rising anxiety and anger about Latino immigrants, Mr. Wilson embraced a ballot measure denying some taxpayer-financed services to those who crossed the border illegally.

A television ad dramatized his stance with grainy footage of immigrants dashing into the United States as a narrator intoned, “They keep coming.”

It worked in the short run. Mr. Wilson won re-election handily.

Yet California Republicans have struggled ever since. The signal Mr. Wilson and his party sent in 1994 alienated Latino and other nonwhite voters as their political clout was swelling.

Before 1994, Republican nominees had carried California in six of seven presidential contests. Since then, they’ve lost all five, averaging 40 percent of the vote.

Before 1994, Republicans had won three consecutive elections for governor. Since then, they’ve lost four of five regularly scheduled contests.

In the meantime, Republicans have lost all six Senate elections. In four of those races, Republican candidates failed to muster 40 percent of the vote.

The surge by Democrats in the nation’s largest state is not difficult to explain. Mr. Wilson won in 1994 by dominating among white voters, who exit polls conducted by the Voter News Service showed represented 78 percent of the electorate. Latinos were 9 percent, blacks 7 percent and Asians and other minorities 6 percent.

By the 2014 election, whites had declined to 59 percent of the vote, according to exit polls conducted by Edison Research. Latinos swelled to 18 percent, Asians and other minorities to 14 percent, and blacks edged up to 8 percent. Those nonwhite constituencies disproportionately backed the incumbent governor, the Democrat Jerry Brown, Ms. Brown’s brother.

“Republican leaders and candidates were just too slow to understand what their demographic destiny was,” said Mr. Stutzman.

Lately, California Republicans have worked to lure back Asian-American voters, who at one time were attracted to the Republicans’ economic and national security policies. And they have seen an increasing number of younger Latinos register with no party preference, rather than as Democrats.

Enter Mr. Trump, with his call for a temporary ban on entry of Muslims into the United States, his description of some Mexican immigrants as “criminals” and “rapists,” and his remarks about the “Mexican heritage” of a federal judge who was born in Indiana.

Now Mr. Stutzman fears Mr. Trump may set Republicans back just as the Wilson campaign did in 1994, in California and elsewhere.

The demographic shifts that have undercut California Republicans are reshaping the nation, too. Nationally, presidential exit polls showed the share of white voters in 2012 fell to 72 percent, from 87 percent 20 years earlier.

The Census Bureau projects that whites will become a minority of America’s population by 2044. The Republican National Committee itself, following its 2012 presidential defeat, called expanding Hispanic support “imperative.”

Mr. Trump, who flourished in Republican primaries by appealing to working-class whites, has not changed course since securing the party’s nomination. He insists he can compete even in Democratic strongholds such as California, where Mitt Romney in 2012 drew just 37 percent of the vote.

“It’s an absurdity,” Mr. Stutzman said. “Republicans will do better in California if he stays out.”


