


For weeks, the accusation has lingered, muddying public discussions and giving a long-running political spat new bite: Mayor Bill de Blasio, whose fund-raising on behalf of Democratic candidates for the State Senate in 2014 is under investigation by state and federal authorities, has pointedly hinted that he believes that details of the inquiry were leaked to the press in the latest of many attempts by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo to undercut him.

The governor’s side has decided to swat back. In the first statements from the New York State Democratic Party since Mr. de Blasio began describing the episode as politically motivated, the state party’s head, Basil A. Smikle Jr., suggested that Mr. de Blasio’s allegations were “nothing more than a political smoke screen created by the mayor,” arguing that there was good reason for various agencies to investigate the mayor’s fund-raising without an extra prod from state officials.

“To the extent that the mayor is asserting that the current investigation is politically motivated, that would imply that actions of the Manhattan D.A. and the U.S. attorney are politically motivated,” said Mr. Smikle, the executive director of the state party, which was involved in the 2014 election effort and which Mr. Cuomo controls. “It would also imply that the newspapers, editorial boards and good government groups that raised these very issues prior to any investigations are all politically motivated.”

Both the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., and the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, Preet Bharara, are examining whether Mr. de Blasio’s aides tried to evade campaign finance limits by routing money through county committees during Mr. de Blasio’s campaign to elect Democrats to the Senate.

Mr. Vance opened his investigation after receiving a report from the State Board of Elections that questioned Mr. de Blasio’s activities. The board had made its own inquiries and voted to refer the matter to Mr. Vance. The official who wrote the report, Risa S. Sugarman, the board’s chief enforcement counsel, was appointed by Mr. Cuomo.

“The Manhattan D.A. had no obligation to investigate the matter,” Mr. Smikle said. “Law enforcement receives many reports from regulatory agencies and could find them to be frivolous, or politically motivated or flawed on its facts or on the law.”

In addition to questioning the leak of the board’s inquiry, Mr. de Blasio has also suggested that the inquiry itself, as well as another investigation by the State Joint Commission on Public Ethics, are politically motivated.

Asked for comment, a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio referred a reporter to the mayor’s interview on WNYC on Friday morning, in which he was asked why a political nonprofit tied to his administration had refused to comply with a subpoena from the state ethics panel, which Mr. de Blasio has argued is under Mr. Cuomo’s thumb.

“It’s one thing to participate with an investigation that’s appropriate and within appropriate boundaries, but when an investigation may be motivated by politics, when an investigation may be going beyond its legal mandate — and obviously be, in a sense, a partisan act — that’s a whole different matter,” the mayor said.

Mr. Cuomo has dismissed Mr. de Blasio’s insinuations about the leak of Ms. Sugarman’s report. Speaking to reporters on May 2, the governor suggested that it was far more likely that a Republican connected to the Board of Elections, rankled by Mr. de Blasio’s support of the Senate Democrats, had publicized the report.


