


OPELIKA, Ala. — The excitement began outside the courtroom here on Wednesday morning when Gov. Robert Bentley arrived to testify at the trial of the speaker of the state House of Representatives.

“He walked in through the front door,” one deputy sheriff said to the surprise of another, not long after a man waiting for a different Circuit Court case strained for a glimpse of the governor from a second-floor window.

But to the prosecutors in the public corruption trial of Michael G. Hubbard, Mr. Bentley was just another witness to help make their case that the speaker sought to leverage his office for his personal interests. A prosecutor’s file folder about the witness, who testified for about 20 minutes while his security detail of state troopers stood nearby, carried a simple label: “BENTLEY, ROBERT.”

In the end, Mr. Bentley’s brief turn on the witness stand appeared to offer modest victories for the prosecution and the defense. During the governor’s testimony, lawyers asked him to recount meetings with Mr. Hubbard that focused on certain economic development projects, initiatives that were supported by a company that had hired the speaker as a consultant.

“Did you understand you were meeting with him in his capacity as speaker of the House?” a prosecutor, John Gibbs, asked.

“I did,” Mr. Bentley replied. “He is the speaker of the House.”

But Mr. Bentley, a Republican, under cross-examination by one of Mr. Hubbard’s lawyers, effectively acknowledged that he had independently perceived that the speaker was acting in his official capacity.

“He could be a lot of things to a lot of different people,” said Bill Baxley, Mr. Hubbard’s chief defense lawyer and a former lieutenant governor.

“Yes, sir,” said the governor, who also said that he did not believe that Mr. Hubbard’s conduct had been illegal or unethical.

Mr. Bentley’s appearance was part of a gripping day of testimony here in east Alabama, where jurors began to hear evidence last week in the case against Mr. Hubbard, a Republican who many people believe is the most powerful man in the state.

But in a sweltering courtroom, prosecutors called witnesses who portrayed Mr. Hubbard as a man whose public influence masked his increasing desperation about his personal finances.

In emails that were displayed in court, for instance, the speaker beseeched William Brooke, then a senior figure in the Business Council of Alabama, an interest group, to help him find work.

Mr. Hubbard’s pleas were not immediately successful, in part, Mr. Brooke testified, because companies were often unenthusiastic about hiring a sitting speaker of the House who could face complex questions about conflicts of interest.

“Can we find a solution that would leave him independent yet provide him some income?” Mr. Brooke said, explaining the mind-sets of some executives. “And there were no solutions that surfaced.”

Such reluctance, the emails showed, deepened the frustrations of Mr. Hubbard, who lamented that companies hesitated to hire him, even though he had helped strengthen Alabama’s reputation as a business-friendly state. Eventually, Mr. Brooke and others agreed to invest in Mr. Hubbard’s struggling printing company.

Prosecutors also brought out testimony that depicted the extent of the speaker’s ties with lobbyists. One lobbyist, for instance, described how he and two others had once met about their business in Mr. Hubbard’s conference room in Montgomery, the state capital.

Mr. Hubbard faces 20 years in prison on each of the 23 counts against him. Testimony will continue Thursday.

But in many respects, the most sensational component of the trial may have passed by 9:25 a.m. on Wednesday, when Mr. Bentley’s sport utility vehicle began to pull away from a trial that has taken center stage among Alabama’s striking medley of political scandals, including one about the governor’s relationship with a top aide.

Many people here had wondered whether that relationship, which has spurred federal and state inquiries as well as calls for Mr. Bentley’s impeachment, would become a subject of testimony.

It did not, but it was difficult to escape the matter: Spencer Collier, who first publicly accused the governor of misconduct, was sitting in the courtroom’s gallery. And for many people, it was difficult to ignore the spectacle of a sitting governor testifying at a sitting House speaker’s trial.

“It’s amazing,” said Mr. Collier, whom the governor fired as Alabama’s law enforcement secretary, “and I’m embarrassed for the state.”


