


A year ago, Jeff Strang, a longtime horse owner, braved the crowds of 90,000 at the Belmont Stakes for a chance to witness, after a 37-year drought, a Triple Crown win.

He was watching by the finish line, among horse-racing fans and casual observers alike, when American Pharoah, the odds-on favorite, captured Belmont and won the Crown.

“Everybody just went nuts,” Mr. Strang said.

This year, with no Triple Crown bid, the Belmont Stakes appears to be somewhat quieter. As of Friday, 46,000 tickets had been sold for Saturday’s race.

Still, Mr. Strang and a friend, Sean Gerson, said they had no regrets for having bought their tickets to the Belmont Stakes this year. If anything, they said, the smaller crowds would mean cheaper hotel prices and some extra elbow room for the horse-racing fans.

To racing fans like them, this year’s races are still a must-see — even if the forecast calls for scattered thunderstorms.

“Rain or shine, we’re here,” Mr. Gerson said. “Triple Crown or not.”

The smaller event could also bring slight logistical relief for race and railroad organizers.

In 2014, massive crowds, inadequate food supplies and poor communication during a mass exodus from Belmont Park led to a “worst-case scenario,” said Salvatore Arena, a spokesman for the Long Island Rail Road.

Passengers were forced to wait as long as four hours to board trains heading toward Manhattan, creating crowd-control problems for the police and a public-relations disaster for the track and the railroad.

“It was just a horror show,” Mr. Arena said.

In response to the problems in 2014, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the New York Racing Association invested $5 million in infrastructure improvements, including at the Belmont Park station, and increased the number of cars on trains and the frequency in which trains were loaded.

Last year, attendees had all left the park within an hour and a half, Mr. Arena said, and the railroad transported 30,000 people home. This year, the railroad expects a crowd of 20,000 on the trains leaving from the Belmont Park station.

In addition to logistical and structural improvements, event organizers have added entertainment offerings for the 2016 races. The country music duo Maddie & Tae was to perform on Friday night, and the rock band Daughtry on Saturday night.

“You’ll find the millennials here for the concert,” Mr. Strang said. “They come to drink. We’re here for strictly horse racing.”

“And the food,” Mr. Gerson said.

While food options have also increased, so have the prices: two cheese-steak sandwiches and two beers were going for $42.

Last year, the event was expanded from a one-day race to a three-day festival, with 17 stakes races over the course of three days, said Jenny Kellner, the assistant director of communications for NYRA.

This year’s Belmont Stakes increased the number of stakes races to 19: three on Thursday, six on Friday and 10 on Saturday.

“We prepare for the Belmont Stakes as if it’s a Triple Crown every year, no matter what,” said Pat McKenna, the director of communications for NYRA.

But without the prospect of a Triple Crown winner, some at Belmont on Friday suggested that the high prices at the concessions stand and at the admission gate were out of step with the mellower day.

Tony Zuyus, who was at Belmont Park on Friday, bikes there once a week, a habit he said he has maintained for 55 years. He said he can recognize a fellow regular at the races because they are less likely to be fancily dressed.

For the first time in 20 years, Mr. Zuyus said he would not be able to attend the races on Belmont Stakes day. His wife is recovering from a surgery, and he did not want to leave her for 12 hours. And anyway, this year would bring no Triple Crown winner.

“There’s no excitement in the air,” he said, comparing this year to last. “The place is virtually empty.”

But when Mr. Zuyus paused to watch the sixth race on a giant television and his chosen horse, Rock Eagle, won, he looked decidedly excited.

He raised his arms in the air. “Go on, baby!” Mr. Zuyus said.


