


GAMBELLA, Ethiopia — After four days of delays, a deal has been reached to allow South Sudan’s opposition leader, former Vice President Riek Machar, to fly to the capital and be reinstated as deputy to President Salva Kiir.

Mr. Machar’s arrival is considered a major step toward carrying out a peace deal agreed to last year that calls for the formation of a transitional government in South Sudan, where more than two years of civil war have killed tens of thousands of people and displaced over two million more.

Mr. Machar was originally scheduled to travel on Monday, but disagreements over the number of soldiers and types of weapons that he would be allowed to take to the capital, Juba, caused delays, raising fears that the whole peace deal could collapse.

But on Friday, both sides agreed to a compromise brokered by an international commission that is overseeing the transition.

The commission’s chairman, former President Festus Mogae of Botswana, said Thursday that he welcomed the government’s decision to allow Mr. Machar to travel with 195 soldiers, each carrying their individual light arms, as well as 20 rocket-propelled grenade launchers and 20 machine guns. “No further delay is tolerable,” Mr. Mogae added.

Speaking from Juba, South Sudan’s minister of information, Michael Makuei Lueth, said the government accepted the agreement, though he did not preclude the possibility of logistical problems.

Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth, an opposition spokesman, said Friday that Mr. Machar was scheduled to land in Juba on Saturday afternoon. “Peace is finally here,” Mr. Gatkuoth said.

But after four days of tense negotiations between the parties, doubts remain about whether Mr. Machar’s trip will take place as scheduled.

The 195 troops scheduled to travel to Juba on Saturday would join 1,370 soldiers who arrived last week in accordance with the peace deal.

Juba is where the war erupted in December 2013, pitting members of the presidential guard and South Sudanese troops — some loyal to Mr. Kiir, a member of the Dinka ethnic group, and others loyal to Mr. Machar, a Nuer — against one another. Clashes broke out largely along ethnic lines and spread throughout the country.

The opposition’s chief of general staff, Gen. Simon Gatwech Dual, said this week that he was still concerned about the strength of the government’s troops and weaponry in Juba.

“But if the deal is implemented,” he added, “peace will prevail.”


