


Advocating for equal pay in Hollywood takes its toll, as the actress Patricia Arquette said she learned the hard way. Ms. Arquette, who made her 2015 Oscar speech an impassioned plea for income equality, said she lost jobs as a result of her comments.

“But I’m O.K. with that,” she said, at a recent panel for female filmmakers sponsored by the Tribeca Film Festival and the #ActuallySheCan campaign. “Sometimes when you’re in a position to make a difference – to be a part of that story is a great thing.” Gender inequality, she added, doesn’t just affect Hollywood; a recent study by the World Economic Forum found that in all industries except health care, women are still underrepresented, and paid less overall.

Ms. Arquette, who won the supporting actress Oscar for her role in “Boyhood,” drew cheers from Meryl Streep and Jennifer Lopez in the audience when she said, “It’s our time to have wage equality once and for all, and equal rights for women in the United States of America.”

Now the actress has become a de facto spokeswoman for wage equality, especially in California, which in January enacted some of the strongest fair pay protections in the country – partly thanks to her comments. State Senator Hannah-Beth Jackson, a Democrat from Southern California, referenced Ms. Arquette’s speech when she introduced the legislation just a few days after the Oscars. “Her rallying cry,” Senator Jackson said, “has energized a movement that has long been calling for this.” And she credited the news media attention with helping to raise momentum to pass the bill, which she had long been working on as part of the California Legislative Women’s Caucus.

In an interview after the Tribeca panel, which highlighted the documentary shorts of the filmmakers Erin Sanger, Emily Harrold, Ricki Stern and Annie Sundberg (whose films have their premieres at the festival on Thursday, and will be online at ActuallySheCan.com the following day), Ms. Arquette detailed the realities of financial inequality in Hollywood and why she decided to fight it.

“I always knew I was paid less than men,” she said. “They would be very clear about that, sometimes, when they would make offers to you: ‘Well, they’re paying the guy, so they don’t have any money’ – they would say things like that.”

After the 2014 hack of Sony Pictures made explicit the disparities in pay and profit-sharing deals for women in the industry, Ms. Arquette said she felt galvanized. “I had just seen a lot of people struggle to make a living, and I just didn’t think it was fair,” she said. She knew her Oscar speech would ruffle feathers, and she said she knew she lost roles because producers or executives “were dumb enough to say something that made it clear.”

Ms. Arquette was prepared to take a financial hit. “I thought, I could sell my house, I can downsize, I can live a different kind of way,” she said. “That’s O.K. It’s O.K. if I don’t work anymore. I would be sad because I want to make art, but if that’s what it takes, I guess that’s what it takes.”

She added: “At my age, it’s a time in my life where I want to do things that make the world a better place for everyone to live in.” (The 48-year-old actress hasn’t had to downsize, she said, “yet.”)

But Ms. Arquette still has to walk the walk: she recently turned down a role in an indie film because, she said, though she agreed to lower pay than a male co-star who had a larger role, the profit-sharing, or back-end participation, was not equitable. In low-budget filmmaking, “because you’re basically donating your whole normal salary, and your name value, and your everything, if it does succeed you should participate in the success of that,” she said. “The back-end participation was not the same as the man’s, so I did walk away from that job.”

She still has several film offers lined up, and said she felt hopeful because of initiatives like Tribeca’s and #ActuallySheCan, which sponsored the female documentarians’ projects.

The California Fair Pay Act, which passed with unanimous bipartisan support, is an example of the power of attention on the issue. “When we bring all of our energy together and we’re all bringing what we can to the table, we can have rapid evolution, and that’s what we need to do,” Ms. Arquette said. “They talk about the gender pay gap not closing for another 40 years. I mean, who’s got 40 years? I don’t have patience.”


