


With its pristine beaches, delicious seafood and cheery vibe, this town is the next great south-of-the-border destination.

As Tulum has become overrun with Los Angelenos and New Yorkers trying to recreate the cultures of their own hometowns in a more idyllic setting, Santa Teresa, a string of beach-backed hamlets on the southern tip of Costa Rica’s westernmost peninsula, has an edge-of-the-world vibe that still feels remote and inspires dreams of relocation. Driving down the dusty dirt road that connects the locale’s four beach areas — Playa Carmen (notable mainly for having the only ATMs in this no-credit-card zone), Playa Hermosa, Santa Teresa proper and Mal Pais — you look at the tanned, yoga-toned people carrying their surfboards back from the beach and wonder what your life would be like in a town that experiences almost year-round sunshine (punctuated by the occasional biblical rainstorm, sure) and consistent 80-degree temperatures.

Once a sleepy fishing village, Santa Teresa is now an increasingly luxurious surfer’s paradise filled with people who have made this particular fantasy their reality — and the occasional detox-seeking celebrity who likes living it for a week at a time. In addition to native Costa Ricans, or “Ticos,” there are American chefs (if you rent a villa, request James Kelly, who serves delicate, artful compositions of unusual local ingredients), Australian surf instructors, French cafe owners and Argentine hoteliers.

An outer ripple of Costa Rica’s countrywide eco-tourism boom, Santa Teresa’s international community blossomed in the 2000s as foreign adventure-seekers discovered its confluence of natural attractions: white-sand beaches, reliable, long-breaking waves and innumerable species of wildlife. And while New Age hippies still populate the town’s scores of yoga studios, Santa Teresa is now evolving to cater to the growing number of comfort-loving creative-industry types who’ve discovered its charms, including its proximity to the pristine 3,000-acre Cabo Blanco nature reserve, five miles to the south, and an increasing array of excellent small hotels, villas and restaurants. (The only thing missing so far: a good boutique or two.)

But reaching paradise still requires work (rightfully, it feels): Visitors take a short flight from Costa Rica’s capital, San José, to an airstrip in the town of Tambor, followed by a scenic 45-minute drive across the hilly farmland of the Nicoya Peninsula. Then there’s the daily endurance test of your car’s suspension as you travel anywhere along Santa Teresa’s only road, so dusty and pockmarked it gives the town an almost lunar landscape. This road is what both mars and maintains Santa Teresa’s perfection. One day it may be paved, but until then, it allows you to feel like one of the very few lucky souls able to visit this beautiful, unspoiled place.

The most high-end hotel in Santa Teresa occupies its own small white-sand bay, and it recently acquired the next-door property’s four villas and coconut grove. Nestled among sprawling banana plants and towering palms, the existing 11 ocher-plastered villas (a mix of one- and two-bedroom bungalows) are semi-open to the elements. Each has a large private terrace slung with a crocheted two-person hammock; cooling cross breezes blow through the canopy bed’s gauzy drapes. The property feels fully integrated with the surrounding jungle: In the rooms, delicate bird-nest-like paper pendant lamps (made by indigenous women in Punta Islita, 50 miles north) hang above sculptural wooden tables carved from local teak and cedar. And at the spa, you can wash off after the signature coconut scrub treatment (an out-of-body experience) in a giant open-air shower. By nightfall, dinner is served at the beachside restaurant beneath fragrant frangipani trees.

Sitting high on a hillside overlooking the Pacific, this cantilevered three-bedroom villa is really a series of bamboo-walled treehouses connected by flying bridges. Award-winning Costa Rican architect Benjamin Garcia Saxe designed the house to maximize the view — the two upper-level bedrooms both have fully retractable walls of cedar shutters so you can wake up to the ocean — and minimize the environmental impact. Indeed, the house is so open to flora and fauna that sometimes capuchin monkeys mosey into the master bathroom, which is partially exposed to the rain forest. The wraparound terrace makes a breathtaking setting for sundown drinks or sleeping under the stars. Playa Hermosa; 011-506-2640-0550

Given its miles of Pacific coastline, it’s hardly surprising that Santa Teresa has great seafood, but the fact that the tiny town also has a local Japanese sushi master, Koji Hyodo, seems exceptional. Hyodo prepares traditional yellowfin tuna and red snapper rolls, miso soup garnished with flotillas of local avocado and lightly charred octopus in a simple tin-roof kitchen, from which dishes are delivered (by a team of young waiters who are clearly also surfers) onto heavy wooden tables lit by strings of globe lights. Playa Hermosa; 011-506-2640-0815

Santa Teresa specializes in “clean food”: Almost all the fare you’ll find in this smoothie-bar-heavy town is plant-based, local and organic. And no place does it better than Olam, the restaurant at the Nautilus hotel, a tranquil yoga-lovers retreat. For breakfast, there’s spicy shakshuka with orange-yolked eggs and homemade granola topped with ripe mango. At lunch, the hearty Mexican-style vegetarian burger is the standout on a menu of enormous, every-color salads. And after a 9 a.m. vinyasa class, nothing is more satisfying than the thick, sweet-savory date and tahini smoothie.

During a recent dinner at this cozy, candlelit Italian restaurant, a gecko fell from the tin-roof ceiling into the lap of a (luckily, delighted) diner. The fact that this wasn’t the most memorable part of the meal is testament to the delectable, authentic Tuscan food served by husband-and-wife owners Emiliano Franceschini and Luz Marina Apuy, natives of Florence and Costa Rica respectively. The thin-crust pizza is wonderfully light, the pasta (slicked with luscious, vivid-green homemade pesto) perfectly al dente. The decor is rustic in a way befitting heartfelt Mediterranean food — think roughly hewn wooden benches and gravel underfoot — and eminently more romantic than the view from the road suggests. Santa Teresa; 011-506-2640-0433

Doused with lime and hidden beneath a heap of crunchy cabbage and cilantro, the fish tacos at this family-run seafood market aren’t to be missed. Neither is the zingy ceviche made with rings of succulent calamari. Every morning, the catch of the day is written on a blackboard near the ice-packed glass display case, and is either served to go or eaten at casual, umbrella-topped tables in the adjacent courtyard. The menu might include tuna sashimi with umami-rich seaweed salad or locally grown oysters, depending on the day’s haul.

With its terracotta-tiled roof and folding wooden cafe chairs, the Bakery looks like a Santa Monica breakfast joint. Waiting in line gives one the best chance to overhear local gossip: Surfers come first thing for overstuffed black-bean breakfast burritos, followed by later risers looking for macchiatos, flaky pineapple-filled pastries and bagels — all made in a nearby bakery and delivered daily at 7 a.m. Playa Carmen; 011-506-2640-0560


