


On a recent night at New York’s Soho House, D.J. Speakerfoxxx and Bosco performed a handful of tracks off their new Fool’s Gold mixtape, “Girls in the Yard.” The songs are vivacious and fun: It is impossible not to bounce and body roll while they play. But equally infectious is their pure, unadulterated affection for one another, as collaborators and close friends: Throughout the performance, the duo grinned at each other as they tossed out lyrics and danced.

Bosco (whose first name is Brittany) sings most of their songs, while Speakerfoxxx (born Christen Nilan) mixes music alongside her. They have been friends since 2010, when their mutual friend, Chilly-O, a visual artist and designer from Atlanta, invited them both to work with him on a photo shoot. They bonded instantly. “Within 24 hours, we were quick friends,” says Bosco. “We hung out for three weeks straight.” The duo had always wanted to work on a project together, but were too busy touring or putting out their own records to make the time. But last Christmas, both found themselves in Atlanta for an extended stretch of time. “Suddenly the waves parted and we both had wide open schedules,” says Nilan. “We were like, ‘Let’s just do it.’”

As musical artists, Bosco and Nilan have distinctly different sounds. “Bosco is known for her ambient, electro R&B, and I am known for Southern trap music,” says Nilan. “They are very different types of music, but we both love reggae and house.” (Bosco chalks their collaboration up to a “mutual aesthetic.”) They loved the high-speed vivacity of songs like “SuperSONIC” by J.J. Fad and wanted to make something that echoed their friendship: Lively, energetic, a series of hyphy tracks to throw on while driving in the car, getting ready for a party, hanging out in their bedroom at home. “Girls in the Yard” achieves just that — including “Run Around,” a peppy Technotronic-sampling jam that premieres here. They recorded the entire tape at Stankonia Studios, the famous record haunt in Atlanta where OutKast did much of their earliest work. They spent four months living together and working on the mixtape before releasing it in early April. “We made the project from top to bottom,” said Nilan. “We lived in ‘Girls in the Yard.’”


