


When the Cleveland Indians hosted the Mets last weekend, they saw the kind of team they want to be. The Mets reached the last World Series with a group of young, hard-throwing, right-handed starters who have yet to reach free agency. If the Indians get there this fall, it will be for the same reason.

“It’s going to be around our starting pitching,” General Manager Mike Chernoff said. “I think when you look at the success the Mets had last year, you can see that that can be successful. You read the fans’ reaction or the media’s reaction to ‘Do you have to trade a starter to balance your team more?’ What we saw last year with the Mets was no, you don’t have to do that.”

The Indians’ rotation pillars are Corey Kluber, Carlos Carrasco and Danny Salazar. Last season, they combined for 10 strikeouts per nine innings, with a 3.52 E.R.A. The Mets’ top three — Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Noah Syndergaard — combined for 9.49 strikeouts per nine innings, with a 2.80 E.R.A.

Chernoff, 34, is more familiar with the Mets than most. He started his career in baseball as an intern for the Mets’ baseball operations department when analytics was in its infancy.

“I was transcribing the numbers from the Super Register into an Excel database so we could analyze them,” Chernoff said, referring to an annual Baseball America reference book. “I was staying up every night until 4 in the morning doing that. It’s embarrassing to think about it now, but that was the state of analytics in 2002. There was no Fangraphs, there was no Baseball-Reference. There was none of that out there.”

Chernoff is a Princeton graduate, like Mark Shapiro, the former Indians president, and Mike Hazen, a former Indians official who is now general manager of the Boston Red Sox. The Indians promoted Chernoff to general manager last October, when Chris Antonetti took over for Shapiro, who left for the Toronto Blue Jays.

“One of the smartest human beings I’ve ever been around,” Shapiro said of Chernoff this spring. “Good human being, high-character individual, incredible intellect and ability to reason and understand where the opportunities are and where the leverage lies. The intellectual muscle and firepower that Mike has, I just don’t know many people who have that, combined with an elite level of integrity.”

Chernoff played baseball in college with the future major leaguers Ross Ohlendorf and Will Venable. In 102 games across four seasons at Princeton, Chernoff, a middle infielder, hit .242 with no homers. But he set an example for others, and served as a team captain as a senior.

“I would say his work ethic was great,” said Ohlendorf, who pitches for the Cincinnati Reds. “He really worked hard, and he was a good leader. He made sure other guys were in the weight room and working out.”

With the Indians, Chernoff has helped build a team that won a wild card in 2013 and has had winning records in the two years since. Nobody on the Indians’ current roster was brought in as a free agent on a multiyear deal (the departed Michael Bourn and Nick Swisher were expensive disappointments), but they have used every other source to find their core players.

The draft brought them second baseman Jason Kipnis, shortstop Francisco Lindor and closer Cody Allen. They signed Salazar as an amateur from the Dominican Republic. And when the Indians have traded veterans, they have usually gotten high-impact talent in return — C. C. Sabathia brought outfielder Michael Brantley; Cliff Lee brought Carrasco; Jake Westbrook brought Kluber; Casey Blake brought designated hitter Carlos Santana; and Esmil Rogers brought catcher Yan Gomes.

“You have to hit on everything,” Chernoff said. “You don’t have the same margin for error that a large-market team has. We know who we are and how we have to make decisions like that, and they can be really hard in the moment.

“There was a lot of backlash on some of those trades that we made, but at the same time, if you have a plan and you have an idea of how to build it, you see the fruits of those decisions four or five years later.”

As successful as their trades have been, the Indians — who won their last World Series title in 1948 — still have not played in a playoff series since 2007. They have finished last or second to last in the American League in attendance in each of the last four seasons, playing in the shadow of LeBron James’s Cavaliers but also of the city’s lowly N.F.L. team.

“People here love the Browns; they obviously have had tough times over the past decade or so, and yet there’s always this kind of eternal optimism in football that you can get yourself out of it,” Chernoff said. “It can be challenging in a city like this where you have that, compared to us, where over the last three years we’ve been relatively good but there’s still some of that pent-up negativity. You have to recognize that really, it’s just passionate people who want a championship for the city.”

Chernoff is quite familiar with intense fans. His father, Mark, is the vice president for programming at New York’s WFAN. Chernoff is used to fans voicing their opinions, a pastime that followed him to Cleveland.

“Five years ago, my dad helped start one of the stations for CBS here,” Chernoff said, smiling. “So now they have sports-talk radio all day — just in time for me to be in this role. It’s perfect. I can thank him for that.”

Dominant Beyond a No-Hitter

When Jake Arrieta pitched another no-hitter on Thursday, for the Chicago Cubs in Cincinnati, it highlighted an overwhelming stretch of dominance.

In his last 19 regular-season starts, Arrieta is 16-1 with an 0.78 E.R.A. He has not allowed an earned run in 13 of those starts, and the only time he lost was when his opponent — Cole Hamels, then with Philadelphia — threw a no-hitter. Arrieta has also won the Cy Young Award, tossed a shutout in the National League wild-card game and no-hit the Los Angeles Dodgers in that span.

As a Cub, he is 40-13 with a 2.17 E.R.A. With his previous team, the Baltimore Orioles, he was 20-25 with a 5.46 E.R.A. The Orioles — who discouraged Arrieta from throwing across his body, as he prefers — may always regret trading him in July 2013. But there is, at least, a smaller victory hidden within that deal.

The Orioles made the trade to get Scott Feldman, a veteran starter who could help them in a pennant race. Baltimore missed the postseason, and Feldman left as a free agent. But the Orioles — who also dealt Pedro Strop, a useful reliever — also acquired a backup catcher, Steve Clevenger, from the Cubs.

Clevenger played more games in the minors than in the majors for Baltimore. But last December, when the Seattle Mariners wanted to move an expensive outfielder to the Orioles, they accepted Clevenger in return.

The outfielder: Mark Trumbo, who looks like a steal for the Orioles. Through Friday, Trumbo was hitting .362 with five homers, helping the Orioles to a surprising 10-5 start. Trumbo is not Arrieta, and this rate of production seems unlikely to last. But at least the Orioles have something to show for the ace who got away.

A Ball Is a Ball

After a run of six perfect games in four seasons, from 2009 through 2012, baseball is into its fourth season in a row without one. But that dry patch is short compared with the 1970s, when there were no perfect games at all.

The pitcher who came closest, Milt Pappas, died on Tuesday at age 76. Pitching for the Chicago Cubs on Sept. 2, 1972, Pappas lost a perfect game with two outs and two strikes in the ninth inning when the plate umpire, Bruce Froemming, called ball four to the San Diego pinch-hitter Larry Stahl.

Though Pappas praised Froemming’s strike zone immediately after that game, he later held that Froemming should have given him the final strike. But it was not Froemming’s job to get caught up in the moment. In a 2010 interview with The New York Times, he maintained that the pitch was a ball.

“The pitch was outside,” Froemming said. “I didn’t miss the pitch; Pappas missed the pitch. You can look at the tape. Pappas, the next day, said, ‘I know the pitch was outside, but you could have given it to me.’ That pitch has gotten better over the years. That pitch is right down the middle now.”

Pappas remains the only pitcher to issue a walk with two outs in the ninth inning and a perfect game on the line. But a similar situation arose last June, when Washington’s Max Scherzer needed one more strike against Pittsburgh’s Jose Tabata to finish off a perfect game. Scherzer hit Tabata with an errant slider, spoiling his bid — but, like Pappas, he retired the next batter and settled for a no-hitter.


