


ONO ISLAND, ALA.

WHAT: A beachfront cottage with three bedrooms and three bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $800,000

SIZE: 1,664 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $481

SETTING: Ono Island is a residential community on Perdido Bay and the Old River, on the Florida border. The island is about five and a half miles long and a half-mile wide, with about 1,100 houses. Development started in the early 1970s, after a bridge connected the island to Orange Beach, Ala. Most of the older houses are, like this one, simple frame cottages; newer construction varies. This house faces south on a sandy lot dotted with pin oaks, with 100 feet of frontage on the river. The nearest grocery stores and other services are in Orange Beach; Pensacola, Fla., is about 25 miles away.

INDOORS: The single-story cottage was built in 1982. It has an open floor plan and faces south over the Old River, with oak floors and extensive knotty cypress paneling throughout.

The ceiling in the great room pitches up to about 16 feet. In addition to a wood-burning fireplace, which has a brick chimney stretching to the roofline, the room has French doors opening to a sunroom overlooking the river. (The sunroom is heated and cooled, though its 240 square feet are not counted in overall square footage.) The kitchen has butcher block countertops and a wood breakfast bar separating it from the dining area.

The master bedroom is set away from the other two. Both the master and one of the other bedrooms have French doors opening to a deck that runs across the back of the house, also connecting to the sunroom. There’s a storage room below the house.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is four-fifths of an acre, with a wooden walkway leading from the house to a dock and a small boathouse on 100 feet of deepwater frontage. Deck space totals 2,200 square feet.

TAXES: Approximately $1,870 a year

CONTACT: Barbara McDaniel, Re/Max of Orange Beach, (251) 978-8639; barbaramcdaniel.net

•

PIKESVILLE, MD.

WHAT: A contemporary with four bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $829,000

SIZE: 3,577 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $232

SETTING: Pikesville is a census-designated place with about 30,000 people, within 15 miles of downtown Baltimore and the Inner Harbor. This contemporary is on a sloping, wooded lot off a dead-end road, surrounded by wooded space entrusted to the county. The property is about a five-minute drive from shopping around man-made Quarry Lake and from I-83, which leads into the city.

INDOORS: The house was built in 1985 and updated within the last 10 years. The exterior is cedar, with sharply angled roofs and walls of glass facing the woods.

The interior is bright and open plan, with few interior walls and a mix of vaulted and pitched ceilings rising more than 25 feet. There are an entry level and two lower levels, following the grade of the land. Floors in most rooms are bamboo parquet.

The front door opens to a foyer, followed by a living area and a den on one side and a dining area and a kitchen on the other. The living area has a wall of windows and a tall pitched ceiling; the den has a fireplace and sliding glass doors opening to a deck. The kitchen is a skylit area with stainless-steel appliances, including an Aga range and an Asko dishwasher. The house runs on a geothermal WaterFurnace system, drawing on three wells hidden at the end of the driveway.

One of the bedrooms is on the first floor. From the foyer, one can look over a partial wall into the lower level, where there are three additional bedrooms and a family room. The master, one of the three bedrooms downstairs, has a wall of glass facing the woods and is part of a suite with a bathroom with a soaking tub and a sauna.

The family room has a double-height wall of windows stretching up through the entry level. On the lowest level is a recreation room, with doors that open to the yard.

A spiral staircase in the foyer leads to a sitting room with a wall of glass and a small balcony. The property also has a two-car garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is 1.21 acres, mostly wooded.

TAXES: $7,388 a year

CONTACT: Harriett Wasserman, Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices PenFed Realty, (410) 458-5300; wassermanteam.com

•

PROVIDENCE, R.I.

WHAT: A Victorian with six bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $835,000

SIZE: 3,747 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $223

SETTING: This house is on a tree-lined residential street in College Hill, a historic neighborhood that is home to Brown University and the Rhode Island School of Design. The area is architecturally mixed, but has many Victorians and other late-19th-century styles. Across the street from this house is the Moses Brown School, a private Quaker school for children from prekindergarten through 12th grade on a 33-acre campus. Thayer Street, the neighborhood’s cafe, restaurant and gallery corridor, is a few blocks away; downtown Providence is within two miles.

INDOORS: The three-story house was completed in 1886 and updated within the last seven years. A hefty Victorian with a brick-walled exterior on the first floor and clapboard on the second and third, it sits back from the street, with a gabled roof and a turret to the right of the entryway.

Most of the interior has been preserved, including wood floors, molding and paneled wainscoting. The living room, in the turret, has a rounded wall of windows with southern exposure. Both it and the adjoining dining room have fireplaces. A sunroom has walls of windows on three sides.

The kitchen, updated during renovations, has stainless-steel Bosch appliances and white wood cabinets. Lighting is contemporary throughout. There is a wood-paneled butler’s pantry with an additional sink and counter.

Bedrooms are on the second and third floors. The master is in the turret, with a rounded wall of windows and a gas fireplace. It is in a suite with a walk-in closet and a bathroom, which, like the others in the house, was updated with stone and marble during renovations.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about a quarter of an acre, with front and back yards.

TAXES: $15,100 a year

CONTACT: Kevin Fox, Residential Properties Ltd., (401) 688-5556; residentialproperties.com


