


It is not one of baseball’s infinite unwritten rules. Nor has it been scientifically proven through rigorous testing. No, instead, common sense dictates that the longer a baseball game endures, the chances of something bizarre occurring naturally rise.

Managers transform into mavericks trying to score the winning run. Benches and relievers are worn thin. In the case of the Mets’ game Wednesday afternoon against the Chicago White Sox, a relief pitcher who said he had last taken batting practice in 2007 scored the deciding run in the White Sox’ 2-1 win at Citi Field.

Matt Albers entered in the 12th inning as the seventh White Sox pitcher and successfully kept the game tied, 1-1, with a scoreless frame. He returned to the dugout, where Manager Robin Ventura, who once hit a grand slam to win a playoff game for the Mets, told him to grab a bat. Albers did not have one. Nor a helmet.

The husky Albers — perhaps, you could say, a poor man’s version of Bartolo Colon — last made a plate appearance in 2009. His first major league hit was in 2007 against Zach Duke, now a teammate.

Four hours 20 minutes into the game, Albers channeled Colon’s theatrics in the batter’s box. Leading off the 13th with his teammate Dioner Navarro’s bat, Albers drilled Logan Verrett’s 2-2 pitch into the left-center-field gap for a double.

His teammates roared with laughter and slapped the dugout railing. That was only the beginning of the high jinks. With Jose Abreu at the plate, Albers cruised to third base on a wild pitch.

“I was going to slide, and I didn’t see it; it was just a mess,” Albers said. “But I made it.”

He scored on a sacrifice fly, beating an off-target throw by center fielder Juan Lagares, a Gold Glove award winner and the Mets’ best defensive outfielder. Waving home Albers was the former utility player Joe McEwing, now the White Sox’ third-base coach.

“They didn’t think I could do it,” Albers said, still somewhat in shock at his athletic feats. “It was pretty funny. Man, I did that — a wild pitch, and I scored on a sac fly.”

The loss was not as humorous to the Mets, whose offense and bullpen relinquished several winnable games on a homestand in which they finished 2-4 and scored only one run three times.

Michael Conforto characterized the Mets’ offensive woes, going 0 for 6 and striking out four times. While the offense was largely extinct, Jacob deGrom continued to creep toward his All-Star level of last season.

DeGrom has been successful pitching in most conditions, even those not traditionally conducive for pitchers. But his nirvana lies in day games at Citi Field, where he protects the bases with deft precision better than almost any pitcher in baseball. Entering the game, deGrom held a 1.92 E.R.A. at home. In career day games, deGrom was 13-2 with a 1.58 E.R.A., the best among qualified pitchers since his debut in 2014.

DeGrom threw six scoreless innings, clinging to a one-run lead before leaving a changeup over the plate to Todd Frazier, who belted his league-leading 17th homer over the left-center-field wall to begin the seventh. DeGrom closed out the inning, and tossed his first 10-strikeout game of the season, but ultimately a no-decision, as well.

The Mets walked 13 times, a season high, but with a lineup heavy with reserves, could muster only one run on a single by Rene Rivera in the second. They grounded into five double plays, also a season-high.

Manager Terry Collins attributed some of the Mets struggles at the plate to the absence of injured regulars like David Wright, Lucas Duda and Travis d’Arnaud. On Wednesday, Yoenis Cespedes asked for the day off.

“I don’t think there’s any question that’s a major part of it,” Collins said. “We had a lot of opportunities to win a number of games on this homestand and couldn’t put a big hit on the board. It’s one thing to give a guy a day off. It’s another thing when you got four guys off out of your lineup. Those are big holes.”

Kevin Plawecki, the Mets’ last available position player, made the final out. Of course, Collins still had Colon available to hit.

INSIDE PITCH

DAVID WRIGHT reportedly visited another doctor Wednesday. TERRY COLLINS said Wright was scheduled to receive additional treatment and meet the team in Miami on Friday. … ZACK WHEELER is expected to throw a side session this weekend. The Mets have set July 1 as Wheeler’s return from Tommy John surgery.


