


The Ultimate Fighting Championship is suddenly and unexpectedly in danger of losing one of its biggest stars, Conor McGregor. If he really is leaving the sport, the return of Jon Jones on Saturday after 15 months away from the Octagon becomes more and more important to the organization.

McGregor has been the U.F.C.’s headliner since Ronda Rousey’s defeat in November. He is devastating in the ring and funny and flamboyant outside it. Even after an unexpected loss to Nate Diaz in March, he was considered the biggest star in the organization because of his strong pay-per-view numbers and the mainstream media attention he receives.

Then came this bizarre message on his Twitter account on Tuesday:

“I have decided to retire young. Thanks for the cheese. Catch ya’s later.”

Reaction was fast, confused and voluminous. By Wednesday morning, the message had been reposted 150,000 times.

Many fans’ first response was that it must be a joke. McGregor is a huge star and just breaking into the really big money. He was scheduled for a rematch against Diaz in July at U.F.C. 200 in Las Vegas, a fight that would have made him millions, win or lose.

Was the message an effort to hype the fight? Or was it the result of a dispute over money with the U.F.C.? Some speculated that McGregor was shaken because he had attended a fight on April 9 in Dublin that resulted in a fighter, Joao Carvalho, dying of injuries he had suffered in the ring. But the flip nature of McGregor’s post made that seem unlikely.

Diaz responded lightheartedly in a post of his own: “I guess my work here is done I’m retiring too.”

The next move belonged to the U.F.C., which announced that McGregor would be removed from its U.F.C. 200 card, dashing hopes that the whole thing was a joke.

But Dana White, the U.F.C. president, said McGregor had been scratched only because he had declined to do promotional work. “Conor did not want to come to Las Vegas and film the commercial or be a part of any of the marketing,” White t old ESPN. “Is Conor McGregor retiring? Only he can answer that question. I don’t know. But he’s not fighting at U.F.C. 200.”

White said that he would add more fights to the card, including one for Diaz. He also said he was open to McGregor’s continuing his U.F.C. career, if he does not retire.

McGregor has been silent on Twitter since his bombshell.

In December, McGregor, known as the Notorious, cemented his place at the top of the sport by beating the longtime featherweight champion Jose Aldo, who was at the time ranked as the best pound-for-pound fighter in the U.F.C. McGregor knocked him out in just 13 seconds.

Next, McGregor moved up two weight classes, to welterweight, only to lose by choke in the second round to Diaz. Their rematch, and the rest of McGregor’s career, were highly anticipated by his fans and detractors alike.

Jones once held the mantle of the U.F.C.’s biggest star, though seems like a long time ago. He won the light-heavyweight championship in 2011 at age 23 and defended it eight times, often with insouciant ease.

Jones’s problems came outside the ring. He was involved in a hit-and-run accident in Albuquerque a year ago and was stripped of his title. He pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an accident and was sentenced to probation.

He will return Saturday at U.F.C. 197, still only 28 and still possessing a sterling career record of 21-1. The championship he once held is now in the hands of Daniel Cormier, whom Jones beat in his last bout. But Cormier is injured, so Jones will fight for the interim title against Ovince St. Preux. Most people think the old Jon Jones will return; he is a 5-to-1 favorite in the bout.

Rousey will also return, perhaps in November at the first U.F.C. card in New York City.

With McGregor in limbo, the U.F.C. may need both Rousey and Jones to keep its place in the sports conversation.


