


HALHOUL, West Bank — The Israeli prison service on Sunday released the youngest known Palestinian inmate, a 12-year-old girl who had tried to stab a security guard at a Jewish settlement.

The girl, Dima al-Wawi, was freed six weeks before her scheduled release, said Assaf Librati, an Israeli prison service spokesman. Mr. Librati told the Israeli news media earlier that the release was because of her age.

Dima was given a hero’s welcome Sunday in Halhoul, her hometown. Large banners welcoming her were draped in front of her home, music blared from loudspeakers, and drivers in a convoy honked.

While eagerly eating her first ice cream cone in months, Dima said she intended to kill the security guard on Feb. 9 but was quickly apprehended. She said she had hoped that she would be killed.

“I was dreaming that I was going to be martyred,” she said. She said she had been influenced by other young Palestinians who stabbed or tried to stab Israeli soldiers and civilians. The wave of attacks, now sputtering, began last year.

The surge of very young people trying to commit very violent crimes has posed a challenge for the Israeli military authorities, who for years had vowed to change their system of prosecuting and incarcerating Palestinian minors in the West Bank. It is a far harsher system than the one used for dealing with young Israeli offenders and Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem.

After her detention, Dima was interrogated without her parents or a lawyer present. She said she had been yelled at during her interrogation and attended six court sessions with her feet in shackles, causing her to develop a limp. Prison itself, she said, was fine because she was allowed to play with other incarcerated girls.

There were 422 Palestinian minors in Israeli jails in December, according to Defense of Children International-Palestine, which works to help incarcerated Palestinian minors. The group said that figure was the most recent one from Israel’s prison service.

About 100 of the minors were under 15, and most were boys, the group reported. By comparison, 195 minors were incarcerated in December 2012, the group said.

Palestinians have killed 28 Israelis and two Americans in stabbings, shootings and attacks with cars since October. Israeli forces killed 204 Palestinians from October to March, according to the Palestinian Ministry of Health. Most of the Palestinians were killed while committing, or trying to commit, an attack.


