


Peter Pan is getting ready to fly away.

“Finding Neverland,” the Broadway bio-musical about J. M. Barrie, the Scottish playwright who wrote “Peter Pan,” will close on Aug. 21, the show’s producers said on Thursday night.

The musical was a Broadway debut of sorts for the Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein, who has invested in multiple other shows, but was serving as lead producer for the first time. The experience was rocky at times — Mr. Weinstein replaced much of the creative team and cast during the show’s development — and the show was not nominated for any Tony awards last season, when it was eligible.

But Mr. Weinstein is still determined. He is planning a national tour of the show, beginning in Buffalo, this fall, and winding up back on Broadway. He said he is planning a second production in London next year, and a third production in Asia the next year. He said he intended to make a film version of the musical as well.

“Finding Neverland,” with music and lyrics by Gary Barlow and Eliot Kennedy and a book by James Graham, was adapted from a nonmusical 2004 film that starred Johnny Depp. The Broadway musical, directed by Diane Paulus, initially starred Matthew Morrison as Barrie; that role is now played by Alfie Boe.

The musical, which had a pre-Broadway run at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., cost an estimated $20 million to develop and mount. It has not recouped its capitalization on Broadway, but Mr. Weinstein is hoping that he will be able to repay investors from the other productions of the show.

The production began previews on Broadway on March 15, 2015, and opened on April 15, 2015.

It started strong, with about five months in which weekly grosses were usually over $1 million, but its financial performance has weakened over time; last week, it grossed $583,984 and played to audiences of 62 percent capacity.

“The show did spectacularly well when families and tourists were here, but it was tough when the family audience wasn’t available,” Mr. Weinstein said in a telephone interview.

“I wish we could have played longer, but we’ll be back, and when it comes back it will be much more economical to run.”

Meanwhile, Mr. Weinstein is continuing to pursue multiple theatrical projects. He hopes next year to bring to Broadway the Paris-based Théâtre du Châtelet’s musical adaptation of the classic film “Singin’ in the Rain,” starring Derek Hough. His company is also developing a musical adaptation of “Around the World in 80 Days.” And he has the rights to film adaptations of two musicals, “In the Heights,” by “Hamilton” creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, and “Pippin.”


