


The punishing rents of New York City breed unusual compromises. Sophomore year of college, I snagged a one-bedroom at the top of a seventh-floor walk-up in Lower Manhattan. The week I moved in, a neighbor pulled me aside and offered wisdom on the climb: “Your legs will get used to it,” she said, “but your heart never will.” How literally she meant this, I was never sure.

The apartment was tiny — I had to shuffle sideways like a crab to get into my bathroom — and I was intent on justifying the unreasonable rent. So the day before I moved in, I ordered a bunk bed on Amazon. I figured that with an extra berth, I could effectively double the apartment’s holding capacity, allow out-of-towners to avoid hotels and offer refuge for friends, whether locked out of their own homes or weary of the slog back to Brooklyn.

The bed arrived as a sprawl of metal poles, each embalmed in white lacquer. I had picked a model with a full-size bed on bottom and a twin on top. While a traditional twin-on-twin evokes the accommodations of childhood and camp, prison and the military — a sign, somehow, of both playfulness and austerity — the twin-over-full variety signals something entirely different, and possibly even transgressive. Instead of two sleepers, the bed seemed to beckon heterodox groupings of three or four.

Most evenings, the bunk bed offered itself up as a choice. Did I want to transcend worldly concerns, swaddled and suspended in a criblike twin bed that enveloped my lanky build? Or did I prefer to brave the open expanse of the full bed like a taxpaying adult? The decision involved a touch of foresight. The bed was wedged against three walls, and waking up on the twin meant either shimmying down the ladder (and having my ribs played like a xylophone by the rungs) or taking a morning death-leap from the top, more invigorating than a cup of coffee.

During the trial run, close friends took the bottom, and I, rather religiously, took the top. I was convinced I would be horribly maimed should the contraption collapse — “Please! You take the bottom,” I insisted, shrouding my dread in panicked largess. But once the lights were off, youthful exchanges about life, love and the cosmos raged. We were recumbent along an intimate vertical axis, and our words, unmarred by dubious glances, spilled into the air. All night, the whoosh of cars outside echoed through the room like waves against a hull; until sleep finally took us, we were out at sea together, stowed away safely.

The bed swiftly earned its claim to being one of my most prized possessions. Then, my parents came to visit.

One evening, I left the apartment to pick up milk for the morning’s cereal. When I returned, they were absent from the living room, and the bedroom door was closed. I opened the door, and I regret it, as those who open doors so often do. My parents, stumbling through a defense, confessed that the bunk bed had sparked dormant passions — the bed’s latticework of metal poles both the kindling and the match that ignited their love aflame. Freud’s “primal scene” is supposedly a trauma specific to childhood, but I am now no longer sure.

In the years to follow, the bed exerted something like a centripetal force on the space. Nearly all memorable activity in the apartment spiraled around it. Regardless of how close any two (or more) people are beforehand, on bunks they fall asleep together, they wake up together, they hear each other sleeping (snoring, babbling, rolling around). Each person is made to be vulnerable before the other, and in doing so bonds in an unusual and meaningful way. The twin-over-full arrangement did not militate against the orgiastic, as my parents had proved, but much more often, it fostered friendship.

In the summer, small, boozy gatherings in the apartment migrated to the air-conditioned bedroom. As many as six of us would distribute ourselves across the beds, and occasionally someone would be dispatched to the bottom bunk if the metal moaned too much under our weight. Treasured memories of childhood mischief and sleepaway camp inevitably surfaced, cementing new friendships and shedding light on old ones.

Each morning when visitors were below, I craned my neck over the side of the safety railing to check on them. Some consulted my eyes, as if inquiring about what was in store for breakfast; others instinctively reached out a hand to meet mine halfway. Even though the bed proved to be reliably sturdy, I was always delighted to find that no one perished in the night, that no limbs and organs were compromised by loose screws or buckled metal.

Word eventually got around campus, and the questions kept finding me: Is it true that you have a bunk bed? Does it really have a full and a twin? I had bought the thing in the name of economy, but it had become an attraction in itself. Perhaps bunk beds, in an age of individuation, tap into our latent desire to share a world — they urge us, after all, to cohabitate, and to explore the pleasures and challenges of unfamiliar intimacies.


