


The first time I met Frederick Jones, in January 2015, he had something to say about the orthopedic shoes his doctors wanted him to wear. How could he go to church in boats like those — how could he flirt, how could he strut, how could he pursue the lasting romantic connection that had eluded him for his 87 years, or at least a temporary substitute?

“Maybe I can persuade some lady to come over here and live with me and let me slap on her butt once in a while,” he said.

We were in his third-floor walk-up apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, where I would visit him for the next 12 months for a series of articles called “85 & Up,” and afterward just because I missed him. Visiting him always made me happy.

Fred Jones died on April 28 at SUNY Downstate Medical Center, after being rushed there in a state of cardiac arrest. His death came one week after that of his daughter Deidre Jones, the only one of his six children with whom he remained in close contact. He had recently turned 89. “The social worker said he died of a broken heart,” said Danielle Jones, 29, Deidre Jones’s daughter. “And it’s true.”

Fred was a complicated man. He wanted to live to 110, but he continued to eat a diet rich in ice cream and Pringles, even as he lost two toes to diabetes. He was outgoing and loved to tell stories, but he was also protective of his privacy and rarely let people into his apartment, which had gone to seed as his health weakened. His conversation, often ribald, was equal parts God and sex. He could sing like Billy Eckstine. He wanted to get back to church, to go to Red Lobster, to hang out on the street and make conversation with the women who passed by. He was never again able to do any of these things. His favorite part of every day, he said, was waking up and thanking God for another day.

I once asked him about the happiest time of his life. It was after a long conversation about his mother and his grandmother (the true loves of his life); about earning small tips as a teenager, during the early days of World War II in Norfolk, Va., by helping servicemen find willing women; about being the first one in his family who went to college.

The happiest time of his life was “right now,” he said without hesitation. “I have health problems, but it’s been going on a long time, so it’s secondary.” he said. “But I think happiness really is what’s going on at a particular time. I used to think happiness was something that somebody brought to you. But happiness, as opposed to enjoyment, is when you are doing something and you are elated.”

After one of the “85 & Up” articles, a reader named Jim Healy contacted Fred and became a part of his life, for which Fred never failed to give thanks. On one visit, Mr. Healy asked Fred what he would do if he found a couple hundred dollars on the street, and Fred said he would buy a suit. So they did. “He wanted a purple suit, which made it a bit complicated,” said Mr. Healy, a retired executive. But they found one, double-breasted and checked, and Fred looked great in it, and couldn’t control his smile.

“You could say he died of a three-story unheated walk-up,” Mr. Healy said. There was truth to this as well.

The other five subjects of the “85 & Up” series continue roughly as the last article left them, though two — John Sorensen and Ping Wong — have had some noticeable loss of memory. Jonas Mekas returned from Paris, where he contributed materials for a Velvet Underground exhibition.

Fred believed in a life after this one and expected the best for himself and his older brother, whose health problems exceeded Fred’s own. “Heaven is my home, but I’m not homesick,” he said almost every time we talked. If I have the good fortune to meet Fred there, I promise to take him to Red Lobster. I owe him that much and more.


