


DAVAO CITY, Philippines — The front-runner in the Philippines presidential election, Rodrigo Duterte, held a large lead over his closest competitor on Monday, according to an unofficial tally of partial results.

The Commission on Elections reported that with 83 percent of the votes counted, Mr. Duterte, the mayor of the southern city of Davao, had nearly double the number of votes of his nearest rival. Election officials said they would not announce the winner of the race until Tuesday, though one of the leading candidates, Senator Grace Poe, conceded defeat on Monday night and withdrew from the race.

Mr. Duterte had been largely unknown outside the Philippines before he declared his candidacy last November. Since then, he has run a campaign light on specific policies and heavy on tough talk, earning him comparisons to the presumptive Republican presidential nominee in the United States, Donald J. Trump.

Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Duterte has cast himself as an outspoken outsider, and has drawn wide criticism for his comments.

He alienated many people recently by joking about rape.

At a campaign rally, he made light of the rape and murder of an Australian missionary during a 1989 prison riot in Davao, when Mr. Duterte was mayor.

“She looks like a beautiful American actress,” he said. “What a waste. They lined up and raped her. I was angry because she was raped. That’s one thing. But she was so beautiful. The mayor should have been first.”

He apologized, but his blunt speech has riled voters throughout the campaign.

He boasts about his sexual conquests.

On the campaign trail, Mr. Duterte has been accused of groping female voters during rallies and has bragged about his voracious sexual appetite fueled by Viagra. He said at a campaign event that he has two wives and two girlfriends, and admitted that he is a womanizer. He joked that he keeps his mistresses in a cheap boardinghouse and takes them to motels for sexual trysts.

He has called for killing criminals.

Elected mayor of Davao City seven times, Mr. Duterte has touted his record in making the city safe from crime using extreme measures. In a speech last year, he said his strategy to fight criminals was, “kill them all,” and he has said he would ignore or roll over those in his way.

His aggressive comments and violently-tough-on-crime position has earned him the nickname “Duterte Harry” — a reference to the character played by Clint Eastwood in the 1971 film “Dirty Harry.” If elected president, he said recently, he would aggressively pursue those who break the law, vowing to kill them himself and grant himself a presidential pardon.

Mr. Duterte has been accused of having ties to death squads that carried out extrajudicial killings in Davao during one of his previous terms as mayor, in the 1990s. In a television interview during the campaign, he appeared to confirm his involvement in the killing of criminals in Davao, and reissued his “kill them all” rallying cry.

Some in Davao have praised his approach. “The police do their job in this city,” said Giovanni Perucho, a bus driver. “That is because of Mayor Duterte. The criminals are afraid of the mayor, but the police are also afraid. They know they have to do their job, or else.”

Like Mr. Trump, he had choice words for Pope Francis.

During the pope’s visit to the Philippines last year, Mr. Duterte cursed Francis and his entourage for causing huge traffic jams in Manila — a perennial issue for Filipinos who endure grinding, daily delays. Despite the fact that the Philippines is more than 80 percent Catholic, Mr. Duterte, using a vulgarity in describing Francis, said he hoped the pope would never visit again.

In January, Mr. Duterte reportedly sent a letter of apology to the Vatican, and in February, during a visit with the bishop of Bacolod City, he asked for forgiveness for his comments.

He has also cast doubt about the reliability of his country’s security alliance with the United States.

The Philippines is one of the United States’ oldest allies in Asia. Mr. Duterte has been increasingly bellicose toward China, threatening to settle his country’s dispute over China’s claims to parts of the South China Sea by taking on the Chinese Navy himself on a Jet Ski.

Mr. Duterte’s no-nonsense message of strong solutions to nagging problems has resonated with some Filipinos who have become tired of the more measured tones of President Benigno S. Aquino III.

Mr. Aquino has responded with alarm to the prospect of a Duterte presidency, saying it is tantamount to a return to dictatorship. He had called on other candidates to unite to defeat Mr. Duterte, but none agreed.


