


An African-American man in Troy, N.Y., shot to death by a police officer after an early-morning traffic stop. A grand jury declining to indict. A district attorney determining that the shooting was justified.

A year ago, the case might have ended there. But as questions have mounted in Troy about whether the man was armed, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s executive order last summer giving the New York attorney general broad powers to investigate and prosecute in deadly encounters between police officers and unarmed civilians has scrambled the case, setting up a collision between state and local authorities over an issue that has grown in national prominence with every death of an African-American at the hands of a police officer.

On Wednesday, the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, sued the Rensselaer County district attorney’s office over its handling of the shooting. Mr. Schneiderman said the local prosecutor had violated Mr. Cuomo’s executive order by claiming jurisdiction over the investigation and convening a grand jury before Mr. Schneiderman’s office had determined whether the shooting fell under the attorney general’s mandate. Though local prosecutors have been leery of ceding their powers, the shooting in Troy is the first case since the order was issued in which a district attorney has openly challenged Mr. Schneiderman’s authority as special prosecutor.

Less than a week after the shooting, the district attorney, Joel Abelove, impaneled a grand jury, which declined to press charges against the officer.

Mr. Abelove’s conduct “flew in the face of the public concerns” about potential conflicts of interest that arise when local district attorneys investigate local police officers — concerns that led to the executive order, the complaint says. Mr. Abelove’s “attempted five-day end run around Executive Order 147 reinforces and exacerbates these public concerns,” the complaint says.

Through a spokesman, Mr. Abelove declined to comment on Wednesday.

Mr. Schneiderman’s special investigations and prosecutions unit, which he assigned to handle episodes in which civilians die in encounters with the police, has looked into several such cases since the executive order was issued, said Eric Soufer, a spokesman for the attorney general, who added that the local authorities have generally been cooperative. Only four cases were determined to involve civilians who were not armed and dangerous, prompting Mr. Schneiderman to intervene. Of those, three are still open investigations — one in Yonkers, one in Putnam County and one in the Bronx — and one has been closed. The closed case examined the death of Raynette Turner, a woman who died while in the custody of the Mount Vernon police. Mr. Schneiderman’s office found in March that the police were not responsible for her death.

According to the authorities, the shooting in Troy unfolded in the early hours of April 17, when Sgt. Randy French pulled over Edson Thevenin, 37, on suspicion of driving while intoxicated. Mr. Thevenin fled in his vehicle, leading to a brief chase. The authorities said that when two police cruisers caught up to Mr. Thevenin, his car struck and pinned Sergeant French against his cruiser, prompting Sergeant French to open fire. He fired eight times; the police have declined to say how many times Mr. Thevenin was shot. Sergeant French was treated for minor leg injuries.

Jurisdictional questions were murky almost from the start: Mr. Schneiderman’s office sent investigators to the scene, but they were rebuffed by the local authorities, Mr. Soufer said. The next day, Mr. Abelove announced that one of Mr. Schneiderman’s investigators had told him the attorney general would not be investigating, only to be contradicted by the attorney general’s office, which said it would review whether to take over the case. Mr. Schneiderman’s office followed up a day later with a letter to Mr. Abelove requesting the case files.

The lawsuit, filed in New York State Supreme Court in Albany, says the attorney general’s office told Mr. Abelove “at least three times” that Mr. Schneiderman was interested in the case.

By the end of the week, however, Mr. Abelove had already acted, announcing on Friday that a grand jury had declined to indict Sergeant French after finding that his use of deadly force was “justifiable under the law.”

The lawsuit addresses only what the attorney general says is Mr. Abelove’s improper assertion of jurisdiction. Mr. Schneiderman’s office has not yet decided whether it will ultimately intervene in the case.


