


Keep your swoosh and your polo players. Logos are a drag. If only, one sometimes feels, we could return to the days of well-made generics, clothes advertising nothing but their anonymous good quality.

Sure, there is Uniqlo and Topshop and H&M. Yet, inevitably, shopping at those international chains for anything resembling my beanpole body type leaves me feeling as if I ought to be trolling the aisles at Rochester Big & Tall. Thus, when spring rolls around, I face an annual quandary: where to find a proper summer sport shirt.

Frustratingly enamored of licentious T-shirts and polo shirts produced by Carne Bollente, an indie label founded by the French model and artist Felix Gesnouin and a band of his pals, I went hunting for one of its shirts featuring subtly embroidered logos of couples of every sexual stripe getting busy. Actually obtaining a Carne Bollente shirt or two from one of the few European retailers that purport to stock them proved frustrating, however: Sold out or unavailable are no less discouraging when rendered in French.

Then a friend tipped me to Arkwear, another indie label making its debut this spring. The dull-but-worthy promise made by Arkwear is to produce “polo shirts with a purpose.” And the purpose is a noble one, in line with a pledge by Andreas von der Goltz, the Guatemala-born and conservation-minded 38-year-old German baron who started the label, to donate 5 percent of the proceeds from every shirt sold to the Wildlife Conservation Society.

Happily, the shirts themselves are well cut and well made, woven of Peruvian Pima cotton and each bearing a sprightly logo designed by Kayako Kobayashi of threatened and endangered animals, including the orangutan, white rhino, great white shark and — no conservation campaign these days is complete without one — the African elephant.

“I thought it would be really great if you could do something with animals for animals that are threatened with extinction, and at the same time have something with a logo that is not the same old boring crocodile,” Mr. von der Goltz said.

Arkwear polos, $95 at arkwear.com.


