


BALTIMORE — The jockey Mario Gutierrez finished his morning news conference, conducted on a platform with a microphone and speakers, and immediately scanned the crowd for his wife, Rebecca. She is his biggest fan and confidante, the person whom he most wants to make happy — not the trainer Doug O’Neill, not the owner Paul Reddam, not even Nyquist.

The couple held hands and chatted as they made their way from the backstretch to the clubhouse for an annual Preakness Week breakfast that fetes the Kentucky Derby winner above all. Gutierrez, who rode the undefeated Nyquist to victory, is at the top of his sport, and it was Rebecca who helped him get back there after he had lost his way.

Gutierrez, who was thrust into the spotlight in 2012 when he rode the Derby and the Preakness winner I’ll Have Another, has not always been comfortable with commanding a large audience. After I’ll Have Another was scratched with a tendon injury the day before the Belmont, a heartbroken Gutierrez headed to Hastings Racecourse in Vancouver. It was a step down from the Southern California circuit where he had been riding, but it felt like home. Gutierrez had landed at Hastings in 2006 after leaving his native Mexico to try to make something of himself as a jockey.

“All the excitement, all the hype, they build you up so high, and then all of a sudden, they just take it away — it’s just not there anymore,” Gutierrez, 29, said of I’ll Have Another’s injury. “So that was hard, and it was very emotional because of the horse.’’

Back at Hastings in 2012, Gutierrez reconnected with Rebecca, who had picked him up at the airport when he arrived in 2006 at the suggestion of her father, a horse owner who had helped out as an interpreter in the racing office. Rebecca, whose family is from Spain, speaks Spanish, and Gutierrez did not even know how to say “yes” or “no” in English. He used movies with English subtitles and catchy songs to teach himself the language.

As a boy, Gutierrez fell hard for horses in his hometown, El Higo, where his father became a quarter-horse jockey in his mid-30s. Gutierrez learned the trade at age 7, and he was riding in races by the time he was 14.

“I just knew back then, I kept telling everybody, I was going to be just like my dad,” said Gutierrez, whose family has never seen him race aboard a thoroughbred.

After he left Hastings and returned to Southern California in 2013, he found out that merely winning a Kentucky Derby was not enough to secure mounts; he needed to be there in the mornings, too. So he fell behind in the standings.

“I think for a little bit of time I forgot why I became a jockey in the first place,” Gutierrez said. “And I think that was my hardest moment, because I disconnected from the love of horse racing.”

When you are in a slump, Gutierrez said, it is hard to remember that love.

“You want to force things that you probably shouldn’t force,” he said.

Rebecca, whom he married just over a year ago, urged him to see a sports psychologist. At first Gutierrez said no — none of the other jockeys did it — but he finally relented. Now he credits the work he has done with the psychologist, who helped rekindle his love of the sport and taught him how to isolate racing and news media obligations.

The psychologist, whom he sees once a week, even helped him get more fit. He encouraged Gutierrez to hire a strength and conditioning coach, who helps him stretch twice a week. The strength coach then suggested that Gutierrez visit a chiropractor twice a week.

Rebecca, a graphic designer, acts as his chef and nutritionist.

“For him, it was hard, but in life and in sports, it’s inevitable to have ups and downs,” Rebecca said. “In those moments, when going through hard times and things aren’t going your way, that’s when the most development can happen sometimes. And sure enough, his attitude changed immediately, and he started feeling better. It can be a pretty tough sport mentally for jockeys. But, now, if he has a bad race, he asks how he can grow instead of blaming himself.”

At the urging of his psychologist, Gutierrez kept a diary and set short-term goals for himself. One by one, with Nyquist underneath him, he has checked them off.

“It’s almost like my paper and my pen was like a magic paper and a magic pen,” Gutierrez said. “There is not one thing that I wrote in those papers that didn’t become a reality. Even with Nyquist. The first time I worked him, I came home and told Rebecca, ‘You know what, I think this is the horse that can take me all the way.’ But those are just hopes and dreams. Fast forward one year later, and now look at him and his accomplishments.”

Among those who never gave up on Gutierrez, who is more mature but still baby-faced, was Reddam. Gutierrez delivered him his first Derby victory after Reddam and O’Neill had plucked him from relative obscurity after watching him win a low-level race at Santa Anita Park. O’Neill called him a “gift from God.”

Reddam said he admired Gutierrez’s determination.

“He came down to Southern California without an agent a few years before he came down in 2012, and he didn’t get a single mount, so he went back to Canada,” Reddam said. “But then he tried again. So anybody who’s got that kind of drive, you’ve got to like. Plus, he’s such a sweet, humble guy, and we just have the right chemistry.”

Gutierrez’s work ethic has not wavered. On the Monday after the Kentucky Derby, he worked eight horses at Santa Anita Park.

“He’s out there every morning working horses, and he never complains,” said his agent, Tom Knust. “He didn’t take any time off after the Kentucky Derby. He’s very professional, and he knows his job is to ride horses. He wants to be up top, so he’s got that drive.”

Besides the mounting pressure to win a Triple Crown, Gutierrez also has a new challenge ahead. Rebecca is pregnant with their first child, who is due in early September. When he found out it was a boy, Gutierrez cried.

“I wanted a girl because I hear girls are so attached to their dads,” said Gutierrez, who does not want his son to become a jockey. “We come from very humble beginnings and not a lot of money, and if you compare horse racing to how we grew up, we didn’t have anything and then all of sudden we are cashing $10,000 checks, $15,000 checks weekly. And a lot of things can go wrong. I wish I can say I always stayed on the right path, but I did some pretty crazy things. I just don’t want my child to go through that.”

He paused to think about his journey and the “Uno Mas Mario” T-shirts that circulated at the 2012 Belmont before it all came crashing down. Then he remembered the position he is in today, with another possible Triple Crown on the line.

“If my son loves horses, I would never stop him from reaching his dream, the way my family never stopped me from riding horses,” he said. “I would not encourage him, but if that’s the way he wants to go, I’ll have his back 100 percent.”


