


FRANKFURT — At first it seems illogical to buy bonds at prices practically guaranteed to lose money.

But there are good reasons that the yields on 10-year German bonds dipped below zero percent on Tuesday for the first time, meaning investors are essentially paying Berlin to keep their money.

Fear is probably paramount. A sluggish global economy and uncertainty surrounding the coming vote in Britain over whether to leave the European Union have some investors rushing for safe havens.

The European Central Bank is also printing money to buy bonds in an effort to bolster the eurozone’s weak growth. That has pushed prices higher, and made yields go down.

It has all created a topsy-turvy world for bonds, where investors are actually paying governments for the privilege of holding their debt. The German 10-year bonds are just the latest to fall into negative territory, after those in Switzerland and Japan. Yields on German five-year bonds fell below zero last year.

While many central banks are pushing for low or even negative rates, the new world order could create unexpected consequences. Much of the global financial system is based on above-zero interest rates. Banks, pension funds and insurance companies depend on interest-bearing investments for a big part of their profits.

Stock prices around the world have been falling since last week, and European shares are near three-month lows. Some investors are preferring to hoard cash until conditions improve.

The surge of fear lately stems from the so-called Brexit vote. Recent polls are showing that support in Britain for leaving the European Union is on the rise: More voters are backing a departure from the bloc than are opting to stay. If Britain drops out, the future of the European Union could be in doubt, and financial markets would be in for a rough ride.

Top officials of the European Central Bank, including Mario Draghi, the president, have said they have contingency plans if voters in Britain choose to leave the bloc. The central bank is battle-tested after enduring a series of crises since 2007, and it already has mechanisms in place to ensure that banks and businesses will be able to get access to all the pounds or euros they need. “The E.C.B. is ready for any outcome,” Mr. Draghi said this month.

Still, investors are nervous. And the cash — or liquidity in technical investment terms — that is sloshing around the eurozone looking for a home is not helping. For that, the European Central Bank is partly to thank, or to blame, depending on your point of view. For a year, the central bank has effectively been printing money and using it to buy government bonds. This month, the bank began buying corporate debt as well, spending about 80 billion euros, or around $90 billion, per month.

All that buying drives down interest rates across the board, more so for the safest assets. Investors trust Germany because the government has a budget surplus, a healthy economy and a long history of fulfilling its obligations.

The low-inflation environment is another important part of the equation for investors. At least for now, bondholders do not need to worry about their money losing too much value. When prices are weak, investors can even come out ahead despite paying negative interest rates. The real buying power of their euros can increase enough to more than compensate.

And most economists do not see any risk that inflation will pick up soon, anyway. The global economy is simply too weak. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has warned that the world is locked in a “low-growth trap.” The International Monetary Fund lowered its economic expansion forecasts at its last meeting in April. And the Federal Reserve in the United States, meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday, is likely to postpone an interest rate increase.

The outlook is so dismal that some investors may be betting that yields will fall even further. The yield on the German 10-year bond went as low as minus 0.03 percent at midday. An investor who bought at that price could make a profit if market rates dropped below that level. In June 2015, the yield was 0.92 percent, a rate that once would have been regarded as ridiculously low.

From the European Central Bank’s point of view, low interest rates are the whole point. The bank set a precedent for negative interest rates two years ago when it began charging banks to keep money in its virtual vaults, instead of paying them interest as it did in the past. The so-called negative deposit rate is currently minus 0.4 percent.

The lower borrowing costs take pressure off government finances and ripple through financial markets. Italian and Spanish 10-year bonds, for example, were trading at yields around 1.5 percent on Tuesday, compared with more than 7 percent in 2012.

In theory, businesses and consumers will spend more, stimulating the economy. Low rates also help depress the value of a currency, bolstering exports. And they increase the attractiveness of stock markets, which are considered riskier investments than bonds.

But very low interest rates also create tensions. In Germany, where many people are savers rather than borrowers, low rates make it hard for them to earn a return. Some economists, particularly in Germany, argue that central bank policies have encouraged dithering by political leaders in countries like Italy that need to do more to improve the performance of their economies by removing obstacles to hiring and firing or by investing in infrastructure.

“The E.C.B. has allowed politicians to sit on their hands with regard to growth-enhancing reforms and necessary fiscal consolidation,” David Folkerts-Landau, the chief economist of Deutsche Bank, said in a note to clients recently.


