


This year’s monthlong London Festival of Architecture has just kicked off, with over 200 events taking place across the capital. From thought-provoking exhibitions to silly cycling tours, hands-on workshops to lively debates, architects will be exploring the (admittedly broad) theme of “community”: how we live and work together, and connect with the cityscape. Here, our top picks of the events not to miss.

Think the hit television series “The Great British Bake Off,” but instead of aspiring chefs, the contestants are architects whose task is to recreate the world’s most iconic buildings in cake. Part of the Open Studios series, which sees over 50 London practices open their doors to the public, and hosted by WATG design consultants, the event will have architects — including Zaha Hadid Architects, Squire and Partners and Tom Dixon’s Design Research Studio — battle it out in Fitzroy Square to be crowned the winner of the best architectural baker trophy. Last year’s entries included Tower Bridge with a cake flotilla and a Serpentine Pavilion made out of jelly — so the stakes are high. June 11, architecturaldiary.org.

What would a typical cottage, terraced house or apartment look like if they were reimagined to take into account the way we live and work today? That’s the question being addressed by six contemporary architecture practices (Jamie Fobert Architects, Mae, Maison Edouard François, Mecanoo, Studio Weave and vPPR) in this Royal Institute of British Architects exhibition. Using the RIBA Collections as a starting point, each practice has created its own reinterpretation of a dwelling, whether that means turning a terrace into a linear collection of individual homes or looking at how cottages that once housed the working class are now seen as the height of luxury. It’s a fascinating look at the possibilities for the future of housing in Britain. Through Aug. 29, architecture.com.

One of the best ways to explore is on foot, and these three tours cover everything from the “Kings Cross Renaissance” — Europe’s largest city-center regeneration scheme, which has transformed a once-gritty part of north London into a hip enclave with street-food markets and dozens of restaurants and bars — to postwar art and architecture along the South Bank of the River Thames (titled “Art on the River,” and led by the art guide Alexandra Epps). Don’t miss the “New London Walking Tour,” a look at the legacy of the buildings and public spaces in the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, either. King’s Cross Renaissance: June 4 and 25, July 16 and 30, open-city.org.uk; Art on the River: June 4, architecturediary.org; New London Walking Tour, June 18, architecturediary.org.

Mayfair’s Grade-I-listed, 19th-century St Mark’s church is usually closed to the public (and is also about to undergo extensive restoration works) but throughout June, it will be opening its doors, allowing visitors to peer inside and learn about the building’s history. Plus, at the beginning of the month, it’s transforming into a pop-up cinema, showing crowd-pleasers like “Moulin Rouge” and “Purple Rain.” Meanwhile, over on the South Bank, a tour of Denys Lasdun’s iconic Brutalist National Theatre examines the outside of this divisive London landmark. St Mark’s cinema runs until June 5 (and is open until June 30), architecturediary.org; National Theatre tours run June 4-25, architecturediary.org.

For the last four years, the Australian comedian Tim Ross and musician Kit Warhurst have taken over architecturally important spaces across the globe to present their award-winning show, “Man About...” Now, for their London premiere, they are celebrating the 20th anniversary of the public opening of Ernö Goldfinger’s 1939 Modernist masterpiece home in Hampstead by turning it into a temporary performance space for two nights only. Expect storytelling, songs and lots of laughs. Other venues for the show during the festival include Australia House and the BT Tower. June 13-14, nationaltrust.org.uk.


