


It’s hard to define the mystery of what draws us to a particular place. How is it, for example, that in some places we seem to feel instantly at home, as if we’d always belonged there, or as if some unknown but vital part of ourselves had finally been awakened?

Of course, the realities of any country or city, whether one that feels instantly familiar or not — the stuff we discuss when talking to one another about where we have been, its architecture and landscape, its policies and programs, its shops and hotels and food — all have something to do with why we are attracted to a place. But they don’t neatly add up to a full expression of its soul, or its particular magic.

That magic seems to come from the ghosts that truly define a place — the way in which time and memory and feeling seem to layer themselves into things, how the past and the future pervade the present moment, how they are alive in some way in the culture, the buildings, the food, but especially, the people.

Because even if we know no one there, the people seem essential to the mysterious alchemy of our attraction: Their fortitude, quirks, traditions and behaviors give a place its atmosphere, its energy and spirit. It is how they act in the face of the current circumstances in which they live — and, equally, how they carry their past, the weight of their history. It is this strange and sometimes dark magic that our writers and photographers convey so beautifully in this issue.

From the magnificent and decrepit fresco-covered havelis in Rajasthan, which aren’t cordoned off museum-style from daily life, but are rather part of its fabric, to the quiet, craggy Swedish island of Gotland, whose long, desolate and lonely winters seem written into the wonders of its short, brilliant summer months when the island explodes with wildflowers, sunshine and tourism, to Beirut, a complicated gem formed from layers of historical sediment and disruption, loved and nurtured by a class of artists, writers, historians, aristocrats, activists and aesthetes in the face of war and chaos, the destinations in this issue are all locations where the wonder of the place is inseparable from the soul of its people. “What is the city but the people?” Shakespeare asked in “Coriolanus.” The answer now, as then, is clear: nothing.


