


LONDON — Pep Guardiola regrets that he must leave Bayern Munich without delivering on the one trophy for which he was hired — the Champions League.

“It hurts,” he said in the media room at the Allianz Arena. “Of course it hurts every time. Titles are just statistics, but I can tell you that I gave everything — my life — to these players. I’m sorry, more for them than myself.”

Bayern had won the game, but lost the contest. This was the third time that Guardiola’s team had gone out at the semifinals to clubs from his own country — to Real Madrid, Barcelona and now Atlético Madrid. And though Guardiola tried to say on Tuesday that titles are not everything, he knows that that is how he will be judged.

He inherited a Bayern that won everything, including the Champions League, in the final season of his predecessor, Jupp Heynckes. And to lose not one, but three semifinals in his three-year term as Heynckes’s successor will inevitably go down as a legacy of failure.

Outside, on the grass where Atlético Madrid had on Tuesday done just enough to eliminate Bayern, Atlético’s coach, Diego Simeone, ended the night as we have not seen him before.

At the final whistle, Simeone was bent over. Crouched on his haunches, his face hidden in his hands, he tried to hold back tears and stop trembling. He was elated and emotionally spent. His team, with comparatively fewer resources and with substantially less of the ball, had squeezed victory out of adversity.

The format of Champions League soccer invites this conundrum. When teams finish with one game won and the other lost, and tied on the aggregate score, the away goals break the tie.

Atlético won 1-0 in Madrid last week, and lost 2-1 in Munich this week.

Without dirty or particularly ugly play, Simeone’s Atlético had done exactly this to Barcelona in the quarterfinals, too. “We played against two of the three best teams in the world,” Simeone said. “We went through, with difficulties; I’m very proud.

“In the first half tonight, we were up against the best team I’ve seen in my career. Bayern’s display was unbelievable. We fought, we had to suffer, and we’ve made it through to the final.”

Atlético, like the remarkable Leicester City, is noteworthy for the heart and spirit and inexhaustible effort with which it defies the odds. Leicester’s winning the English league was a 5,000-to-1 shot; and what would be the odds against Atlético Madrid’s reaching the final of the Champions League for the second time in three years? And, moreover, for a second time having sold its top strikers and top goalkeeper and found others to step up to the defiant way that Coach Simeone wins contests.

Let us be clear. There are more ways than one to win matches, and if Guardiola’s way is to coax beauty almost like a symphony of talents out of great players, there is also virtue in Simeone’s achieving results with supposedly lesser players and with tactics that contain the opponents before striking them when they are weary.

Simeone’s teams are unfailingly fit to run the 90 minutes, and more. They are competing — again — against Barcelona and Real Madrid in the Spanish league, which is tougher to win than the German Bundesliga.

And when it is played within the rules, Atlético’s minimalist style has to be acknowledged. The purpose is to reach the next round, and Simeone’s team exposes as nonsense the current trend to throw numbers at everything and to draw conclusions from those numbers.

The statistics say that Atlético had barely one-third of ball possession in the four games of the Champions League against Barcelona and Bayern. Atlético beat neither on goals scored. But it did the hardest thing, scoring an away goal in each contest.

So when both coaches, and the computer wizards, avow that Bayern appeared overwhelmingly the more accomplished side in the Allianz on Tuesday, their opinion is baseless.

Bayern missed chances before it opened the scoring Tuesday through a free kick from Xabi Alonso that deflected into the net off the knee of the defender José María Giménez.

Moments later, Giménez conceded a penalty kick that was wasted by Thomas Müller, whose meek shot was anticipated and saved by the excellent goalkeeper, Jan Oblak.

“We did many things right, and a few things wrong,” Müller said. It may not have eased his pain that Atlético was later given a generous penalty kick, and that was similarly tamely struck by Fernando Torres and saved by Manuel Neuer.

But before that, Atlético had changed its tactical approach at halftime. Its new plan was to press Bayern deeper, to suppress the home side in its own half.

Simeone had dared to take off a defensive midfield player, and replaced him with a winger. That approach paid its dividend in the 54th minute when Atlético broke like a stone out of a sling.

Torres passed to Antoine Griezmann from the center circle, and Griezmann had the speed to get behind the Bayern defense, and the composure to wait for Neuer to rush toward him before calmly stroking the ball around the keeper.

Griezmann follows a long line of Atlético strikers — Sergio Agüero, Radamel Falcao and Diego Costa among them — polished by Atlético and sold for profit. It is a wonderful trick.

Simeone has others. His team suffered when Bayern regained the lead through Robert Lewandowski’s headed goal in the 75th minute. That left a quarter-hour, 20 minutes given time added on for deliberate time-wasting by Atlético, but by then exhaustion had set in, and organized resistance rode out the pressure.

Bayern feels the hurt, Atlético is in another final, and Simeone is trying to win Europe’s most coveted title before, inevitably, Griezmann is sold to the highest bidder.


