


The central message of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s re-election pitch appeared clear, even early in his administration: After a winning 2013 campaign that deplored the “tale of two cities,” the mayor’s bid for a second term would be founded on his mission to create “one city” for all New Yorkers.

Words of unity adorned banners placed behind Mr. de Blasio at public events and the official names on his agenda: a plan for the city’s future titled OneNYC; a policing strategy named One City, Safe and Fair Everywhere; and a nonprofit formed to buttress the mayoral agenda, the Campaign for One New York.

But in recent months, as overlapping investigations have swamped his administration, the notion that Mr. de Blasio has brought about a unified city — a theme that mayoral advisers believed could lure New Yorkers into the fold who voted against him last time — appears to have all but vanished as an argument for his re-election in 2017.

While the “one city” banners remain, the inquiries into Mr. de Blasio and his aides have sapped much of the mayor’s ability to court new voters at the moment, some of his advisers believe, especially skeptical whites who have mostly shunned the mayor’s agenda.

They also have given new hope to potential challengers in 2017: Bradley Tusk, a former close adviser to Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and the architect of Uber’s successful bid to oppose Mr. de Blasio’s regulatory efforts, is vowing to organize aggressively in support of the mayor’s defeat in a Democratic primary.

The shifting political landscape has forced Mr. de Blasio to retool his strategy: His aides said the new game plan was to highlight the mayor’s accomplishments, portray him as an able manager of its day-to-day and long-term needs, and shore up support among the core constituencies that have long backed him, including labor unions and liberal activists.

Surrogates have blasted out a litany of mayoral achievements by email, on Twitter and in op-eds articles. Aides have pointed to supportive words from a small number of voices rising to defend the mayor.

Returning to the “two cities” theme, the mayor has fashioned an array of boogeymen to rail against, from “billionaire media owners” and hedge fund managers to state investigatory agencies and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who has been increasingly willing to punch back publicly. It is a refrain that the mayor has underscored since a recent strategy discussion in which he embraced the idea, one adviser said.

“We said we would take on the tale of two cities,” Mr. de Blasio told the crowd at his birthday fund-raiser last month. “But those who believe the tale of two cities is somehow ordained, they will fight to preserve it.”

Over the next month, Mr. de Blasio is expected to hold about a dozen additional low-dollar campaign fund-raisers, ranging in size from dozens of attendees to several hundred, according to a campaign adviser, with hosts including State Assemblyman Luis R. Sepúlveda of the Bronx and the City Council members Daniel Dromm, Ydanis Rodriguez and Helen Rosenthal.

Most of the aides and advisers interviewed about the mayor’s approach spoke on the condition of anonymity in order to discuss internal deliberations, plans and the effect of investigations and negative headlines on the outlook for 2017.

But the fear of powerful opponents is not unfounded. Mr. de Blasio has faced stiff resistance to his agenda — and millions spent on negative television ads — from well-funded antagonists including charter school advocates, Uber and the city’s largest police unions.

Mr. Tusk, who would have run a Bloomberg presidential campaign had it gone forward, said his consulting firm, Tusk Holdings, dropped Mr. Bloomberg as a client last month in order for Mr. Tusk to publicly pursue efforts to unseat Mr. de Blasio, starting with a private poll of Democratic primary voters that began on Wednesday.

He unveiled a new website on Monday — NYCDeservesBetter.com — along with a podcast and a tipsheet for potential candidates, paid for with his own money, he said. (His firm is also working for the Patrolman’s Benevolent Association, which is negotiating its contract and running television ads that go after the mayor.)

“I hate the way the city is being run right now,” Mr. Tusk, 42, said in an interview. “Everything is focused on politics, everything is focused on ideology.”

Mr. Tusk said he would seek to expand turnout in the Democratic primary, which Mr. de Blasio won with roughly 280,000 of 690,000 ballots cast in 2013, out of around three million registered Democrats. Mr. Tusk planned to court younger New Yorkers with the sorts of sharing apps and services that have become ubiquitous in many of their lives, including Airbnb, Uber and the restaurant delivery service Seamless. (None of the companies have yet been approached by Mr. Tusk about participating in a get-out-the-vote campaign, though he said he had discussed the idea with Uber at the national level when Mr. Bloomberg was mulling his presidential run.)

The poll, he said, would lay the groundwork for an as-yet-unnamed challenger. Among those included in the poll were a few familiar potential candidates — the public advocate, Letitia James; the comptroller, Scott M. Stringer; Representative Hakeem Jeffries — and some unusual ones like the Rev. Al Sharpton, the former police commissioner Raymond W. Kelly and the MSNBC host Joe Scarborough.

Another potential candidate, Paul J. Massey Jr., a real estate developer who has said he is mulling a Republican run for mayor, closed a nonprofit issue advocacy group he formed this year, 1NY Together, before it ever got off the ground — an indication of the shifting attitudes toward the nonprofit model that Mr. de Blasio had embraced. (Citing the completion of its work, Mr. de Blasio has said the Campaign for One New York has also stopped operations.)

“Too many 501(c)(4)’s have crossed the legal line, and I wouldn’t want to be mentioned in the same sentence with any of them,” he said, referring to the section of the tax code that allows for their creation.

Faced with the opposition, the mayor’s strategy has been threefold, aides said: Stay focused on the job; keep in constant communication with supporters and allies; and get the message out on the radio, in town-hall-style meetings and through community events.

In recent weeks, council members have been encouraged by the mayor’s office to post messages on Twitter vowing to “#protectprogress”; eight of 51 had done so by Friday. Unions, too, were pressed to express support.

“Screaming headlines have jumped ahead of the appropriate legal scrutiny now taking place,” Henry Garrido, the executive director of District Council 37, the city’s largest union of municipal workers, wrote in an email to his members on May 26. “I think it’s important during this challenging time to take stock of the accomplishments of the past two and a half years.”

Mr. Sharpton, who defended Mr. de Blasio in a speech last month, said no one had asked him to do so. “My concern was protecting some of the initiatives,” he said, adding, of the investigations into Mr. de Blasio’s team, that “there’s no there there yet.”

“I’m not saying there won’t be,” he continued. “But there’s no there yet.”

Phil Walzak, a top adviser to Mr. de Blasio, said the mayor never abandoned his goal of a more unified city and pointed to “one-city moments” such as a news conference last month in which business leaders expressed support for mayoral control of city schools, the Police Department’s low crime numbers and the administration’s focus on improving homeless services.

“We are in a snapshot in time,” Mr. Walzak said. By the start of the 2017 election campaign, he said, “the atmosphere and climate that we’re going to be operating in will be fundamentally different because I believe that our team has acted appropriately and we’ll be vindicated.”

“Outside of all of these atmospherics,” he continued, “the story we have to tell is very powerful.”


