


GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Much to Coach Alain Vigneault’s surprise, the Rangers captain Ryan McDonagh practiced fully on Monday, wearing a white jersey that meant he was not off limits and gripping a stick with a right hand that was broken two weeks ago.

McDonagh, the stalwart defenseman, was not available to reporters after a 45-minute practice, and Vigneault said that McDonagh was doubtful for Game 3 of the Rangers’ opening-round playoff series, tied at a game apiece, Tuesday at Madison Square Garden against Pittsburgh.

“But stranger things have happened before,” Vigneault added, with a twinkle in his eye.

McDonagh has not played since April 4, when he blocked a power-play shot by Columbus forward Brandon Dubinsky with his right hand. McDonagh practiced last week but wore a red noncontact jersey. Vigneault watched him skate on his own Sunday.

“I did not expect him to skate with the group today,” Vigneault said Monday. “But after discussing with our medical staff today, they thought it would be a good idea for him to get a practice in, and we’ll see how he responds.”

A minute later, Vigneault said of McDonagh’s injury: “But in the last little while, it’s been getting better. So who knows?”

McDonagh’s return would certainly buoy a defensive corps that is also missing Dan Girardi, McDonagh’s longtime defensive partner, who did not practice Monday. Nevertheless, the Rangers split the first two games of the series last week in Pittsburgh.

“Mac obviously plays a big part on this team as the captain,” said goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who returned from an eye injury to make 29 saves in a 4-2 victory Saturday. “He plays really hard out there. He has the experience in the playoffs as well. We’ll see when he plays, but it’s a good sign.”

The Rangers mostly used the veteran defensemen Marc Staal and Kevin Klein against the potent line centered by Sidney Crosby in Game 2 and could do so again, even if McDonagh is fit to return. McDonagh practiced Monday with Raphael Diaz, called up from Hartford.

Klein was credited with a game-high eight hits in Saturday’s game, leading a rambunctious lineup that pummeled the Penguins 57 times, the most hits by the Rangers in a regulation playoff game since 1998, when the statistic was first kept.

“He plays a game where you can depend on him, what he’s going to do and where he’s going to be,” Staal said. “He consistently plays hard on guys and is in their faces. That creates room for other guys on the ice.”

The Rangers also got contributions from two rookie defensemen, Dylan McIlrath and Brady Skjei, the team’s first-round draft choice in 2012. A left-hander who saw some time on the right side, Skjei, 22, had three hits and three blocked shots in more than 19 minutes of ice time.

“He does look like a young Trucker out there,” Klein said of Skjei, referring to McDonagh by his nickname. “He’s built the same way, skates really well, can play in every situation, and he’s going to be a good player. He’s already showing that right now.”

Skjei said of playing in Game 3: “I don’t look into that too much. I just try to get better every day.”

The Rangers took eight penalties Saturday, two when Klein scrapped with forward Chris Kunitz, receiving a fighting major and an unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty. The Penguins scored on two of five power plays. Vigneault wants his team to show more restraint.

Vigneault guessed that the Rangers were more physical Saturday because they had to be.

“I don’t think going down two games to nothing would have been a good idea, so that sort of raised the level of urgency and emotion,” he said.

“There are a couple of penalties that we have taken that I think have been unnecessary,” Vigneault said. “I want our guys to play whistle to whistle and play the right way, and when we have the opportunity to be physical, to be physical.”

It will be the Rangers’ first playoff game at the Garden since last May 29, when they played listlessly and lost to the Tampa Bay Lightning in Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals. McDonagh played on a broken right foot.

“Every time you go out there, it’s goose bumps,” Lundqvist said of playing at the Garden. “You’re excited, nervous. Every time you go out there, you just want to try to win. Winning at home is the best feeling, especially in the playoffs.”


