


Carl Ducasse’s family in the Bronx had been planning something big to mark two approaching milestones: his graduation from high school this month, and his 18th birthday in August.

“It was supposed to be a big celebration,” his cousin, Narier Ducasse, 29, said on Saturday. “And now we’re planning a funeral.”

Carl Ducasse and a friend had gone out on Friday to get a milkshake from a bodega around the corner from where he lived in the Mount Hope section of the Bronx, Narier Ducasse said, but his cousin never made it back.

The police said he had been fatally stabbed in the chest during a robbery around 11:20 p.m. near the corner of East 175th Street and Walton Avenue, a block from the apartment where his mother had been waiting for him to return.

No one had been arrested yet in connection with his death, the police said on Saturday.

Carl Ducasse’s friend, a classmate who was visiting from Brooklyn, told detectives and Mr. Ducasse’s family that they had been approached by two men the friend thought were from a nearby homeless shelter as they headed back to the apartment, the police said. The two men demanded money — $2 — but Carl Ducasse said he did not have any, Narier Ducasse said.

“They were patting him down and trying to see if he did have money,” Narier Ducasse said. “His cellphone dropped. Once his cell phone dropped, he went to go pick it up, and the other guy stabbed him.”

The attacker and the other man fled; Carl Ducasse collapsed, and his friend ran back to Mr. Ducasse’s mother’s apartment to get help.

His mother, Angela Ducasse, 42, was struggling to cope with her son’s death.

“Please don’t leave me alone,” she said in Spanish on Saturday.

Carl Ducasse was the youngest of Angela and Carlos Ducasse’s three children. The Ducasses had left the Dominican Republic in pursuit of better life, and they had settled among relatives in a second-floor apartment on Walton Avenue.

Their son, who was quiet and shy, was to graduate this month from high school, where his favorite subject was math, Narier Ducasse said. All he had left to do was to pick up his cap and gown, and retake his senior photo.

Carl Ducasse wanted to go to college to become a lawyer, so that he could defend people, his mother said.

“Never in a million years would we think that for a miserable $2, anyone would be killed,” Narier Ducasse said. “You took a life for nothing.”


