


For nearly a decade, I have been writing children’s books under the ridiculous name Pseudonymous Bosch. When my readers ask about it, I usually tell them that Pseudonymous is an old family name and that Bosch is the brand of my dishwasher. (Rarely do I mention Hieronymus Bosch, whose paintings, though edifying in their own way, are not altogether appropriate for my target audience.) If pressed, I admit that, yes, it is a pseudonym. My nom de plume, I explain, is a nom de guerre; it protects me from enemies as numerous as they are mysterious.

Having an alter ego can be a liberating experience. As any writer will tell you, you have to let yourself be bad in order to be good. My crippling self-consciousness disappears — well, diminishes — when I write under Bosch’s name. Whether making fart jokes or discussing the finer points of Egyptology, I worry less about the reader’s judgments. I’m not doing the writing, after all; Bosch is. Snarky, irresponsible, incorrigible Pseudonymous Bosch. Don’t like my puns? Think I put a comma in the wrong place? Blame him.

As my books have gained in popularity, at least with a certain kind of obsessive 10-year-old, the pseudonym has provided a not unwelcome barrier between author and reader. We live in an age when kids no longer think of authors as remote; they expect to find their favorite writers online at all hours, if not signing books at their local Barnes & Noble.

Pseudonymous Bosch makes a big fuss about hiding from his readers as well as from his enemies. He variously claims to be holing up in the jungle or living in an igloo in Greenland. Nonetheless, my daring double manages to make himself accessible via email, and sometimes even ventures out into public with his signature sunglasses and the occasional fake beard. What’s his favorite book? “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory,” of course. Does he have any pets? Yes, his rabbit secretary, Quiche. He’s the one typing this letter. Whereas I might feel uncomfortable responding, Bosch always has answers at the ready.

But as much as I owe to my pseudonym, lately I find that it fits less than perfectly, like an old suit that I’ve outgrown.

Once, in front of a live audience, a fellow writer asked me to describe a humiliating moment from childhood. His expectation, I think, was that I would tell a funny anecdote that would demonstrate to kids — hey, writers are people, just like you, and maybe someday you can be one, too. In retrospect, I should have invented just such an anecdote. But the only story that came to mind was true, and not very funny: about a time I was picked on for being gay, before I realized I was gay myself. Instead of telling the story, I stammered my apologies and changed the subject.

Afterward, I felt confused and a bit foolish. I couldn’t have told that story without a lot of explanation and backpedaling — Pseudonymous Bosch isn’t “out,” or even necessarily gay — but not telling it made me feel as though I’d stepped back into the closet. And back in time.

In my non-pseudonymous life, I came out at age 20 and now live the gay American dream with a husband, two kids and a mortgage. In my pseudonymous life, I am like one of those perennial bachelor uncles from another era. A witty dining companion perhaps, but ultimately pitiful because he can’t tell the truth about himself.

There are, indeed, gay characters in my books, most notably Larry and Wayne, the eccentric grandfathers of my heroine, Cass, even if I am rather discreet in how I portray them. (Perhaps I can out them ex post facto, as J.K. Rowling did for Albus Dumbledore.) And nowhere does it state that because an author is gay his narrator has to be. So why does it feel as if I’m hiding something?

But it struck me recently that, in a way, I’ve been writing about being gay all along. My entire first series is about a secret: The near-universal experience of gay people of my generation is to have lived with a secret. This state of secrecy is known as the closet, and it defined a large part of my youth. Perhaps my fake identity is not so fake after all.

In children’s books, closets are full of secrets, but they provide something else as well: a doorway to magic and adventure. Think of the Pevensie kids stepping through the Professor’s wardrobe into the snowy land of Narnia, or Harry leaving the cupboard under the stairs for the splendors of Hogwarts. In their new world, these young heroes inevitably become new people. Meanwhile, young readers go on a ride of their own, imagining themselves ruling Narnia. For those whose personalities are still forming, books provide a way of trying on various roles without risk.

But in the end, everyone must emerge from the wardrobe, no matter how wonderful the world inside. Writers, too. Like our readers, we’ve had fun pretending to be other people, and learned something about ourselves in the process.

Someday, even Pseudonymous Bosch may come out of the closet. That’s a private, creative decision between me, my publishers and the children’s book buyer for Walmart. (Kidding! Scholastic Reading Club actually holds all the power.) In any case, it’s time for me to out Raphael Simon. If I can find him.


