


The horses for the 141st running of the Preakness Stakes are listed in order of post position, with comments by Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert of The New York Times. The morning-line odds were set by Keith Feustle of Pimlico Race Course.

Purse: $1.5 million guaranteed Distance: 1 3/16 miles

Track record: 1:52.2 (Farma Way, 1991) Weight: 126 pounds

Post time: 6:45 p.m. Eastern Television: NBC

Joe Drape’s picks: Exaggerator, Nyquist, Collected

Melissa Hoppert’s picks: Nyquist, Exaggerator, Stradivari

Trainer: Dale Romans Jockey: Corey Lanerie Odds: 20-1

Joe Drape: He chased Brody’s Cause and My Man Sam in last. Neither of them lifted a hoof in the Kentucky Derby.

Melissa Hoppert: He was third in his last race, the Blue Grass, but he is a strong closer and has scored a nine-and-a-quarter-length victory on a wet track.

Trainer: Gary Sherlock Jockey: Fernando Perez Odds: 20-1

J.D.: Uncle Buck has a better chance of hitting the board.

M.H.: He turned in a solid effort in the Santa Anita Derby, finishing third behind Exaggerator and Mor Spirit.

Trainer: Doug O’Neill Jockey: Mario Gutierrez Odds: 3-5

J.D.: The horse to beat, and he will make things interesting if he comes to New York with a Triple Crown bid. I can’t pick him at 3-5.

M.H.: Hope we can all agree now that he is the real deal. Rain should not dampen his Triple Crown quest.

Trainer: Alan Goldberg Jockey: Jevian Toledo Odds: 30-1

J.D.: A nice colt, but he is stepping way, way up. Better off shooting for the Ohio Derby.

M.H.: He won his last race, the Federico Tesio Stakes, via disqualification on a wet track. Still, he is in over his head.

Trainer: Keith Desormeaux Jockey: Kent Desormeaux Odds: 3-1

J.D.: Gritty colt who always comes a-running. Here’s hoping the fifth time is a charm when it comes to vanquishing Nyquist.

M.H.: With rain in the forecast, it is tempting to think Exaggerator can finally best Nyquist on his fifth try.

Trainer: Mikio Matsunaga Jockey: Yutaka Take Odds: 30-1

J.D.: Love this eccentric colt: This is his prep for the 1½-mile Belmont Stakes.

M.H.: He became unglued at the Derby, where he finished ninth, and has been hiding from the crowds at Belmont ever since. A nice price, but he’s too much of a wild card.

Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Javier Castellano Odds: 10-1

J.D.: He caught the attention of clockers pre-Derby with superb works. Expect a big effort.

M.H.: The Lexington Stakes winner has been working well, and I do believe you can never count a Baffert horse out.

Trainer: Eric Guillot Jockey: Florent Geroux Odds: 30-1

JD: Along with Uncle Lino, this one will make Nyquist run fast early.

MH: The fourth-place finisher in the Blue Grass has yet to win a race. Pass.

Trainer: Ned Allard Jockey: J.D. Acosta Odds: 30-1

J.D.: Undefeated this year in minor stakes and allowance company. He will add to the early pace as well.

M.H.: Good news: He’s an Uncle Mo colt and has won five in a row. Bad news: He’s beat no one worthwhile.

Trainer: Mark Casse Jockey: Jose Lezcano Odds: 30-1

JD: Excellent trainer and underrated jockey add to this colt’s intrigue. He might run a big one.

MH: He placed third in the Florida Derby but has since changed barns and finished fourth in his last race, the Pat Day Mile.

Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: John Velazquez Odds: 8-1

J.D.: Nation’s leading trainer usually skips this race. My guess is this lightly raced colt has been kicking down the barn and made him enter. Don’t dismiss.

M.H.: He has raced only three times but has won twice, by 11 ¼ and 14 ½ lengths, while notching a triple-digit speed figure. One of those wins came on a wet track.


