


NEW YORK

An article in some editions last Saturday about criticism over the New York Police Department’s use of a restraint bag in an arrest misspelled the surname of a woman whose death led the police to re-evaluate its practices regarding emotionally disturbed people. She was Eleanor Bumpurs, not Bumpers.

SPORTS

An article on Thursday about teenage sports champions misstated Martina Hingis’s age when she won the 1997 Australian Open. She was 16, not 15.

THE ARTS

An article last Saturday about the visual artist and choreographer Yve Laris Cohen referred incorrectly to his study of Martha Graham technique at the University of California, Berkeley. He studied in the dance department founded by two former Graham company members; he did not study under them.

•

A theater review on Wednesday about “Indecent,” at the Vineyard Theater in Manhattan, referred incorrectly to the character Lemml. He is the cousin of a character named Nakhmen, not a cousin of Sholem Asch.

Weekend

A picture caption on Friday with a film review of “Maggie’s Plan” carried a credit that misspelled the photographer’s given name. He is Jon Pack, not John.

•

A dance review on Friday about “Merce Cunningham Early Works,” at the Baryshnikov Arts Center in Manhattan, omitted a co-presenter of the program. Besides the Merce Cunningham Trust, it was presented by the arts center.

•

A television review on Friday about a new series on Amazon Prime, and a picture caption with it, omitted part of the title of the show. It is “Julian Fellowes Presents Doctor Thorne,” not “Doctor Thorne.”

THE MAGAZINE

An article on Page 29 this weekend about Donald J. Trump’s improbable journey to the Republican nomination for president misstates the sequence of events by which Paul Manafort, a senior adviser, joined Trump’s presidential campaign. Manafort was referred to Trump by more than one person close to the campaign, not just by the former Trump adviser Roger Stone, and Manafort’s March 24 meeting with Trump occurred before, not after, Trump read a Wall Street Journal article describing Ted Cruz’s delegate strategy.

T: Travel

An entry in the “This and That” feature on Page 32 this weekend about a new collaboration between the jeweler Brooke Garber Neidich and the fashion designer Duro Oluwo erroneously includes one person among those who are fans of the Sidney Garber jewelry line, which Garber Neidich designs. While Hillary Clinton might be a fan, as the article noted, that could not be confirmed. (She is, however, friends with Garber Neidich.) The article also refers incompletely to the fabrics Oluwo uses in his designs. They come from a variety of sources, not just African-printed fabrics.

•

An article on Page 110 this weekend about the British designer Chloe Lonsdale’s denim brand M.i.h. and her house in Sussex erroneously includes one person among those involved in Lonsdale’s London pop-up shop. While the boutique owner Alex Eagle was involved at one point, that is no longer the case. In addition, an accompanying picture caption misidentifies a collection to which a dress of Lonsdale’s design belongs. It is part of M.i.h. Jeans’s pre-fall 2016 collection, not the Cult Denim Project collection.

•

A picture caption on Page 144 this weekend with an article about the cultural resilience of the people of Beirut in the face of continuing political strife misstates the time of day the photograph was taken. It was sunset, not sunrise.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Thursday about the historian Fritz Stern referred incorrectly to his work history and his tenure as provost at Columbia University. He taught at Cornell in the early 1950s; he did not spend his entire career at Columbia. And he was provost of Columbia from 1980 to 1983, not from 1980 to 1992.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


