


Ivan Nova was perplexed when he was asked to throw a bullpen session after he arrived at Yankee Stadium on Friday. Sweating heavily from his forehead, Nova walked into the clubhouse shortly before 3:30 p.m. and was told by reporters that C. C. Sabathia had been placed on the disabled list with a left groin strain.

Suddenly, the reason for the extra throwing became apparent.

Nova is scheduled to start Monday in the opener of a four-game series against the reigning World Series-champion Kansas City Royals at the Stadium. Before Sunday’s game against the Boston Red Sox, Nova said that losing the spring training competition with Sabathia for the fifth starter’s spot and being sent to the bullpen had been difficult for him to accept at first but that Manager Joe Girardi had told him he would eventually get another opportunity to start.

“After that, you just got to accept it,” said Nova, who has made six relief appearances and has a 5.14 E.R.A. “Don’t think too much. You’re already in the bullpen, what can you do?”

In 2011, Nova seemingly solidified a spot in the rotation for years. He went 16-4, compiling the most victories by a Yankees rookie since Stan Bahnsen won 17 games in 1968. But Nova has been unable to regain that early consistency. In April 2014, he underwent Tommy John surgery to repair his right ulnar collateral ligament and missed 14 months. After returning last June, Nova went 6-11 with a 5.07 E.R.A.

Nova, who has not appeared in a game since May 1, said he would like to throw 100 pitches Monday, but Girardi has set a lower bar, around 75. With Sabathia’s injury and Sunday’s starter, Luis Severino, winless with a 6.31 E.R.A. going into that game, Nova did not think of his temporary reinsertion into the rotation as an audition.

“It’s a business, and if they need me over there, I’ve just got to find a way to help the team in the bullpen, too,” he said.

BULLPEN SHAKE-UP Aroldis Chapman made his debut at Yankee Stadium on Sunday afternoon, briefly meeting with the news media the day his 30-game suspension under Major League Baseball’s new domestic-violence policy was to end.

His return leaves Andrew Miller, the current closer, moving to a setup role in the bullpen.

In his second season with the Yankees, Miller has consistently expressed his willingness to make sacrifices to support the team, a point that Girardi emphasized before Sunday’s game.

Asked why he had accepted yielding the ninth inning to Chapman, Miller said: “What do you want me to do? You want me to throw a fit? I think — the goal here is to win.”

Later, he added: “Wins are what’s fun at the end of the day. It doesn’t matter if you’re saving games for a last-place team.”

As of Sunday afternoon, Girardi had not spoken to Miller or Dellin Betances, the current setup reliever, about their new roles in the bullpen. He said he planned to before Monday’s game.

Girardi also said he envisioned interchanging Miller and Betances to maximize matchups against right- and left-handers, although both relievers have been largely successful in either situation this season.

For Miller, who has not allowed a run this season in 12 appearances and has six saves, leaving the closer’s role will require adjustments. For one, he will enter more games with runners on base. He said that he had been spoiled by pitching after Betances, who also has been dominant, striking out 27 batters in 14 innings.

“He finishes every inning and does such a good job, I come in with a nice clean slate,” Miller said, adding that he would try to mimic Betances’ approach.

“The way he goes about it, try to copy that and try to get Chap the ball in the best situation possible,” Miller said.

Chapman, wearing a dark, hooded sweatshirt and a bevy of diamond-studded jewelry, said he was humbled that Betances and Miller changed roles to accommodate his arrival. Together, Chapman said through an interpreter, they could make up the best bullpen in baseball.

Miller said that Chapman, who has saved more than 30 games in each of the last four seasons and regularly throws 100 miles per hour, makes an already sterling back end of the Yankees’ bullpen even better.

“You could have the six best relievers in baseball and you add him and you’re going to be better,” Miller said.

ELLSBURY SIDELINED Jacoby Ellsbury was out of the lineup for the second consecutive game after leaving the first inning of Friday’s matchup against the Red Sox with a strained hip muscle.

Ellsbury received treatment Sunday, but Girardi did not expect him to be available for Monday’s game. A trip to the disabled list remained a possibility.

“I think if you see after five or six days he’s not really improving, I think it would probably make sense,” Girardi said.


