


For a decade and a half, grime — the rugged, fast-paced British hip-hop offshoot — has been remarkably durable, one of England’s most vibrant and innovative music scenes, while also seeping out in fits and starts to the broader world. Whether grime is best when keeping to itself or engaging with everything else is a source of fervent fascination, questioning and debate, something as true now as it was at this genre’s inception. Unease about absorption into the mainstream is pervasive.

On Friday, there were two reminders of the now long-running push and pull between grime’s ground-level immediacy and the scope of its impact. Skepta, one of the genre’s biggest current stars, and one with growing international appeal, released his debut full-length album, “Konnichiwa” (Boy Better Know). And that night Dizzee Rascal, the teen prince of grime’s first explosion, in the early 2000s, performed his 2003 debut album, “Boy in da Corner” (XL), in full at Music Hall of Williamsburg.

Grime is skeletal and skittish — producers are as essential as rappers — and grime beats are often as striking for what’s missing as for what’s there. That canvas has led to different sorts of vocal approaches over the years. On his debut, Dizzee Rascal was a twisty rapper with a penchant for tight clusters of syllables. Often he appeared to be densely weaving himself in and out of spare beats. Skepta, by contrast, is a bruiser — a straightforward, metaphor-light lyricist whose rhymes land like quick jabs.

Thirteen years separate “Boy in da Corner” from “Konnichiwa,” and grime evolved in the intervening years, but what didn’t much change is the debate over its assimilation — both into British pop, but also into the slipstream of forward-thinking global pop. Dizzee Rascal’s show — part of the Red Bull Music Academy lineup of concerts and talks, which continues throughout May — perhaps inadvertently underscored those conversations.

The stage was set up to mimic the cover of “Boy in da Corner,” with the star sitting in the corner of a yellow room — he began by rapping the first song from the floor. (There was also a stall in the lobby where fans could pose with a similar backdrop and recreate the cover for themselves.) The ecstatic weirdness of “I Luv U” remained intact after all this time, as did the boom of “Fix Up, Look Sharp.” (The passage of time did make “Jus’ a Rascal” sound more like a Dr. Demento novelty record, though.)

In a way, this show served as a discovery engine, a reminder that non-single album tracks like “2 Far,” “Hold Ya Mouf” and “Seems 2 Be” were nearly as effective as his most famous songs. But while this performance was spirited, it was ultimately limited in effect. Album-driven concerts are odd fits for singles-oriented genres — the legacy of Dizzee Rascal, or grime’s first wave, would likely have been better served by a D.J. set of his early hits, or something closer to a warehouse rave.

In the years since his breakthrough, Dizzee Rascal has become a rather reliable pop star. In an interview with Complex last week, he appeared mildly frustrated about the choices he has made. “I feel like I want to rap, but it’s hard knowing that I’ve done really well off of dance music,” he said when asked about new music.

His career is archetypical of someone who moves successfully from the margins to the center, but who finds it a one-way path. Grime stars over the years have handled the transition with different degrees of smoothness, and some of the bending and accommodating that took Dizzee Rascal a few years to get around to, Skepta’s already toying with. That’s partly a result of the quicker speed with which grime moves today as opposed to a decade ago, thanks to social media — Skepta can be the standard-bearer for the genre at home, while still collaborating with Drake, and recording songs with Pharrell Williams.

“Konnichiwa” ends up being a statement about the evolving nature of grime stardom. In part, it’s a roundup of the singles that have propelled Skepta to stardom in the last two years: the pugnacious “Shutdown” and “That’s Not Me,” songs that are almost explicitly about how Skepta both celebrates success and abhors its trappings. Those are themes he continues to explore elsewhere on the album, like on “Corn on the Curb”: “I broke down a few more barricades, got me a few more accolades/I used to look forward to the weekend, now every day’s like Saturday.” And Skepta’s most convincing when talking smack to an antagonist — his insults are pummeling and sometimes comically small: “My mum don’t know your mum/Stop telling man you’re my cousin.”

“Konnichiwa” also shows Skepta attempting to thread the needle when it comes to his sonic evolution, to mixed effect. The production — especially on the title track and “Corn on the Curb”— is more ornate than usual. And on the tepid, almost down-tempo “Text Me Back,” about fomenting mistrust in a relationship, Skepta’s hard flow feels out of step, almost clunky.

But sometimes assimilation is the mother of invention. Take “Numbers,” the song made with Mr. Williams — it’s slow, kooky, off-kilter. The beat is closer to the buoyant bass and intricate syncopation of early productions by the Neptunes, Mr. Williams’s old crew, and it forces Skepta into unexpected cadences. The result may not be grime, but it’s grimy.


