


CHASKA, Minn. — A special administrator will manage Prince’s estate for the next few months, a judge here decided on Monday, as questions continue to arise about the size of the musician’s fortune and to whom it will be distributed.

Relatives and their lawyers — along with a throng of reporters — packed the Carver County probate court for the first hearing on the estate of Prince, who may have died without a will.

“We’re not used to this much notoriety in little Carver County,” Judge Kevin Eide said during the 12-minute proceeding, at which he agreed that a bank, Bremer Trust, would oversee the estate.

Prince was not married at the time of his death last month, and his only child died in 1996.

His sister, Tyka Nelson, had requested that the bank oversee the estate, and all but one of his siblings, his half brother John Nelson, have signed an agreement with the bank. Mr. Nelson did not appear in court on Monday.

Possible heirs, in the absence of a will, include Tyka Nelson and the half siblings John Nelson, Norrine Nelson, Sharon Nelson, Alfred Jackson, Omarr Baker and Lorna Nelson, who died in 2006, according to court documents.

“Everyone has been spoken for,” Frank Wheaton, a lawyer for Mr. Jackson, said afterward.

The search for a will is continuing, a lawyer for Bremer Trust said at the hearing.

The value of Prince’s estate is unknown, and includes large areas of land near Paisley Park, his recording studios near here and his most recent residence, in addition to his music. The real estate alone is valued at about $31.3 million, according to property records, and experts estimate that the music — including unpublished recordings in Prince’s vault — is worth much more. The value of Prince’s existing catalog could be about $50 million, and thousands of hours of unreleased recordings stored in the vault might be worth another $50 million, according to Howard E. King, an entertainment lawyer who represented Prince in the past.

“The real unknowns are what is unreleased, and can it really be exploited for big money?” Mr. King said. “Is Prince big enough to be exploited in death the way Michael Jackson was? Can you sell tens of millions of dollars of Prince merchandise?”

That will depend on how his unreleased music is managed, and whether it’s handled by someone who enhances it or liquidates it, Mr. King said. Prohibitive estate tax, he added, could mean that the assets would be quickly liquidated. And it could be years before the estate’s full value is known.

It is also possible that others will come forward to make claims on the estate, as the district judge noted on Monday.

“None of us have a crystal ball; no one knows what claims will be made, but we will address these issues as they come,” Judge Eide said.

Indeed, after the hearing, the court paperwork showed that one woman, Darcell Gresham Johnston, had come forward to say that she too is a half-sibling.


