


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

I have no idea what a chowder goblin is, only that I want desperately to be one. They first appeared in a tweet from the musician Perfume Genius: “I just lovingly ladled chowder in to [sic] my life partner’s bowl, my own bowl and 8 golden ramekins for the chowder goblins.”

It’s not an especially unusual Perfume Genius tweet, in that most of them are unusual — his feed is bizarrely amusing in the inane, fuzzy way of late-night Adult Swim, but as with Adult Swim, there’s a real cleverness behind it (and anyway, he’s sober). Perfume Genius is the stage name of Mike Hadreas, whose chowder, apparently, is real, though I’m not sure I can say the same for the goblins.

Chowder goblins are just one of the many fantastical elements — and the many other goblins — that haunt the witchy tapestry of Perfume Genius’s Twitter. The overall effect is a kind of free-associated fairy tale, like someone live-tweeting a lucid fever dream. The longer you try to follow it, the more sense it appears to be making — themes emerge, and it seems there may be a deeper meaning to all of it. His account has a distinct aesthetic that’s difficult to pin down: something like light-wash denim “Dark Crystal” Bonnie Raitt, or subdued, pleated-satin @witch_ebooks. Perfume Genius himself seems thematically torn, and conducted a Twitter poll about the style direction for his next album: “blue velvet vapelord” vs. “normcore goblin king.” (Whether that’s “blue velvet” like the movie, the song or grandma’s track suit is open to interpretation, but the “Labyrinth” reference is clear.) Blue-velvet vapelord won out, but as far as his Twitter goes, it’s clear the two are not mutually exclusive.

Wherever his next album lands, stylewise, Perfume Genius’s social media is unusual for more than its aesthetics. He’s a major recording artist who, instead of tweeting concert dates and music videos, tweets about blouses, vaping, aliens and butts (his own butt and the butts of others). Becoming famous seems to have had no effect on the content of his brand, and compared with other recording artists, he’s an anomaly in his apparent disregard for any sort of #branding. His laconic bio declares the account “Official Tweets” — which is both technically correct, since he’s a verified user, and a smirking acknowledgment of at the total lack of anything authoritiative across his fairly inscrutable feed. If anything, his unmediated presence has enabled him to connect more deeply with a fan base that appreciates his unfettered oddity for what it is, a weirdness uniquely suited to the medium of Twitter.

Perfume Genius’s queer identity is palpable in his self-presentation, both physically — I’ve yet to see an image of him without a flawless high-gloss manicure — and artistically. Each of his three albums deals explicitly with same-sex desire and relationships, and a teaser ad for one of his music videos, which featured the gay pornographic actor Arpad Miklos without a shirt on, was pulled from YouTube for being “non family safe [sic].” Perfume Genius is a queer celebrity whose fame benefits queer visibility, but even more vitally for his queer fans, he is a queer celebrity versed and conversant in queer culture.

Perfume Genius’s blouses and tentacles exist in a lexicon as rich and specific as queer culture itself, one that becomes legible, if not sensible, to devotees. Hilarious though the chowder goblins are at face value, in the context of his elaborate Twitter fable, they take on a richer significance as recurring figures, a kind of entourage of the weird. Consciously or not, they become stand-ins for fans — that is, Lady Gaga’s Little Monsters, Beyoncé’s Beyhive and Perfume Genius’s Chowder Goblins.

In a feature for Out.com, Perfume Genius named half a dozen artists and cultural objects that inspired his most recent album, a list that reads like a works-cited page for his Twitter account. Even the most disparate elements seem at home in his referential cosmos, from “Suspiria” to Roy Orbison to a folk-music group called the Bulgarian State Television Female Vocal Choir. There’s an unexpected ickiness to his aesthetic, with its goblins and tentacles, and even its blouses to an extent. His counteraesthetic is radically queer in its appreciation of the gross and the bizarre, and contrasts with the icy handsomeness he exhibits in photo shoots and live performances. The tension between beauty and grossness is central to Perfume Genius’s self-presentation, as well as to a new mode of queerness that has emerged on social media, one that values powerful strangeness above simple beauty. In a community that often prizes pretty white cis men over queers of other stripes, this counter-aesthetic is notable, particularly from someone who, if it suited him, could certainly look the part. Instead, with his goblin horde, Perfume Genius is a vanguard of a new kind of public queerness.

One of my favorite Perfume Genius tweets reads: “I have a dedicated printer that just prints out pictures of Sade all day and I just sit in front of it yelling YASSSSSSSS.” It’s a hilarious image, and it also echoes a particular slice of gay Internet culture: unmodulated, conditioned responses to kweenly stimuli. Perfume Genius’s dry take doesn’t quite rise to the level of a critique (it’s his printer, after all), but it implicates him and other online gays in a certain mode of Internet fandom, however defensible — Perfume Genius himself once tweeted, “Is it ok to stop being friends with someone if you find out they don’t like Sade.” (It is.)

The “Sade printer” is an idea uniquely legible to Perfume Genius’s queer followers, not in its function but in its significance: In acknowledging that some part of me actually wants and would use a Sade printer, and in considering the number of unironic “yas”es I have uttered in my life, I’m forced to consider my orientation to Sade-as-personal-kween. A printer for Beyoncé, Rihanna or Britney would serve the same purpose, and hold the same appeal, if I’m being honest. There is something earnest and admirably uncritical about the gay community’s hagiography of female pop stars, but by the same token, there is something unconsidered and knee-jerk to it. Sade (or Beyoncé, or Rihanna, or Britney) as a cultural icon is a great deal more than her music — she is an attitude; “Smooth Operator” is a feeling. Perfume Genius, too, is an attitude, and his Twitter an emotional state. Scrolling back through his tweets is like having a dedicated Perfume Genius printer, each tweet a new, more bizarre vision of the world than the one before, each feels worthy of a hearty YASSSSSSSS.


