


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

Let’s get out of here. Let’s travel the world. We’ll be judges and priests and hoteliers, and we’ll plan for global crises and teenage heartache and figure out how to lead the lives we were meant to. In other words, let’s watch some foreign language TV shows. You can’t have a “second screen” experience when you have to read subtitles (at least I can’t), so I tend to get even more absorbed in these series than I do in my English language favorites.

Thanks to all of you who’ve written in so far. I loved hearing about what you’re enjoying, so now I’m especially curious about what show you find yourself watching out of habit, but not necessarily delight. For me, it’s “Shark Tank.” Why oh why do I keep watching this show when every episode’s stilted presentations make me uncomfortable? Email me at watching@nytimes.com, or tweet @Watching.

See you Monday.

... a gripping political thriller Watch the Norwegian series “Occupied” on Netflix. The show is set in a very-near future, where energy crises have dramatically affected international relations: The United States has pulled out of NATO, and now Russia is stealthily invading Norway to try to maintain the nation’s oil production (which the new prime minister has tried to ban). There’s a “24” vibe to some of the action, in a good way. (Netflix, one 10-episode season)

... a serious and thoughtful ensemble show Watch the French drama “The Churchmen” on Hulu. It centers on five young men in the early stages of becoming Catholic priests and the higher-ups within the parish and diocese who are engaged in their own power struggles. The show isn’t, er, preachy, and does not require much knowledge about Catholicism in particular. It does a beautiful job of blending the personal and the political (and the spiritual) as its characters wrestle with questions about where power comes from, and ought to come from, and under what circumstances the needs of individuals outweigh the needs of the group. (Hulu, two eight-episode seasons)

... something on a beach, but not “beachy” Watch the Swedish drama “30 Degrees in February” on Netflix. The show follows three unrelated Swedes — each somewhere between a vacationer and an expat, and each in a state of profound despair — on their respective trips to Thailand. There’s a refreshing straightforwardness to “30 Degrees,” no twists, no mysterious back story, no kooky theories necessary to keep things interesting. (Netflix, one 10-episode season)

Short of a mass purification in the waters of Lake Minnetonka, the only thing that might help us all this weekend after Prince’s death is watching as much Prince as possible. Here are some movies, TV moments and other clips for you.

“Purple Rain” Obviously. But if you haven’t watched this movie since the ’80s (or have never seen it at all), get your friends together and rent it at iTunes, Amazon or Google Play. (It’s also playing on VH1 half a dozen times over the weekend.) Parts of it are quite silly, but the musical performances are tremendous. Look at this GIF and say you’re not convinced.

2007 Super Bowl Halftime Show Most any other semi-legacy acts from the early to mid-80s would have been derided in some corners as fusty. In the two years before, Paul McCartney and the Rolling Stones performed the halftime show. In the two years after, Tom Petty and Bruce Springsteen. But Prince existed out of time. His set was one of the best ever.

“New Girl” In its third season, this Fox sitcom (which is available on Netflix) devoted an entire episode to the anxiety and weirdness that comes with being invited to a party at Prince’s house, which is something we can all relate to, right?

Questlove vs. Prince Prince was great, but he could often be bizarre and mysterious and unfathomable. Questlove, the drummer for the Roots, narrated a story — animated in this video — in which he is asked to throw Prince a post-concert party. Prince really liked parties. There’s also the 2004 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony, in which he plays a magnificent solo on “While My Guitar Gently Weeps” and a young Prince on American Bandstand, which you can watch at Deadspin. — Gilbert Cruz

WATCH: ‘A Hologram for the King’

Based on Dave Eggers’s novel of the same name, “Hologram” tells the story of “an American consultant visiting Saudi Arabia to sell a holographic teleconferencing system to the Saudi government.” While that may all sound a little fanciful, writes Stephen Holden, it’s grounded by the Tom Hanks, whose “performance elevates an ominous, downbeat reflection on American decline and runaway technology into a subdued absurdist farce.” Read the full review

SKIP: ‘The Huntsman: Winter’s War’

Both a sequel and a prequel to 2012’s “Snow White and the Huntsman,” this movie takes a great set of actors — Charlize Theron, Jessica Chastain, Emily Blunt, Chris Hemsworth — and stuffs them into an empty container. “Its badness is not extreme, but exemplary,” writes A.O. Scott. “It’s everything wrong with Hollywood today stuffed into a little less than two hours.” Read the full review

HBO’s mega two-hour programming block returns Sunday night with “Game of Thrones” at 9 p.m., “Silicon Valley” at 10 and “Veep” at 10:30.

To prepare, you can read our profile of the actor who plays Ramsay Bolton, the worst man on TV; our Q. and A. with T.J. Miller, who plays Erlich Bachman on “Silicon”; and James Poniewozik’s look at the upcoming season of “Veep.”


