


ALBANY — It was mid-January when Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo took to the stage here and delivered his vision of the coming legislative year, unveiling a laundry list of nearly 150 proposals.

“My friends, there is no doubt that this is an ambitious agenda,” the governor said, in closing his State of the State address. “What else did you think I was going to give to you?”

Five months later, as the Legislature wrapped up its session in the wee hours of Saturday morning, that list of ideas had an impressive success rate, according to the governor’s office, with about 80 percent being enacted or on their way there.

And yet, on two major issues that often attract much of the public’s attention — ethics and housing — Mr. Cuomo’s accomplishments drew sharp critiques for failing to live up to grand promises. The results were worse for Mayor Bill de Blasio, the governor’s fellow Democrat and frequent sparring partner.

The Republican majority in the State Senate summarily dismissed the mayor’s pleas for a lengthy extension for mayoral oversight of schools, turning his pursuit of a three-year deal against him — wringing out concessions, including new financial disclosures and a shift in oversight of the city’s charter school system.

The humiliation did not stop there. In yet another reminder of the mayor’s lesser reputation in the eyes of the Senate — where Long Island and upstate Republicans hold sway, and have been offended by efforts to oust them — New York City was forced to delay enacting a five-cent fee on plastic bags, a setback for the mayor and the City Council on a seemingly local concern but one with national political appeal.

There was also a mutual disappointment in the governor’s office and in City Hall over the lapsed tax break and development program known as 421-a, which the governor had urged developers and unions to negotiate on last year, and which Mr. de Blasio looked to restart in order to support the creation of affordable housing in the city, a bedrock promise of his first term. The program, however, languished and was not renewed.

Both the governor and, to a lesser extent, the mayor said they were pleased with their accomplishments. Mr. Cuomo, in fact, suggested in an interview on Sunday that no governor in New York had accomplished as much as he had.

“Tell me what has been a more productive legislative session. Please,” the governor said in an interview on Sunday morning, adding, “Tell me what session did more.”

Later on Sunday, the governor addressed such post-session analyses, suggesting that they often fell into false “on-one-hand, on-the-other-hand” dichotomies. He added, “However, this year, on one hand it wasn’t perfect, on the other hand it was probably the most successful session in modern history.”

But the inability of Mr. Cuomo and Mr. de Blasio to push through several major initiatives underscored how both men failed to sway a Legislature that seemed ripe for change after the corruption convictions of Sheldon Silver, the former Democratic Assembly speaker, and Dean G. Skelos, the former Republican Senate majority leader.

Mr. Cuomo had pledged to push hard for new ways to clean up Albany, laying out 11 ethics reforms in his speech in January. But only a handful of modest changes were passed by the state’s 239th Legislature. And the most prominent — pension forfeiture for convicted lawmakers — would need to pass the 240th, due here in January, and then be approved by voters. (The earliest enforcement would be in 2018, when Mr. Cuomo will be up for re-election.)

Ethics proposals that failed to get through included bans on outside income — a central feature in Mr. Silver’s conviction — and eliminating the so-called L.L.C. loophole, a source of almost unlimited corporate campaign funds. Mr. Cuomo had offered various solutions on the loophole but did little public campaigning on the subject. A late-session suggestion of eight different bills, including one focused only on the campaign for governor, foundered on the shoals of legislative indifference.

In his first remarks since the end-of-session deal was announced, Mr. Cuomo said that, despite his proposals to close the L.L.C. loophole, it was far-fetched to believe that the Legislature — particularly the Republican lawmakers — would ever agree to it.

“There has to be a dose of reality in the assessment,” the governor said, noting that the issue has been discussed for years. “It is tantamount to political suicide for the Republican Party in this state because they believe it ends corporate money, and only union money would come into the system, which would help the Democrats.”

Mr. Cuomo added that the only way to solve the problem was a constitutional convention. “The people are going to have to do it,” he said.

The governor also dismissed the notion that he could have fought harder for that issue and defended the five-point package he announced on Friday, including an agreement with the Legislature to strip pensions from policy makers and lawmakers convicted of crimes related to their public office.

“The strongest piece of ethics reform was pension forfeiture: That’s what the people wanted,” he said. “What every poll said, right? And that was achieved.”

Mr. Cuomo also said the lack of a deal to ban outside income was not surprising, considering the Legislature has not had a pay raise in nearly two decades.

“The public says we don’t want to pay them any more,” he said, noting that many lawmakers basically work full time and earn $79,500 a year. “And somebody is going to represent Manhattan and raise a family?”

There was no doubt that housing was a top-line issue for Mr. Cuomo this year, when he promised to spend $20 billion over the next five years to create thousands of affordable and supportive housing units. But housing advocates were dismayed at the bargain that state leaders struck on Friday night, saying that the $150 million in new state funding amounted to little more than a token of the $2 billion for housing that the governor and legislators approved in the budget in March.

“Every month that passes without the full M.O.U. means New York misses out on at least 1,000 new units of affordable, senior and supportive housing,” a group of advocates said in a statement on Saturday, referring to the memorandum of understanding that the legislative leaders and the governor must sign to open the funding spigot. “Without the release of the full $2 billion, affordable housing projects are being needlessly delayed at a time of unprecedented need.”

That said, there is nothing that says the agreement had to come by Friday night. In theory, Mr. Cuomo and the legislative leaders — John J. Flanagan, the Long Island Republican who is the Senate majority leader, and Carl E. Heastie, the Bronx Democrat who is the State Assembly speaker — could still negotiate a broader one later this year.

“Technically, it can get negotiated later, but the practicality is, there’s no shot,” Assemblyman Andrew Hevesi, a Democrat and chairman of the Assembly’s social services committee, said before the agreement was signed last week. “Everybody goes back to their districts in an election year. Nobody’s going to be focused, nobody’s going to want to cut a deal.”

Over the weekend, the governor’s office said the overall commitment — including tax credits and other types of funding — would amount to $570 million in 2016, and would allow the state to fund 1,200 units of supportive housing this year. That schedule is consistent with the plan Mr. Cuomo outlined in January, his aides said, and puts the state on track to open 6,000 units over the next five years and 20,000 units over the next 15 years.

In the interview, Mr. Cuomo called the criticism “a distortion of the facts,” explaining that this year’s funds are only the first installment of a larger, $10.4 billion plan to reduce homelessness through new beds and services. He said new rounds of funding would come as the state worked to open each chunk of supportive housing units, a process that he said was standard for city, state and federal programs.

“They don’t set aside and allocate $20 billion in year one; otherwise, it would be a one-year program,” Mr. Cuomo said. “The system cannot produce that much housing that fast, and that’s why you come up with the allocations.”

The Cuomo administration voiced its displeasure with critics on Twitter, where Melissa DeRosa, the governor’s chief of staff, mocked the complaints directly. “$570M for first year of 5 year pledge fulfilled,” she wrote on Friday, adding, “Learn to take yes for an answer or stop being credible.”

She also drew a sharp distinction with the mayor.

“How much $ has city hall released?” Ms. DeRosa wrote. “More than enough for 1200 units? Did mayor break promises? Guilty of betrayal?”

On Saturday, the mayor’s office returned fire, suggesting that the governor and the Legislature had missed the opportunity to address affordable housing and homelessness in the city.

“When it comes to affordable housing investments and help for homeless New Yorkers, it’s clear the state is doing far too little,” he said in a statement on Saturday.

Mr. de Blasio, of course, had other reasons for consternation, chief among them the one-year extension of his control of city schools — an outcome that could hardly have been worse, given that most legislators did not seriously entertain notions of allowing mayoral control to lapse. The mayor also had to accept two unpalatable concessions just to get the bare minimum: agreeing to publish information about the city’s schools budgeting and changing the way many of the city’s charter schools are run.

It was the second year in a row that Mr. de Blasio had to accept a single-year extension. On Saturday, he called the consecutive one-year extensions “no way to treat our children, families and educators,” adding that it was, nevertheless, a “crucial acknowledgment by state lawmakers that the education progress we have made in New York City could not have happened without our accountable control of the school system.”

Mr. de Blasio’s office noted what it thought were successes, such as protecting neighborhood zoning regulations, stabilizing bus contracting and preventing tinted windows on cars. He thanked Mr. Heastie, but, notably, not Mr. Cuomo or Mr. Flanagan.

“This legislative session,” the statement concluded, understatedly, “was not without its missed opportunities.”

Others in the city who watched the negotiations were on the edge over the brinkmanship. “What we need in New York City is stability,” said Dennis M. Walcott, the schools chancellor under Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, who won a seven-year extension of mayoral control. “To me, this back and forth, back and forth is a really unsettling situation.”

The Cuomo administration suggested that the session’s end was anticlimactic because many of its priorities were accomplished at the March 31 budget deadline — most notably an increase in the minimum wage to $15.

“Fifteen dollars is a national accomplishment,” Mr. Cuomo said. “Paid family leave is a national accomplishment. First state in the nation to do lead testing in every school, that’s a national accomplishment, and these are accomplishments that affect people. What session, what accomplishments produced more?”


