


JERUSALEM — Israel said Wednesday that it had uncovered a new network of Jewish extremists in the West Bank that was responsible for several recent attacks against Palestinians, including the attempted arson of at least one home as people slept inside.

The announcement, by the police and Shin Bet, the country’s domestic security agency, came amid heightened tensions after a July arson attack in the West Bank village of Duma that killed a Palestinian boy and his parents. That attack enraged Palestinians and alarmed Israel’s security services, which have been trying to maintain stability in the West Bank. Two young Israeli Jews were charged in January in connection with the attack.

Describing the newly identified group as a “Jewish terrorist network,” the authorities said in a statement that six members had been arrested in recent weeks, five of them residents of Nahliel, an established settlement northwest of Ramallah in the West Bank.

Two of the suspects are minors and a third is a soldier, the statement said. The others range in age from about 19 to about 22. The authorities said they expected to file charges against all six in the coming days.

A lawyer representing the two minors and two adult detainees from Nahliel said he had been allowed to meet with the minors only on Tuesday, “after many, many days.”

The lawyer, Aharon Roza of Honenu, a right-wing legal aid organization, told Israel Radio that the reason for the delay was “not to prevent any damage to state security, but only to deny my clients their rights, so that they do not know that they have the right to not incriminate themselves, the right to silence.”

He added, “This led them to confessing, but these confessions are not necessarily genuine.”

The authorities named three of the suspects as Itamar Ben-Aharon and Michael Kaplan from Nahliel, and Pinchas Shandorfi from the settlement of Kiryat Arba, near Hebron. The two minors and the soldier, all residents of Nahliel, were not identified.

Members of the group are accused of throwing a firebomb at a Palestinian home in the village of Mazraa Qibliya, south of Nahliel, one night in November as the family slept inside. The firebomb bounced off the window, keeping the flames away from the house. Hebrew graffiti sprayed on the walls outside read “Revenge,” “Death to Arabs” and “Jews wake up.”

On a night in December, the statement said, members of the cell threw military smoke grenades into the home of a Palestinian family in the village of Beitilu, west of Nahliel. The father woke up and had difficulty breathing but managed to escape with his wife and infant son. Hebrew graffiti at the scene read “Revenge” and “Regards, the detainees of Zion,” an apparent reference to the arrests after the Duma attack.

The group was also believed to be behind an attack on a Palestinian farmer with sticks and tear gas, as well as the burning of several cars belonging to Palestinians.

Despite the crackdown after the Duma attack, which included the rare measure of placing Israeli suspects in administrative detention without formal charges or a trial, the authorities said that the Nahliel group had not been deterred.

“The re-enactments and confessions of those interrogated revealed an extreme and violent organization that systematically harmed Palestinians and their property with the full knowledge that lives could be at risk,” the statement said, adding that the group had been “inspired” by the Duma episode.

The Israeli authorities determined early on that Jewish extremists were behind the attack in Duma, in which Ali Dawabsheh, 18 months old, burned to death. His parents and older brother, Ahmad, who was 4 at the time, sustained critical burns over much of their bodies; the father died after a week, and the mother after five weeks.

In the course of investigating the Duma case and some earlier acts of arson, the authorities came across another Jewish extremist network, known as the Revolt for the title of its manifesto, which advocates an anarchic vision of redemption.

Members of the shadowy far-right group mostly lived in unauthorized settlement outposts in the occupied West Bank and called for fomenting unrest to bring about the collapse of the democratic system in Israel and replacing it with a Jewish kingdom based on the Torah.

The police and Shin Bet said there appeared to be links between the Nahliel group and some members of the Revolt. “Like the members of the Revolt, the Nahliel group acted out of extreme ideology and out of a readiness to harm Palestinians to the point of murdering them,” the statement said.


