


So much fashion seems designed to obscure the hands that made it. It chases perfection, smoothness, a certain sheen. The clothes aren’t designed to raise questions, only answer them, or render them moot.

But to deny the presence of human hands has not only political consequences, but aesthetic ones as well. We did not arrive at these outfits without assistance. If we have dressed better, it is only by standing on the taste of others.

That’s always been true, but over the last year or so, we’ve been in a golden moment of human touch in clothing, from hand-painting and drawing by Raf Simons to the wild appliqués of Discount Universe to the choose-your-own-adventure designs of Craig Green. These are clothes that reify not only the wearer, but also the creators. They scream a story that stretches back well before the act of getting dressed.

This is, in an age of late capitalism, a small act of resistance — a blow to fast and medium-speed fashion and an acknowledgment of the potency of human intervention. But it’s also a jolt to the senses, a reminder that a person — many people — had hands on your clothes before you did. Everything that seems effortless is really the product of a very refined set of decisions.

I like to see the work in progress. I don’t mean artisanal, in the sense that a label fetishizes the labor and skill that go into a product. Rather, I’m drawn to clothes for which the behind-the-scenes choices are loud and clear and, in some cases, still not wholly finished. They don’t always look right, or fit right, but they never bore.

Linder feels like a store born for that approach, and for this moment. A tiny shop on one of those quiet SoHo blocks that could pass for the West Village, it doesn’t advertise itself loudly. There are only three racks of clothing, a few shelves of accessories, a few more of shoes, and that’s it.

Yet there’s this: Nearly every item in the store, from clothing to shoes to jewelry to accessories, feels like the product of a fresh mind, a creator at work hoping to make something just slightly different from what peers are coming up with, without edging into triteness.

It begins with the Linder house line, which spans minimalist, reversible flight jackets that aren’t bogged down by elastic at the waist ($437) and cardigans in a pseudo-bouclé style with bright trim ($416). Or take the work of the Israeli designer Hed Mayner, who seems interested in disrupting and exaggerating the usual garment proportions. He had a camel-colored leather vest ($725) that was broad and stiff and smelled excellent, and a collarless bomber jacket with overlong arms and a short torso ($763). He also had scoop-neck T-shirts that looked like hospital scrubs and a boxy jacquard work coat with Carhartt proportions and royal mien ($490).

From Qasimi, a designer who shuttles between London and Sharjah in the United Arab Emirates, there was a luxe knit guayabera ($259) and shirts with intriguing irregularities, like pinstripes that stopped abruptly and intersected at strange angles, or two chest pockets, but one atop the other on one side of the shirt.

Each of these pieces forced an additional layer of reflection, a consideration of the thought process that birthed it. In other cases, the hand of creation was more literal, like on the exquisite hand-painted denim pieces by the artist Patrick Church, in surrealist comic-book style ($350 to $400).

There was innovation in the shoes, too, like the sneakers with hand-painted bulbous figures, a collaboration between Linder and Hus-Hus ($395). Or the lace-up numbers by a young French label, Solovière ($325), that look like Capezios but in pebbled leather and with extra fabric gathered at the top, something a particularly frilly monk might wear.

Even more striking are the shoes that don’t scream about their innovations, like the ankle boot made by the venerable Foster & Son ($435); it has elastic pulls like a Chelsea boot but they are inserted at an angle for an aerodynamic look. Or the Lucchese cowboy boots ($995), which might not match the aesthetic of the rest of the store but do match the fetish for handcrafted detail.

Most of the designers here are not widely carried elsewhere in New York, and their collections are full of winning idiosyncrasy. In every corner of this modest store, there were clear ideas at work — progress being made, one hand at a time.

I was taken with an overshirt by Tender made of rough, deadstock linen dyed a blush pink ($308). From a distance, it looked fairly straightforward, but up close, it only provoked questions. Somehow, despite the delicate fabric, it was chunky and raw. And even when I tried it on, I couldn’t tell if it was for spring or fall, or even summer or winter. Now that I own it, I’ll keep trying until I figure it out.


