


PITTSBURGH — In baseball, batters dive out of the way to avoid being clipped by a pitch. In basketball, the smallest jostle can lead to a free throw. But hockey is a little different: It is one sport in which players go out of their way to be struck by a projectile that can travel at speeds exceeding 100 miles per hour.

Forward Nick Bonino of the Pittsburgh Penguins has the welts to prove it. In Game 3 of the Stanley Cup finals against the San Jose Sharks, he blocked four shots, including one from Brent Burns, one of the N.H.L’s hardest shooters, that hit him squarely in the stomach. Bonino was delighted with his gut-pummeling stop.

“Those are the fun ones to block,” he said stoically on Sunday.

Bonino blocked another four shots in Game 4 Monday night, helping the Penguins to a 3-1 victory that put them one win away from capturing the Stanley Cup.

Bonino’s body may be in for even more punishment in Game 5, which takes place here on Thursday. With the Sharks desperate to keep their championship hopes alive, Coach Peter DeBoer and his players have said they will be firing as many pucks as possible, hoping that, with enough shots, some of them get past Penguins’ 22-year-old goaltender, Matt Murray.

Every team has players who pride themselves on stopping the puck by any means possible before it reaches their goaltender. For the Penguins, those players are Bonino, who leads the finals with 18 blocked shots, and defenseman Ian Cole, who on Easter Sunday this season was struck in the chest by a shot that was so hard it bent the crucifix around his neck, leaving an imprint on his skin that is still visible.

“You can’t think, ‘Oh, man, this is going to hurt,’ because then you’re going to flinch,” Cole said Wednesday. “The sacrifice you make for your team really dulls the pain quite a bit.”

But Bonino and Cole, who has eight blocked shots in the finals, were not simply freelancing. Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan and his staff needed to find a way to stifle the Sharks’ offense, which is led by Joe Pavelski, Logan Couture and Burns. The Penguins turned to having players fling themselves onto the ice to stop the puck.

San Jose’s offensive stars were deadly in the early rounds of the playoffs, leading the Sharks to the first Stanley Cup finals appearance in the team’s 24-year history. Of the 16 teams that made the playoffs, San Jose has averaged the most goals per game in the postseason. Pavelski leads the playoffs with 13 goals. Burns, who led all N.H.L. defensemen with 27 goals and 353 shots in the regular season, is tied with Pavelski for second in points in the playoffs. Couture leads the league with 26 postseason points, 4 more than Burns and Pavelski.

But Pavelski, Burns and Couture have scored no goals in the finals. They have combined for just 4 points in four games. Pittsburgh’s commitment to shot-blocking has particularly frustrated Pavelski and Burns.

San Jose’s offense relies on shots from the defensemen, which often lead to tip-in or rebound goals. But Pittsburgh has kept many of the blasts from the blue line from getting anywhere near Murray. In Game 3, the Penguins blocked 12 of Burns’s shot attempts. In Game 4, Burns fired nine pucks toward the goal. Only one of them reached Murray.

Pavelski is among the best in the N.H.L. at deflecting pucks past goaltenders. But with few shots getting through to the front of the net, his scoring opportunities in the series have been limited and his points nonexistent.

”I don’t think teams get this far if they don’t have the ability to defend,” Sullivan said after Game 4. “We certainly have a lot of respect for San Jose and how good they are, but we couldn’t be more proud of our players and the way we’re playing.”

San Jose is hoping to find a crack in Pittsburgh’s defense. The Sharks have not played with a lead the entire series, their lone win coming on an overtime goal by Joonas Donskoi in Game 3. But the Penguins are committed to protecting Murray at all costs, be it with their legs, their arms, their torsos or, in the case, of Patric Hornqvist in Game 4, his head.

Even the team’s elite scorers — Sidney Crosby, Evengi Malkin and Phil Kessel — are putting their bodies in front of pucks. Throughout the regular season and the first three rounds of the playoffs, the Penguins blocked fewer than 15 shots a game on average. In the finals, that number has increased to more than 23 a game.

”It’s inspiring to see,” Murray said. “That’s how badly we want to win.”

The Penguins’ shot-blocking has helped give them a commanding advantage in the series. Of the 32 teams that have taken a three-games-to-one lead in the finals, 31 have won the league title.

On Thursday night, Pittsburgh will have the opportunity to close out the series. The Penguins have won the Stanley Cup three times, but they have never hoisted the 35-pound silver trophy over their heads on home ice.

“For the support that we get here and what the fans mean to us, it would be great,” Crosby said. “It’s going to take a big effort. We believe we can do it.”


