


New York City’s Correction Department has made significant progress toward establishing “enduring reform” at Rikers Island, though violence against inmates remains a significant concern, the federal monitoring team overseeing a remaking of city jails wrote in a report filed on Tuesday.

In the months since a federal judge gave final approval to a sweeping settlement agreement meant to break a culture of brutality and neglect at city jails, the department has hired hundreds of new correction officers, revamped training procedures and policies governing when guards can use force on inmates, added 1,350 additional surveillance cameras and significantly reduced the use of solitary confinement, the report said.

In many areas, the department has met or surpassed requirements, the report said.

“The department’s performance to date should make the stakeholders cautiously optimistic that real reform is underway and building momentum,” the report said.

The report is the first major assessment by the monitoring group, which was established as part of the settlement of a class-action suit brought by Rikers inmates and eventually joined by the office of Preet Bharara, the United State’s attorney for the Southern District of New York. Its authors cautioned that the findings were only preliminary and identified problems that continue to fester, including abysmal conditions at the department’s training academy and officers’ persistent use of physical force against restrained inmates.

In a statement, Joseph Ponte, the correction commissioner, said the department looked forward to working with the monitoring team “as we tackle the next milestones.”

The progress highlighted in the report consists primarily of “foundational steps” that the monitoring team said were necessary to lay the groundwork for further improvements. These include changes in policies and procedures, recruitment and screening of additional staff and improvements to training.

The department has created a new policy governing the use of physical force by guards, one of the key requirements of the settlement. Though the policy will not be fully put into place until September 2017, the department says that new training procedures have already helped to curtail violent cellblock clashes. According to department’s data, assaults on staff dropped 17 percent in the first four months of 2016 compared with the same period in 2015, and serious injuries suffered by staff and inmates were down.

Even so, the monitoring report described excessive force used by officers as a “source of continued concern.” In particular, officers continue to respond to unruly inmates with blows to the head, something that should never be done “absent an imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury to staff,” according to the report.

Unexplained inmate injuries, overuse of pepper spray and unreported uses of force also continued to be problems, the report said.

Mary Lynne Werlwas, a Legal Aid Society lawyer who represented the plaintiffs in the class action, said that while she was encouraged by some of the steps the department had made, the continued violence against inmates “does not reflect a properly managed correctional system.”

In an effort to improve investigations of troublesome guards, the department has begun to bolster its internal affairs division. As of March 2016, the division had 129 investigators, compared with 66 in January 2015, and there are plans to hire 40 more, the report said. And the division has developed a computerized case management system to replace paper-based record keeping.

In the past, the department paid little attention to recruiting and vetting qualified correction officers. An investigation last year by the city’s Investigation Department, found that recent hires by the Correction Department included gang members, people with criminal histories and others with significant psychological problems.

According to the report, the Correction Department has developed new procedures to assess an applicant’s competence and weed out those with questionable histories. This has coincided with a major recruitment push that has resulted in hiring over 1,200 new officers since August 2015.

Though the report praised the department for improving training programs for recruits and in some cases surpassing the number of training hours required by the settlement agreement, it described the training facilities as woefully inadequate.

The department’s training academy in Middle Village, Queens, occupies two floors of an office building under a rooftop garage. Classes are held in cramped, windowless rooms; there are few bathrooms, and the workout space is so small “students have to be extremely cautious to remain on the mats when performing drills,” the report said.

Given the limited space, the report said, the department has had to hold classes 24 hours a day to maintain its demanding training schedule.

The report acknowledges that making improvements to the training center will require significant resources and time. Coupled with the Correction Department’s other challenges — the city has pledged $170 million over the next two years to renovate or build a facility off Rikers to house inmates under 18 — the task of fulfilling all the requirements laid out by the settlement remains daunting.

The report said that so far the department had “accomplished as much as could reasonably be expected.”


