


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this article, Motoko Rich, The Times’s soon-to-be Tokyo bureau chief, writes about learning to improvise in front of the camera — covering President Obama’s historic visit to Hiroshima via Facebook Live by day, and FaceTiming and Snapchatting with her children 13 hours behind her in Brooklyn by night.

NAGASAKI, Japan — My workday had begun at 6 a.m. with a visit to Monday morning mass at Urakami Cathedral, a Roman Catholic church that had been destroyed by the nuclear bomb that hit this city 71 years ago. I went on to interview three hibakusha — survivors of the atomic bomb — and was feeling shattered by the details of their memories. To meet the deadline for my article, I stayed up until 2 a.m. to write.

When I finally fell into bed at my hotel, I was certain I would sleep solidly until the alarm went off for the train to Hiroshima the next day.

Two hours later, I was awake.

Jet lag.

I looked at the clock. Japan, where I had come to help cover President Obama’s historic visit to Hiroshima, is 13 hours ahead of New York, where my 11-year-old daughter would just be home from school. I zapped her a text: Could we connect on FaceTime?

Suddenly, there she appeared on my phone, lounging on the beanbag chair in the Brooklyn bedroom she shares with my son. After a few minutes chatting about school, she asked if we could switch to Snapchat. She wanted to send me a funky picture with the ears and snout of a puppy superimposed on her face.

Now it was my turn. I am new to this, so she texted me instructions. I managed to get the Snapchat camera working and pulled up the filters for altering my face. I tapped on one with geisha-like features.

The result was grotesque, but my daughter was thrilled. A text came zipping back. “They don’t have that one here! Send me more!”

As a journalist who has always traveled frequently for my job, one of the hardest parts of being on the road has been missing my children. When they were born, video-chatting was not something you could do easily by phone. Babies, meanwhile, can hardly talk on the phone, and as preschoolers my children were not much interested in it. So for many years I had to make do with brief, stilted conversations and photos that my husband would send by email. I remember, one night at a hotel, opening a picture of my then toddler daughter grinning from the top of a slide at the playground and becoming so unhinged that I began sobbing hysterically.

Now technology has opened up much more satisfying ways of staying in touch and being part of their daily lives while I am away. Although I was ambivalent when my daughter first asked to be allowed to start an account on Instagram and use Snapchat, I now see the gifts of social media from afar.

Instead of having to call and ask her the always-vexing parental question, “What did you do today?” I can just log on to her Instagram account or click on one of her Snapchat montages and see for myself. While I have been in Japan, she and her friends seem to have developed a passion for buying Blue Raspberry Coolattas from Dunkin’ Donuts on the way home from school. I know which two friends slept over Saturday night at our apartment.

And while my 9-year-old son would often be distracted by a mere audio call and quickly pass the phone to my husband, with FaceTime he can make faces, or pull the camera so close that I have an intimate view of his nostrils. By phone, he tends to simply recite a litany of activities, but when he can see my face he is more likely to tell me what is really on his mind. When we connected the other night (my time), he reported that he had been researching which rides would be scariest at the amusement park he hopes to visit when my husband takes the kids to see my in-laws during my return trip to Japan next month.

Social media is also becoming increasingly crucial to my job. During the week I was in Nagasaki and Hiroshima, I appeared three times on Facebook Live. Having spent my entire career as a print-only journalist, always accustomed to having my work go through an editor before publication, I am now learning to improvise before a camera. It was wonderful to be able to bring readers — if that’s the right term — to wherever I was, interviewing an atomic bomb survivor or touring the peace park in Hiroshima.

But I found that it was also a good tool for posting a video message to my family while they slept, so they could see it in the morning when they awoke.

All this connectivity makes me feel so much less anxious about moving my family from Brooklyn, the only home my children have ever known, to Tokyo this summer.

When I was 7 years old, my family moved to Japan for two and a half years. When we returned to California, I was heartbroken to leave my best friend behind. Staying in touch was much more difficult: The cost of an international phone call was so prohibitive that my parents allowed me to call her only on her birthday and at Christmas.

As we prepare to move, my daughter and her best friend have made a vow to meet on FaceTime at least once a week. She and another friend have created a special shared Instagram account where they can post pictures every day. My son will still be able to play Minecraft with his friends thousands of miles away.

And while I’m on the road, it is so much easier for me to be a noodge. When our babysitter sent a text to me in Hiroshima with a photo of my son at soccer practice, I was able to text back immediately: “Is he wearing sunscreen?”


