


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Enter the wayback machine. Cook the original chicken marbella this week, a classic recipe of the baby boom that Christine Muhlke brought into the pages of The Times in 2007, to celebrate the 25th anniversary of “The Silver Palate Cookbook,” whence it came. You won’t be sorry.

Make a turkey meatloaf as well. And a platter of fettuccine with asparagus. Spend an evening making Julia Moskin’s recipe for whole-grain blueberry muffins with orange streusel, and then take them to work because you’re a good and generous colleague, the sort who bakes so that others may feast and revel in your kindness. (Do this especially if you’re not that sort of co-worker, so as to keep people on their toes.)

Cook wild salmon: It is in season, and ridiculously delicious. Roast salmon in butter. Roast salmon with brown sugar and mustard. Roast salmon with blueberries, agrodolce-style. Grill salmon with green sauce. Do you have any smoked salmon in your fridge left over from an attempt at brunch yesterday or still kicking around from Mother’s Day? Use it to make Florence Fabricant’s recipe for wild salmon with smoked salmon butter, which is a stellar, stellar weeknight meal.

Just cook. That is our exhortation, always. It doesn’t really matter what you cook — you could just microwave up some queso with sambal oelek and eat it with chips while watching “Horace and Pete.” It only matters that you do cook, that you prepare the food that you and others consume, as often as you can, so that you can reap the benefits of doing so. Here it is the top of the week, and maybe everything’s going sideways at work or in life already. But you made dinner, at least. Remember Master P? That ain’t nothing.

Click on over to Cooking for other recipe ideas for tonight and for coming days and nights. Save the ones that are of interest to you to your recipe box (we’re thinking Melissa Clark’s cool new recipe for a cheese-filled and herb-scented phyllo-dough torte applies!), or share them with friends via email or social media. Rate their success when you’ve cooked them, or leave notes on them to help others achieve success of their own. And if you run into problems with the technology, please ask us for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com for just that purpose.

Now, for those of you interested in the sticky, complicated business of where our wild fish comes from, and what natural and governmental forces are being brought to bear on both commercial fishermen and the stocks they target, do take a moment to read this Wall Street Journal article about how changing migration patterns are upending the business and culture of catching fish in the waters off the Eastern Seaboard.

Or, you know, don’t. Yourself, you may prefer watching Mary Norris, the comma queen of The New Yorker, talk about the use of the reflexive pronoun. Enjoy.


