


MIAMI — The general arc of this series landed a surprising figure smack dab at the center of it all before Game 6 on Friday night.

Alex McKechnie is the director of sports science for the Toronto Raptors, who have required his services in their Eastern Conference semifinal series with the Miami Heat. At Toronto’s morning shootaround here, McKechnie stood before a group of reporters and explained how he was attempting to reduce the swelling in DeMar DeRozan’s sprained right thumb.

The process involved wrapping a red shoelace around DeRozan’s thumb during timeouts — and a lot of pain. McKechnie stressed that it was not as uncommon as it sounded.

“It’s actually a very standardized method of treatment,” he said, adding, “These guys are playing through all sorts of things.”

Through heaps of injuries. Through poor shooting. Through some of the most inartistic basketball this side of the Philadelphia 76ers.

On Friday, though, the Heat poked their heads through the muck just long enough to escape with a 103-91 victory that evened the best-of-seven series at three games apiece. Game 7 is scheduled for Sunday afternoon in Toronto. The Cleveland Cavaliers, who are enjoying an extended sabbatical, await the winner in the conference finals.

The Heat avoided elimination behind Goran Dragic, a guard who scored a team-high 30 points. He was everything that the first five games of the series were largely not — crisp, efficient, fun to watch — and he seemed to have a response for every run that Toronto could muster.

“I was just aggressive,” Dragic said. “I don’t want to go home to Europe. I still want to be here.”

Dwyane Wade added 22 points in the win.

When the Raptors cut into the Heat’s lead midway through the fourth quarter, Dragic connected on a midrange jumper. Wade soon followed with a basket of his own.

It was a missed opportunity for the Raptors, who are still seeking the franchise’s first appearance in the conference finals. Before the game, Coach Dwane Casey went straight for the buffet of elimination-game platitudes, saying he wanted his team to play with resolve. The Heat have won championships. But this is all still fairly new to the Raptors.

“We should be the hungry team,” Casey said. “We should be the desperate team.”

Instead, the Raptors missed open layups and fumbled loose balls out of bounds. Kyle Lowry scored a game-high 36 points, and DeRozan added 23, but they had little help.

Depleted rosters led to some unusual situations. Justise Winslow, nominally a 6-foot-7 forward for the Heat, spent time defending at the center position — but then helped bring the ball upcourt. Late in the first quarter, Coach Erik Spoelstra played three point guards at once. He had anticipated an unusual tenor to the evening’s festivities.

“This is a whatever-it-takes game,” he said at his team’s morning shootaround.

The Raptors entered Game 6 shooting 43.2 percent from the field, with DeRozan and Lowry combining to shoot 37 percent. The Heat had not been much better, shooting 44.5 percent from the field and 30.4 percent from 3-point range. Before Game 6, Wade was asked whether he expected his team’s shooting touch to return.

“We would love it to,” he said, “just like they would love it to. But it probably ain’t going to happen in this series.”

He added: “The biggest thing has been timely shots, timely makes. If the ball goes in for you, hey, great. But the rhythm of this series just is not as fluid.”

Along with missed shots, injuries had been mounting, too. Both teams were without their starting centers — Toronto’s Jonas Valanciunas because of a sprained right ankle, and Miami’s Hassan Whiteside because of a sprained right knee. Toronto’s DeMarre Carroll and Miami’s Luol Deng injured their left wrists in Game 5. They played with limitations in Game 6.

Sure enough, the two teams plodded along at the start, combining to miss 16 of their first 23 shots before the first timeout.

“Offense wasn’t our issue,” Casey said. “We needed to get stops.”

After the Heat went ahead by 9 in the second quarter when Josh Richardson drilled a 3-pointer, DeRozan scored 5 straight points for the Raptors. But others soon emerged for the Heat, including Dragic. He scored 19 points to lead the Heat to a 53-44 halftime lead.

“We felt like we’ve been playing in mud,” Spoelstra said. “We looked a little more like ourselves tonight.”

Facing elimination was nothing new to Miami. Against the Charlotte Hornets in the first round, the Heat were down, three games to two. But they won Game 6 — on the road, no less — and then took Game 7 at home. It reinforced the notion that they had some mettle.

On Friday, with their season once more at stake, the Heat delivered again.


