


LOS ANGELES — Terry Collins had just hung up the telephone after a jovial conversation with his old friend Vin Scully, the longtime Dodgers broadcaster, and all seemed well in the visiting manager’s cramped office at Dodger Stadium.

But within moments, the mood shifted decidedly when Collins issued a double-barreled injury report that could be worrisome for the Mets.

First, Collins revealed that third baseman David Wright was dealing with shoulder soreness, which may explain his recent soft, submarine-style throws to first base.

As that news was being digested by a room full of reporters, Collins revealed that Steven Matz, a left-handed pitcher who had Tommy John surgery in 2010, experienced elbow soreness after his start on Monday and would not pitch on Saturday as expected.

Collins said Matz would remain with the team through its current road trip and would see Dr. David Altchek in New York on Monday when the team returned.

Matz was prescribed anti-inflammatory medication and said Wednesday that the soreness had subsided considerably.

“It felt pretty sore yesterday,” Matz said before Wednesday’s game against the Dodgers, “but today there’s a lot of progress.”

Matz said the soreness was in his forearm, which could be alarming because pain in that part of the body sometimes indicates ligament damage that can necessitate Tommy John surgery.

Matz, who has a 5-1 record with a 2.86 E.R.A., said he was not worried that he would have to have a second Tommy John operation. But he did note that he had tried to pitch through pain in a latissimus muscle on the left side of his back last year and ended up missing about two months.

That experience, Collins said, is the reason for the Mets’ cautious approach this time.

During Monday’s game, Matz allowed two runs and six hits and threw 98 pitches through six innings. He said it was difficult to pinpoint when the pain had first arisen, but he had extra treatment on his forearm during the game because of what he felt.

“I was still able to throw,” he said, “but there was enough concern that I said something to the trainers to tell them what’s going on.”

Wright, on the other hand, brushed off Collins’s report about the soreness in his right shoulder.

“I’m fine,” said Wright, who seemed annoyed to have to answer the question.

Collins was asked about Wright because of two throws he made in Tuesday’s game that appeared considerably more sluggish than any he had made this season.

“I think he’s probably got a little bit of a sore arm,” Collins said before specifying that the problem was in Wright’s shoulder.

Collins said that Wright’s chronic back problem — he has spinal stenosis, which caused him to miss much of the 2015 season — could be a contributing factor. Wright has made adjustments with his throwing and hitting mechanics, which may have put a strain on his shoulder.

On the two throws in question in Tueday’s 3-2 loss to the Dodgers, Wright made good defensive plays to get to both balls. But on his throws to first base, both of them rushed, he tossed looping, submarine-style throws that were unsuccessful.

Wright has lost some velocity on his delivery over his career, but those two throws Tuesday looked decidedly slower, and his arm angle seemed lower than normal.

After Tuesday’s game, Wright said that on the first ball, when he had to dive to his left and scramble to his feet, there was no way to make the throw from shoulder height.

“When you dive in the hole and come up, you can’t get on top of that throw,” Wright said. “It’s got to be from down there.”

For much of Wright’s career, his throws in similar situations were sidearm from shoulder height. He has made hundreds of such throws among his 2,927 career assists, two of those coming from shortstop. On plays where he was deep in the corner, he often made authoritative overhand throws.

But in the eighth inning on Tuesday, the slow-footed Adrian Gonzalez chopped a ball toward third. Wright grabbed the ball and ran several steps to his right to make the force play at third base on the lead runner.

Even with Gonzalez’s plodding pace, it would have been tricky at that point to throw to first for a double play, especially with momentum carrying Wright in the opposite direction. A 25-year-old third baseman with a cannon arm might have pulled it off. Wright is neither. He threw from a low sidearm position, and Gonzalez was safe.

“It’s just what I’ve always done and what I’ll continue to do,” Wright said after the game.

If something like inflammation is affecting Wright’s throws, that may actually be good news for the Mets. If the condition improves, his throws may, too.

Collins was also hopeful that Wright, who had a lighter-than-normal load in spring training because of his back, might have entered the regular season with his arm still building strength.

“We’re hoping,” Collins said. “We’re certainly hoping that’s the case as we get into the summer and he’s throwing more and more.”


