


It’s been a decade since Bo Burnham, then 16, uploaded a video of himself to a fairly new site called YouTube. He was singing a song about how his family thought he was gay.

After the video went viral and was seen by millions of viewers, he earned offers from Hollywood, a special on Comedy Central, a theater tour and a deal with Netflix. Bypassing the traditional route to stand-up success, Mr. Burnham grew into a boldly theatrical and formally clever comedian whose trailblazing career was a forceful defense of the internet as a comedy incubator. That’s why it’s startling that he has now emerged as one of its most scathing critics. It’s as if the monster turned on Frankenstein.

“If you look at original content on YouTube now, the center of it is all-caps comments and girls’ cleavage and commercial, derivative” videos aimed at “what 13-year-olds want rather than what they need,” Mr. Burnham said Monday night in a Williamsburg apartment where he’s staying while acting in a movie. “I don’t mean to sound fatherly, but it’s amazing to watch a medium sell out on steroids.”

Citing the work of the author Douglas Rushkoff, Mr. Burnham said that watching the proliferation of comedy online had made him appreciate the virtue of old-fashioned gatekeepers. “I don’t think democracy is a good thing always,” he said. “This world of Rotten Tomatoes and user ratings on Amazon makes for safe, homogeneous choices. It’s made me go: Studio executives aren’t that bad.”

There have been hints of this new-media skepticism in his work for years, from his underrated, short-lived MTV show, “Zach Stone Is Gonna Be Famous,” which followed a fame-hungry teenager desperate to perform his life for the internet, to his more mature stand-up that uses disembodied voices and dramatic lighting to make him look and sound like a man trapped in his own art. But it wasn’t until Mr. Burnham finished writing his third special, “Make Happy,” which debuted on Netflix on Friday, that he decided to stop hinting and add a thesis statement of sorts.

“Social media is the market’s answer to a generation that wanted to perform,” he said toward the end of the hourlong special, crouching low to the ground, while describing the constant exhibitionism of online life as a prison. “I don’t know anything about anything, but what I do know is if you can live without an audience, you should do it.”

Mr. Burnham’s comedy has always skewered pop culture (the new show takes aim at the faux populism of country music and the uplift of anthems like “Roar”), but what makes this special stand out is how it examines the shrinking distance between audience and performer in the internet era. “I want to talk about my relationship with the audience,” he said. “I used to think I shouldn’t because it’s unreliable and stupid and ‘poor me.’ But I think people relate to this idea of having to perform something for people, the idea that the world around you is more of an audience than it used to be.”

Comedians can be romantic about the response from their audience. Jerry Seinfeld famously claims that after several minutes, his fame has no influence on his act. Mr. Burnham finds that absurd, arguing that those comics are “desperately trying to act like they haven’t lost that thing they love they had when they were younger — the ‘I’m still struggling.’ No, it’s easier for you now,” he said. “There’s a huge desperate impulse from a lot of famous comedians to humanize themselves.”

In his show, Mr. Burnham skewers Jimmy Fallon’s “Tonight Show” celebrity lip-sync segments, which he calls the “end of culture.” It’s an example of the internet ethos bleeding into television. “It’s the tearing down of the fake edifice of these people being better than us: multimillion-dollar beautiful people performing their own humanity for us in their $10,000 dresses,” Mr. Burnham said. “I think comedy is destroyed when it gets in bed with celebrity.”

As his argument about the corrosiveness of fame gains momentum, Mr. Burnham stands up, his thin but no longer lanky six-and-half-foot frame jittery with energy. Pointing out the hypocrisy of rich comedians talking about airport woes, when in reality they fly private, he said: “I want you to leave my show skeptical about performance.”

In his special, Mr. Burnham adopts a prickly persona, establishing a tense relationship with his audience members, alternating between making them laugh and baiting, even insulting them. In part, this is rooted in a personal anxiety. Three years ago, Mr. Burnham, who considers himself a writer who fell into performance, started experiencing panic attacks before shows. This is reflected in how his special portrays the audience. “In comedy specials, the audience is always smiling and well lit,” he said. “To me, they’re a mob, faceless black entity. They are intimidating, strange and creepy. “

At the end of the special, he thanks the crowd then says in a blankly affectless deadpan, “I hope you’re happy.” It is wonderfully teasing, grateful on the one hand, bitter on the other.

It may be the last thing a crowd will hear from him in a many years, since Mr. Burnham says he plans to take a long break from stand-up to focus on writing, get a movie about a middle schoolgirl off the ground and avoid the stage. He added that the demands on a comic these days mean that people send him tweets asking, “Are you dead?” after he’s been working on a special for a few years. “A band can take a break but a comedian?” he said. “If you’re not on ‘@midnight’ every month you’re Thomas Pynchon.”

Mr. Burnham said he rejects the expectation of an “IV drip of entertainment.” At the same time, he understands how his critique of online culture looks coming from him. “As someone who hugely benefited from it and maybe bears in part the guilt of what feels like an unfair advantage,” he said, referring to his peculiar career path, which skipped the usual dues-paying steps, “I feel I need to expose what I know.”


