


A full-floor penthouse at One Riverside Park, the Extell Development Company’s glassy tower overlooking the Hudson, sold for $20,063,525 and was the most expensive closed transaction of the week, according to city records.

The unit, PH4A, at 50 Riverside Boulevard, near West 62nd Street, was purchased by Michael P. Krensavage, a hedge fund manager specializing in health care, and his wife, Mary Krensavage. They were represented by Deanna Kory of the Corcoran Group.

The monthly carrying costs are a relatively modest $7,304, thanks to a 20-year tax abatement obtained by the sponsor.

The 12-room condominium, reached by way of a private elevator landing, has 6,168 square feet that includes six bedrooms, eight and a half baths, a media room with a wet bar and a fireplace, and a windowed chef’s kitchen with a breakfast room. A two-sided fireplace divides the spacious living and dining rooms.

The corner master suite has a sitting room, walk-in closets and dual bathrooms.

The new owners will have stunning river and city skyline views from four exposures, along with access to amenities that include a health club and spa, a 75-foot indoor pool, a private screening room, a rock climbing wall and a bowling alley.

Most of the 219 units in the 33-story One Riverside Park, completed in 2015, have sold. The complex also has a rental component and received criticism from some city officials and affordable-housing advocates for having a so-called poor door that separates the condominium owners from renters of its 55 affordable units.

One Riverside Park was designed by Goldstein, Hill & West Architects, with interiors by Shamir Shah Design and landscaping by Mathews Nielsen Landscape Architects. The Corcoran Sunshine Marketing Group is handling sales for the building.

The week’s runner-up, at $15,428,737.50, is a sprawling duplex on the 11th floor at 155 East 79th Street, near Lexington Avenue, a pet-friendly boutique condominium developed by Anbau. The monthly carrying costs for the sponsor unit, called Duplex 11, is $12,842.

The 4,292-square-foot apartment has five bedrooms, five full baths and a powder room. The main level, which holds the entertaining spaces as well as a guest bedroom, includes a living room with a wood-burning fireplace, a chef’s kitchen and a Juliet balcony.

The master suite features a dressing room that connects to the bathroom. There is also a laundry room on the upper level.

Shelley O’Keefe of the Corcoran Sunshine Marketing Group represented the developer. Russell K. Miller of Brown Harris Stevens brought the buyer, identified as the Rollen Family Revocable Trust.

Big Ticket includes closed sales from the previous week, ending Wednesday.


