


When David Price chose to sign with the Boston Red Sox, he secured $217 million in future earnings and at least a few seasons of intense scrutiny from the Boston news media. He also ensured that he would continue to face the Yankees so often that at some point he might start to feel like the star of the movie “Groundhog Day.”

Regular work against the Yankees is nothing new for Price (3-0), who has been a starter only since 2009 but has already managed 30 career starts against the Yankees, which is the second-highest total among active players. On Sunday night, he is scheduled to make his 31st start, which would tie him for the top spot with James Shields, according to Baseball-Reference.com. If he were to remain in Boston, or at least in the American League East, for the remainder of his career, it is very likely he could catch Frank Tanana, another lanky left-hander, for the most starts against the Yankees in the divisional era.

The notion of a rival player’s starting against one team over and over seems antiquated in the era of rapid turnover and interleague play, but Price, who has played for the Rays, the Tigers and the Blue Jays, has made 186 of his 218 career starts for teams in the American League East. No wonder he is so familiar with the Yankees, and to them.

Alex Rodriguez acknowledged how much of a known entity the left-handed Price was to the Yankees after he looked sharp against them in a start during spring training.

“Same old David Price,” Rodriguez told reporters. “He’s always tough. He’s always fun to face, very predictable, comes right at you every time.”

The comment was probably intended as a compliment, but the mention of predictability seems relevant given that the results of all that familiarity have been a bit mixed. While Price’s team’s have won 19 of his 30 starts against the Yankees, with Price getting the win in 13 of 20 decisions, he has not been at his best.

He has a 4.06 E.R.A. against them, well below his 3.02 E.R.A. in his 188 starts against other teams. He has managed 10 strikeouts in a start against the Yankees just once, and he has never thrown a complete game. Twice during the year he spent with Detroit, he gave up eight earned runs to the Yankees in a start that lasted less than three innings.

For the Red Sox, who always seem to measure themselves against the Yankees regardless of how well either team is doing against the rest of the league, results like that are not exactly what they want from the ace of their staff. But if the Red Sox win nearly two-thirds of his starts, it is hard to imagine even Boston’s fickle beat writers having an issue with his performance.

To catch Tanana’s record 52 starts against the Yankees since divisional play began in 1969 would be hard but not impossible. Price has had as many as five starts a season against the Yankees four times, so if he stays relatively healthy over the course of his seven-year contract, an average of just over three starts a season against a division rival is achievable.

Illustrating how much statistics have changed as the game evolved, however, Price would be hard-pressed to set the record for starts against the Yankees since the team was renamed from the Highlanders in 1913.

That mark belongs to Early Wynn, who started 100 games against them during his 23-year career for the Washington Senators, the Cleveland Indians and the Chicago White Sox. Wynn, a Hall of Famer, very likely did not have fond recollections about all of those starts, however, as his record against the Yankees was 32-56.


