


Conscientious objection, one of the few forms of activism I have time for, is a fraught thing. I really do try to stay away from corporations that have been problematic for my politics. I don’t ever step foot in a Chick-fil-A restaurant because of the company’s hostility toward L.G.B.T. causes, though if I’m honest, I don’t really know where to find one in my neighborhood anyway. I would never patronize Hobby Lobby because I believe in women’s access to contraception, but I also can’t say that I have consumer needs that Hobby Lobby can fill, either.

Then there are those purchases of real importance and the times when you have to make decisions about the cost of your convictions. I am speaking of swimwear and, more specifically, the Lands’ End Slender Tunic, a hardworking piece of equipment that, tricky as it may be to slither into, can transform your body into something similar to what you sort of hoped it would look like if you blurred your eyes in a poorly lit room.

If you allow it to, this baby will level out your stomach as if it were an only slightly corrugated piece of cardboard. It will turn some arbitrary midpoint of your torso back into a waist with its patented squeezing technology. I knew all this, for I own two of them: a brown one, whose material became inexplicably see-through around the middle of my back within just a year, and a red one, whose color was too light to help promote the fiction I was trying to unleash on the world.

After my first pregnancy, I despaired of finding a suit that might cover the wreckage that childbearing had wrought. I lived in California at the time, so many of my friends told me to embrace my stretch marks as the stripes a tiger has from being fierce, or some such. My stomach, which was now topographically comparable to a road in rural Liberia, was a badge of honor, they said. But those same women wore bikinis, and there was no sign of stretching or aging on them. It was only my friend Janet who looked me up and down, wide-eyed, and politely said, “Have you been to the Lands’ End website?”

I had never shopped at Lands’ End; I hadn’t felt old enough or Midwestern enough or suburban enough. In a strange way, I hadn’t felt settled enough in adult life to go somewhere quite so utilitarian. Janet assured me that I was ready, and not by a little, and she sat me down in front of her computer. She introduced me to a feature (now defunct) of Lands’ End shopping: It was called My Virtual Model, and it was a figure you could modify with your own measurements, and even your haircut, so you could see how one of the site’s rayon-blend products would look hanging off your particular figure. I made mine as I was at the time, with thighs that touched hard and back fat and brown hair. I dressed her in horrible A-line dresses with surreptitious elastic waists and boat necks — so many boat necks on that website, an ocean full of boat necks. With a deeper breath, I finally put her in a bathing suit that, in front of my eyes, reduced the lumps it covered, and the Uncanny Valley version of myself smiled back.

My Virtual Model was excised from the site a few years later — maybe she had taken a stand on the wage gap? — but it no longer mattered. Once every year or so, I simply clicked “order,” and my bathing suit would arrive.

Now at the pool club we join every summer, I see my children’s friends’ mothers wading in the shallow end. We all look like newborn seals in our Lands’ End bathing suits — colorless, newly hairless after a long winter, frightened and resentful. We greet one another with a quick raise of the chin, and we evaluate what the people you are asked to take seriously at P.T.A. meetings look like barely clothed, knowing this cold truth: that we do not look as bad as we could.

But Lands’ End couldn’t leave well enough alone. Back in February, Lands’ End began an interview series called “Legends” for its catalog and featured a lengthy interview with Gloria Steinem for no discernible reason. Not that Steinem isn’t a legend, and not that every magazine shouldn’t feature her — the more Gloria Steinem the better, if you ask me. But this is a clothing catalog, and to say it seemed out of place is an understatement.

How innocuous was the interview? Well, one featured quote was this scorcher from Steinem: “Fashion is what someone else tells you to wear, but style is about personal expression and freedom.” Hardly bra-burning stuff. Its only transgressive act was mentioning style in a Lands’ End catalog.

But a big market for Lands’ End is school uniforms, and soon after, several schools that patronize the company threatened a boycott over the Steinem interview in the name of the anti-abortion movement. Bloggers blogged. Facebook statuses were updated (tags included). Scores of middle-class Americans clutched their pearls through their striped three-quarter-sleeve casual popover blouses. They rose up and announced that this interview with this woman would not stand, that they needed a safe space to order midcalf dresses and paisley capri pants. They took to a letter-writing campaign that was immediately effective. Lands’ End pulled the interview and apologized.

I read Lands’ End’s spineless reply (“Some customers were troubled and concerned that we featured an interview with Gloria Steinem in a recent catalog. Lands’ End is committed to providing our loyal customers and their families with stylish, affordable, well-made clothing. We greatly respect and appreciate the passion people have for our brand. It was never our intention to raise a divisive political or religious issue, so when some of our customers saw the recent promotion that way, we heard them. We sincerely apologize for any offense.”). I wrote on Twitter: “Lands’ End: many sweatpants, no balls,” and, boy, was that retweeted, and I was pretty proud of my politics. But now, here I was, two weeks later entering my 40s, my body a fossil of young middle-age and childbearing, and I had no place to buy a bathing suit.

What I’m saying is that it’s easy to get angry; the problem is staying angry when your need for convenience outweighs the part of you that is allegiant to your convictions. And as my finger hovers over that Slender Tunic, which Lands’ End is now selling in blackberry — a color that suits me very much — it is harder to find my self-righteousness again. A long time ago, you could opt into news and never be exposed to someone’s really good argument on Twitter that the only answer is a boycott. You could be a person who wasn’t awakened to the world around you. These days, you would have to be trying not to hear about the ways that the world doesn’t align with your values and about the very simplest thing you could do to show your consent or your objection. And the simple thing you can do is not to march on Washington but to simply opt out of a certain business’s service.

For a moment, I grappled with the idea that I could order the bathing suit, just this one last time, and people could assume that it was an old one if they asked. But we are what we do when we’re alone in a room; we are what we do when we can get away with something. I called Janet to ask where I should buy my next bathing suit, but Janet is a Republican and not sympathetic to my causes. And so her response was “Lands’ End,” (“still, you idiot” implied). I hung up with Janet, closed the Lands’ End browser window and opened one for L.L. Bean. Its Sarong Tanksuit comes with an actual pretend skirt wrapped around it, and when you wear it, it’s like you’re not even wearing a bathing suit at all.


