


To no one’s surprise, the Broadway-and-beyond phenomenon “Hamilton” dominated the Tony nominations on Tuesday morning. But there were still plenty of surprises throughout, and the nominators are likely to have anointed a few stars-in-the-making. Charles Isherwood, a New York Times theater critic; Michael Paulson, the theater reporter; and Scott Heller, the theater editor, talk about how the awards derby shapes up from here.

SCOTT HELLER Hello, Charles. Hello, Michael. How do you think the nominations went this morning?

CHARLES ISHERWOOD Well, of course, “Hamilton” was nominated in virtually every possible category. It has the potential to win 13 Tonys out of its 16 nominations, because in two categories — leading actor and featured actor — more than one performer from the show was nominated. I do find it slightly puzzling that it was nominated in the book of a musical category, since the show is almost sung-through, but it’s the kind of juggernaut that we haven’t seen in years.

The one significant surprise in the acting categories was the absence of Audra McDonald from the list. Did they finally decide she had won too many? Her performance was wonderful, but it was a tight category this year.

And despite that omission, it was a remarkable year for nonwhite actors. The two shows with the most nominations — “Hamilton” and “Shuffle Along” — feature predominantly nonwhite casts.

HELLER It’s pretty clear that “Hamilton” will take the best musical prize and many others. Michael, what would you say are the tightest races?

MICHAEL PAULSON This was a really good season for musical revivals. The favorite, I suspect, is “The Color Purple,” because critics liked it so much more than they liked (well, disliked) the original production; New York magazine headlined its review “‘The Color Purple’ Is One of the Greatest Revivals Ever.” But the other nominated shows have a strong argument to make as well, including two with lyrics by Sheldon Harnick, “Fiddler on the Roof” and “She Loves Me,” as well as the Deaf West Theater production of “Spring Awakening.”

ISHERWOOD I think you’re right that “Color Purple” will take the award. Although the “Spring Awakening” revival was fresh and inventive in its own way, “Color Purple” truly felt like an entirely different show. It was mildly surprising, by the way, that Bartlett Sher was not given a nomination for directing “Fiddler on the Roof.”

PAULSON Some of the acting categories will be competitive, too.

ISHERWOOD Yes, leading actress in a musical is a really tough one, with Laura Benanti, Carmen Cusack, Cynthia Erivo, Jessie Mueller and Phillipa Soo. I’m particularly glad that Carmen Cusack, of “Bright Star,” got a leading actress nomination, and that the show did as well as it did, winning a best musical nomination and four others. (Was this the first year that five musicals were nominated?) Still, I think Cynthia Erivo is the likely winner. Michael, do you think “Hamilton” will win in all the categories it’s nominated in, thus setting a record? Or might there be a spoiler in one or two?

PAULSON I don’t think “Hamilton” will win them all. Most people I’ve talked with agree with you that Cynthia Erivo is the leading contender to win best leading actress in a musical, for example. And I think that choreography, set design, costume design and lighting design are all competitive.

HELLER Let’s talk about plays, both new and revivals. There are five new musicals nominated but only four new plays. Is that a sign that it wasn’t all that strong a year for new plays?

ISHERWOOD There are rarely more than a handful of new plays on Broadway during any season, it seems. Musicals dominate the business, and are now regularly being put in what once were considered straight-play theaters. I’m racking my brain to think of a new play that wasn’t nominated. Only one I can think of is “Our Mother’s Brief Affair.” And for what it’s worth, I think “The Humans” is the likely winner this year.

PAULSON Also notable: The two leading contenders for best new play, “The Humans” and “Eclipsed,” are both by American writers. This is a category often won by Brits — last year, for example, it was “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time.”

HELLER I’ve also read that the four nominees (Mike Bartlett, Danai Gurira, Stephen Karam and Florian Zeller) are under 40 and first-timers on Broadway — haven’t fact-checked that yet, but it’s a good sign. When it comes to revivals, you have the big guns — Eugene O’Neill and two Arthur Miller productions, plus “Blackbird.” These are mighty acting showcases and they dominate the leading actor nominations. Any predictions or surprises? Can you not win a Tony playing Mary Tyrone?

ISHERWOOD Don’t forget that “Noises Off” was also included — making for two revivals not by dead people. Anyway, I think Jessica Lange has a pretty good shot at winning. It is one of the two great roles for women in the American canon, along with Blanche DuBois, and she received largely glowing reviews. I found her performance to be very moving and accomplished.

PAULSON I think many folks expected that Ben Whishaw would get a nod for his work in “The Crucible,” but he didn’t. But what do you think, Scott? What were your biggest surprises of the morning?

HELLER I thought Audra McDonald would be a shoo-in for “Shuffle Along,” and I expected Benjamin Walker to be nominated for “American Psycho.” Whether you do or don’t like the show (I liked it), he is onstage virtually every minute and is scary and magnetic throughout. The night I was there, he stayed in character to call out someone in the front row for making noise, and it was chilling. This makes two great antihero roles that have gone unrecognized, following “Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson.”

ISHERWOOD I was not as enamored of his performance, or the show. I was disappointed that more of the cast of “The Crucible” was not singled out. Mr. Whishaw was wonderful, as were Saoirse Ronan and Tavi Gevinson.

HELLER Let’s look ahead to the awards broadcast itself. Will it be exciting to see one show dominate, or will we be overstuffed with “Hamilton” by June 12? And what do you expect from James Corden?

ISHERWOOD Frankly, I am already a little overstuffed with “Hamilton.” But I do think that a show like this generates excitement that spills over into the broadcast. It will certainly goose the ratings, or so it is expected. James Corden will be funny. That’s the gig, and he is. But it’s a bit odd to have a Brit hosting. Angela Lansbury was technically born British, but she’s thoroughly American now. I can’t think of another British host, but my memory can be spotty.

PAULSON On the other hand, James Corden is a Tony winner (for his riotous performance in “One Man, Two Guvnors”) and has demonstrated a great love for musical theater, so I think he’ll put on a good show. And let’s not forget that most of America has not yet seen “Hamilton” — the only televised performance so far has been on the Grammys — so I agree that interest will be high.

The challenge for CBS et al. over the next few weeks will be to figure out how to balance “Hamilton” mania with the desire to feature the other nominated shows, and maybe even some of the non-nominated shows, on the broadcast. “Hamilton,” of course, is a tough ticket to come by, and producers are hoping that viewers of the Tony broadcast, even if they tune in to watch Lin-Manuel Miranda, can be enticed to buy tickets to other shows, all of which actually have available seats.

HELLER Thanks so much. We’ll have plenty more to say in the coming weeks. Until then, read Michael’s full article on the nominations here. And join us tomorrow around 10:45 a.m. for a Facebook Live report from the meet-and-greet with today’s tired and happy nominees.


