


Ripping off a warm piece of the lavash at Joe & Misses Doe, a small East Village restaurant with a devoted neighborhood following, feels like an apt way to honor our move into summer.

The chef, Joe Dobias, changes the menu all the time, depending on what’s available and what he’s feeling.

What he’s feeling now, as the sidewalk temperature rises and the city loosens up, is that it’s satisfying to start off a meal with a puffy, steaming slab of bread. His lavash is so hot, as it comes off the griddle and gets whisked to your table, that your fingers tell you to wait a minute before tearing into it.

It’s hard to hold off for long, though, because it arrives with a scoop of bucolically green butter mixed with blanched spring peas and a trace of honey. Mr. Dobias, 37, described the lavash as the opposite of the perfunctory baguette slices offered at some restaurants — bread that may have been baked at the crack of dawn but winds up getting eaten at 8 p.m.

“Then it’s so bad — it has no shelf life,” he said. “This bread, it begs to be made to order.”

Bread is a central part of the mission at Joe & Misses Doe, which Mr. Dobias has run with his wife, Jill, 33, for about eight years. Dinner, which costs $48, is served in four courses.

The first course is invariably bread. It could be pretzel challah, marble rye, a Pullman loaf, cornbread. “I’ll try anything, really,” Mr. Dobias said. (His brunch biscuits are the stuff of legend.)

Even as the meal shifts into more substantial courses (soft-shell crab with dirty rice, for instance, or a confit duck leg), the memory of that lavash lingers. Closer to pizza than cracker, its base is simple (water, salt, flour, yeast), but its success depends on paying close attention to the nuances of the dough on any given day.

“Therein lies the challenge,” Mr. Dobias said. “In this particular dough, there’s a balance between moisture and elasticity that you’re looking for.”

Overwork it, and “you’re not going to get that beautiful puffiness and the steam pockets,” he said. Overseason it with a showy spice mix, and you’ll interfere with the plainness of its pleasure, which is why Mr. Dobias sticks with salt and pepper.

“The flavor is so true and so beautiful that I didn’t want to step on it too much,” he said.


