


When the Obama administration directed public schools on Friday to accommodate transgender students by ensuring that they may use school bathrooms and locker rooms of their choice, the latest battle in the nation’s culture wars became even more contentious. Conservatives called the action an illegal overreach that will put children in danger. Advocates for transgender rights hailed it as a breakthrough for civil rights.

High school students from around the country shared their thoughts with The New York Times on Facebook. Their opinions ranged from anger to joy, and they offered a glimpse into how students are experiencing the issue in their schools and neighborhoods.

The Obama administration has taken significant steps in the right direction in social reform throughout its almost eight-year tenure, and this is just adding to its legacy. The United States was built on “freedom and justice for all,” and discriminatory laws against transgender students simply disregard not just the Constitution, but the well-being of U.S. citizens. We live in 2016, and acceptance of everyone of every creed, race, sexuality, gender and background is not only a reflection of the time that we live in, but a necessity in American society.

−Zoe Allen, 16, Dallas

It’s a decision that should be left for the school’s administration and board to decide. Also, it shouldn’t be a reason to pull out federal funding if schools choose not to follow this law.

It’s also up to Congress to write the laws, not the executive department.

— Josh Booher, 18, Columbia, Pa.

1) I don’t think it is the federal government’s job to dictate what each school district does with its students. That is extreme government overreach, and it sets a bad precedent for the future.

2) I think that it is endangering females by opening the doors for any man who wants to enter locker rooms and restrooms where females are. I am not saying that transgender people will be the ones committing crimes; however, these laws and orders will allow any guy who wants to to enter these previously all-female spaces without being restricted by law. If schools want to provide a gender neutral restroom or space where transgender people can go, that is one thing, but eliminating any place where girls can go and have privacy from men is a very bad policy.

— Grace Driggers, 17, South Carolina

It is first of all not the federal government’s job to determine this for every school, and to be 100 percent honest, this makes me as a female very uncomfortable. This liberal push for equality in virtually EVERYTHING is beyond ridiculous. You are given a gender, and whether you agree with it or not, you go to the bathroom you are assigned — not the one you determine. Mr. Obama, this is terrible, and for everyone out there that says this is a step for a safer environment, you are very, very mistaken.

— Abbey Morgan, Parrish, Ala.

While I agree with the Obama administration in general and am an advocate for transgender rights, I’m pessimistic about the outcome. Schools that oppose challenging the gender binary will continue to do so, as they probably already resent the fast pace of social change and left-leaning federal government. In fact, schools with conservative administrations may be even more anti-trans in defiance. More open-minded, progressive schools probably have listened to student input in allowing transgender students to use the appropriate bathrooms and don’t need the federal government’s advice. All in all, this decision seemed like it was made for show; however, I agree with it and its significance is in its empowerment of and official solidarity with transgender students. It gives them a voice.

— Jenny Xu, 16, New York

As a high schooler, I honestly couldn’t care less which bathroom somebody uses if they’re using whichever one matches their gender identification. I believe that the whole freakout on this issue is a ploy to distract people from the real issues that face us, like childhood poverty, undue corporate influence in politics and income inequality.

— Andrew Figueiredo, 18, Wichita, Kan.

I’m a high schooler and the co-president of the Gay Straight Alliance at my school. I 100 percent think that this is a step in the right direction. We have been fighting for this right at my school for years and are very pleased that it is being addressed federally. We are thrilled that this will make our school a safer and more comfortable place for students to learn (and relieve themselves) regardless of their gender identity.

— Robbie Goldberg, 16, Framingham, Mass.

This is long overdue and especially appropriate. Being friends with many trans people myself, I find it nonsensical that conservatives will make up any excuse to oppose these laws, because in reality, they do not understand trans people, they do not want to and, as the word conservative implies, they are afraid of any kind of social progress. It is so easy to forget that there was extreme backlash to desegregation as well as women attending class, but the right for transgender people to use whichever bathroom they associate their identity with does indeed align with civil rights and social progress. There will be clamor, but the noise will die down eventually as people will realize this is a non-problem.

— Christian Mixson, 18, Gulf Shores, Ala.


