


OAKLAND, Calif. — The night before the Thunder tried for the first time to eradicate the Golden State Warriors from the postseason, the Oklahoma City players attended the film “X-Men: Apocalypse.” The group included the 7-footer Steven Adams, who is from New Zealand but looks as if he could have emerged from the pages of a comic book.

As the players strode through the lobby toward the theater reserved for them, Adams attracted attention from other moviegoers at the multiplex, and not just because of his Samson locks, handlebar mustache and tattoo ink running down his right arm.

Adams, 22, has been a paladin in the paint for the Thunder in these playoffs, but the nobility of making and rejecting shots and pulling down rebounds is possibly the only thing to have escaped his grasp. Adams’s teammate, forward Nick Collison, said that as they walked through the lobby, Adams turned to him and said: “This is weird. Everyone is watching us.”

Collison added, “He’s handling it well, but I think he just doesn’t understand the whole star culture we have over here.”

With six double-doubles in the playoffs, matching his regular-season total, Adams, a third-year center, has been the breakout performer of the postseason. The isosceles triangle he has formed with established stars Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook confounded the San Antonio Spurs in the second round and has confused the Warriors, who trail, 3-2, in the best-of-seven series after staving off elimination Thursday with a 120-111 victory at home. Game 6 is Saturday in Oklahoma City.

Despite picking up two fouls in the opening three minutes, Adams had 10 rebounds in the game and finished one field goal from his seventh double-double. The Antipodes player who took center stage on this night was the Warriors’ Australia-born Andrew Bogut, who collected 15 points and 14 rebounds. After the game, Adams sounded as if he took the box score and balled it up and deposited it in the trash bin along with the athletic tape holding his bruised and battered body together.

Adams spent nearly 30 minutes in the training room before emerging briefly to talk to reporters. “We just have to make another adjustment, man,” he said. “That’s what series are about.”

After he was done fielding questions, Adams returned to the training room for roughly another half-hour of treatment. While he was having his body worked on, the retired center Dikembe Mutombo, a native of the Democratic Republic of Congo, stopped by the locker room to visit with a fellow Congolese, the forward Serge Ibaka. Mutombo stayed to talk about Adams, spreading praise like salve.

“I’m so proud of him,” Mutombo said. “I’m so proud of his effort. He’s unbelievable.”

Mutombo shook his head in wonderment as he recalled one of Adams’s second-quarter baskets, a dunk off a rebound of a missed 12-footer by Westbrook. “I was like ‘Whoa!’” Mutombo said, adding, “He’s one of the most surprising big men today.”

Adams perked up when Mutombo’s words were relayed to him. Alluding to Mutombo’s deep, soothing voice, which calls to mind Barry White on stilts, Adams said, “He can read me a story and I’ll go straight to sleep.”

For Adams, and his teammates, there is no resting. After coasting to 55 victories in the regular season to trail the Warriors (73) and the Spurs (67) in the West, the Thunder have circled their playoff prey with a hunger that is almost primal. Adams epitomizes the team’s commitment to getting better and to playing with and for one another.

“He’s really, really focused and concentrated on trying to do the job to the best of his ability,” said the Thunder’s first-year coach, Billy Donovan, “and I think he does the job out of great care for the guys in the locker room.”

From their center, the Thunder’s cohesiveness spreads outward. Its ripple effects were seen late in Thursday’s game when Durant, between whistles, hurried over to the bench and patted the players as if they were pillows in need of plumping. Which in a manner of speaking, they were: The Warriors’ reserves outscored their Oklahoma City counterparts by 30 to 13.

But before his teammates can feed off Adams’s energy, he has to accommodate his voracious appetite. “His metabolism is crazy,” said Collison, who has watched Adams attack two or three entrees at one sitting with the same zeal he does loose rebounds.

“I think one of the best things about playing in the N.B.A. for him is he’s able to afford really good food,” Collison said.

Any meal that does not have to be divided among siblings qualifies as a feast for Adams. His father, Sid, an Englishman who settled in New Zealand after serving in the navy, had 18 children with five women. Adams is the youngest. He said mealtimes growing up were as competitive as any sport. “You kind of did fight for food so I filled up my plate,” he said. “My dad would make us finish it and I’d sit there crying because I’d have to finish all that food.” He laughed. “I think that forced my stomach to stretch,” Adams said.

Adams’s father seeded a redwood forest. His brothers average 6 feet 9 inches, and two, Warren and Ralph, played professional basketball in New Zealand in the 1980s. His sisters average 6 feet and include 31-year-old Valerie, a two-time Olympic champion in the shot-put who stands a shade under 6 feet 4. Their family resemblance is obvious; Adams has the same nimbleness around the basket that Valerie does in the shot-put circle.

As a child, Adams lived with his father and three siblings in Rotorua, a rural town on New Zealand’s North Island known for its geysers and thermal pools. In 2006, when Adams was 13, his father died of cancer, and Adams’s life unraveled. He started ditching school and fell in with a bad crowd. He was not close to his mother, so his brother Warren intervened, collecting Adams and bringing him to Wellington, where he lived.

Through his brother, Adams met two people who would form the core of the second family he has created. Kenny McFadden, a former Washington State standout who played professionally in New Zealand, oversaw his basketball development, and the strength trainer Blossom Cameron directed Adams’s education and became his legal guardian.

Through his brother and McFadden, a teenage Adams popped onto the radar of Jamie Dixon, then coaching at Pittsburgh, who had befriended both men while playing in the New Zealand professional league. Dixon recruited Adams to Pittsburgh, where he played one season, 2012-13, before turning to the pros.

The player drafted 12th over all by the Thunder in 2013 bears little resemblance to the one who was kryptonite to the Spurs’ Tim Duncan and has driven the Warriors’ Draymond Green to distraction in the Western Conference finals. His game, now more streamlined and efficient, has evolved. The same cannot be said of his hair. As a rookie, he was cleanshaven and had a modified crew cut. At some point, he and his teammate Enes Kanter, a 6-foot-11 forward, decided to grow mustaches.

That was the start. Early on, someone told Adams that he looked like Tom Selleck, recently named 2016’s Sexiest Actor Alive by Glamour magazine. Adams needed no further encouragement to continue on his hirsute path, which raises the question: How would he have reacted if someone had said he resembled the actor and comedian Russell Brand?

In lock step with his mustache, Adams started growing out his hair, which he collects in a ponytail during games. He recently began pitching his own signature mustache-styling wax, made by Handmade La Conner, with a scent of oakmoss and whiskey with a hint of roseweed essential oil.

Thunder fans, both young and old, have begun showing up at home games with handlebar mustaches and fake tattoos down their right arms. But the real tribute to Adams can be seen in his homeland. The N.B.A. playoffs, because of his role, are competing with cricket and rugby for top billing in the evening sports news, which is a first.

“I hope that basketball gains momentum and kids understand that you can actually make a living from it,” Adams said. “Not just the N.B.A. You can get a scholarship, a free degree, like no student loan you have to pay off. That’s huge in life. Once they realize that in New Zealand, I hope they get inspired.”


