


It’s not the “nerd prom” anymore.

Thanks to the unfortunate accident of its being held only a few days before Monday evening’s Met Gala, the ultimate red carpet runway, the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner (or at least its image) has always suffered by comparison. But a makeover of sorts has been going on, and this year’s event, the last of Barack Obama’s presidency, was a pretty clear acknowledgment that appearance officially matters in Washington, and no one is apologizing, or hiding that fact, any more.

From Helen Mirren in purple Dolce & Gabbana (accessorized with a purple Prince temporary tattoo) to Kerry Washington in knee-length ruffled Victoria Beckham and Madeleine Albright in a black dress slit to the knee, it was a night of big brands, and elegant, sometimes even edgy, dresses.

This is partly because of a raised celebrity presence (Kendall Jenner, neither a famed political activist nor one who plays one on TV, attended this year’s dinner), but also, and possibly more important, the Michelle Obama effect. Mrs. Obama has been a canny user of fashion since her family entered the White House, leveraging her position and her profile to promote local industry and emerging designers, engage in some subtle cross-border diplomacy, and even challenge some classic assumptions about American first ladies having to wear only American designers.

She has been gradually raising the glamour stakes at the Correspondents’ dinner over the years — going from a simple hot pink Michael Kors sheath in 2009 and a red Prabal Gurung with a draped neck in 2010 to strapless Naeem Khan in 2012; embroidered, off-the-shoulder Marchesa in 2014; and platinum-beaded Zac Posen in 2015.

This year, however, she wore a beige silk spaghetti-strap dress with lace and crystal embroidery and a tulle cape on top sprinkled with Swarovski crystals by Givenchy haute couture. That’s about as elite, and elaborate, as fashion gets. It’s very, very French. It’s very, very 1 percent. It took the old rules and tossed them out the window and dared everyone to get upset.

And no one blinked.

Indeed, the Internet mostly applauded the choice, using words like “full glam” (Fashionista), “stuns” (The Huffington Post) and “glistens” (E! online) to describe the effect. Personally, I found the cape oddly matronly, but the choice, and the reaction, especially its lack of skepticism about either the origin of the dress or its cost, was notable. After eight years, Mrs. Obama has changed expectations completely about what a first lady should wear. And it has apparently changed the tenor of what everyone around her wears, too.

As a result, an adult woman looking for inspiration for a black tie event could do worse than look to the Correspondents’ dinner for ideas (itself an idea that would have been unimaginable at the turn of the millennium). Though black was the predominant color, on not just Mesdames Washington and Albright but also Christy Turlington Burns (who seemed to be channeling Madame X in Marc Jacobs), Rachel McAdams (a strapless column) and Jaimie Alexander (who went full fishtail in Christian Siriano), white also made a striking appearance on Karlie Kloss (in Derek Lam) and Sela Ward — both of whom, like Ms. Mirren, demonstrated that impact can be achieved without too much exposure. Ditto Emma Watson, whose black cigarette pants/strapless white poppy-print Osman dress combination was both cool and practical without being cloying.

There were some missteps, to be sure, especially the over-the-top-ness of a few ball gowns with trains, but that is to be expected when an event goes from frumpy to relatively fabulous.

Now the question is whether this sartorial improvement trend is a permanent change in the way Washington does dressing, or an administration-specific moment? We’ll have to wait till next year to find out. But it’s hard to put the genie back in the bottle. Especially when it has cast such a radical spell.


