


FRONT PAGE

An article on Friday about Britain’s historic feeling of being apart from Europe as it considers whether to leave the European Union referred imprecisely to arrival protocols at British airports and to British passports. Only passengers from non-European countries are given British landing cards upon arrival, and they would not be directed to the line for British and European Union passport holders. Some holders of British passports — for example, citizens of overseas British territories like Bermuda and Turks and Caicos — do not hold European Union citizenship as well; it is not the case that “British passports are by definition European Union passports.”

INTERNATIONAL

An article on May 13 about the sagging fortunes of the Workers’ Party of Brazil, whose standard-bearer, President Dilma Rousseff, was suspended by the Brazilian Senate, misstated the amount of foreign debt that was hobbling the Brazilian economy in 1998, when Ms. Rousseff’s mentor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, ran for president. It was $250 billion, not $250 million.

NEW YORK

The Grace Notes article on Monday, about the people who select music for Pennsylvania Station, misstated part of the name of the company that provides the music. It is Mood Media, not Mood Music. And because of an editing error, the article misstated the surname of an executive who supervises the music programmers. He is Danny Turner, not Turney.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Tuesday about a salary increase for first-year associates at Cravath, Swaine & Moore misstated the date the raises will take effect. It is July 1; they were not effective on May 1, and they will be reflected in paychecks starting July 8, not July 9.

•

An article on Monday about the effect of digital technology on productivity growth rendered incorrectly the name of a medical technology provider. It is Athenahealth, not Athena Health.

SPORTS

The TV Sports column on Monday about Mike Breen, the lead voice for N.B.A. broadcasts on ESPN and ABC, misstated the number of N.B.A. finals he would have called had he been chosen as lead announcer when ESPN/ABC took over N.B.A. broadcast rights from NBC after the 2002 season. It is 14, not 15.

•

An article on May 28 about the appointment of José Mourinho as the new manager of Manchester United misstated the year he was first appointed as manager of Chelsea. It was in 2004, not 2003.

•

A correction in this space on Tuesday for a picture caption with an article about Toronto Blue Jays’ recent success against the Yankees misidentified the winning team of the May 24 game between the teams. It was the Yankees, not the Blue Jays.

THE ARTS

An entry in the New Music column on Thursday about “Motown Gospel Presents 1 Mic 1 Take” misspelled the given name of a performer on that album. He is Brian Courtney Wilson, not Bryan.

WEEKEND

A film review on Friday about “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows” referred incorrectly to the turtles’ names. Three turtles are named for Renaissance artists whose major works included paintings, not four. (Donatello was a sculptor.)

FOOD

A recipe last Wednesday for chess pie squares, adapted from the new cookbook “Julia Reed’s South: Spirited Entertaining and High-Style Fun for All Year Long,” misstated the metric equivalent for the six ounces of butter used in both the shortbread crust and the filling. It is 170 grams, not 57.

OPINION

An opinion article on Thursday about the beer industry misstated a detail about the Voluntary Anheuser-Busch Incentive for Performance program. It pays distributors on a sliding scale based on the share of Anheuser-Busch products they sell; it does not pay retailers.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


