


“I wanted to have a more human relationship with the person who was representing my work,” Julian Schnabel said. “A dialogue between a dealer and an artist is important.”

Mr. Schnabel was discussing why he is leaving the Gagosian Gallery for Pace, effective immediately.

“Ultimately, it’s about friendship,” said Mr. Schnabel, 64. “You want somebody to be on the other end of the line, which Arne always has been.”

Arne is Arne Glimcher, chairman of Pace Gallery, where Mr. Schnabel spent 20 years before leaving to join Larry Gagosian in 2002. Mr. Glimcher said that he had remained a fan of Mr. Schnabel’s work, collecting it himself.

“I so deeply believe in his work,” Mr. Glimcher said. “I think he’s really one of the great artists.” He added that there seemed to be a “re-examination” of Mr. Schnabel among institutions. (The Museum of Modern Art acquired a painting last year.)

Asked for his response, Mr. Gagosian said through a spokeswoman: “Gagosian Gallery never formally represented Julian Schnabel, and he was not one of the gallery’s artists. We wish him all the best.” (As of Wednesday, Mr. Schnabel was among the artists listed on Gagosian’s website, and as recently as April 2014, he was the subject of a solo exhibition there.)

Mr. Glimcher said that next season Pace would present a show of Mr. Schnabel’s new work, which will also be featured in its booth at Art Basel next month: purple paintings made from photographic images of the patterns in his studio floor that have been transferred to canvas.

“Julian is a person who needs a lot of attention,” Mr. Glimcher said. “And this is a gallery that pays attention to artists.”

An artist isn’t typically rediscovered at 77.

But that seems to be what’s happening to Judy Chicago of “The Dinner Party” fame, who is now going to be represented by Salon 94.

Jill Soloway, creator of the acclaimed Amazon television series “Transparent,” is also making an Amazon series based on Womanhouse, the 1972 feminist art space that Ms. Chicago organized with Miriam Schapiro.

“I’ve always loved what Judy Chicago likes to call ‘circle pedagogy,’” Ms. Soloway said. “Let’s connect in a feminist and cooperative way.”

Jeanne Greenberg Rohatyn, Salon 94’s founder, started seeing Ms. Chicago’s work at various exhibitions recently. “Everybody was showing different pieces of Judy’s career, and I thought that was interesting,” Ms. Rohatyn said.

So she visited Ms. Chicago in Albuquerque. “Her archive is incredibly relevant,” Ms. Rohatyn said, “but at the same time, we don’t see her work out there commercially.”

Ms. Chicago said that both developments would help her reach a major goal: “Overcoming the erasure of women’s achievements, including my own, and bringing them into the mainstream.”

It’s hard to imagine how an institution as comprehensive as the Metropolitan Museum of Art decides which pieces in its collection it no longer needs or wants. But somehow, the museum has made peace with parting with more than 600 pieces of Chinese ceramics, which it will offer at Christie’s on Sept. 15 to benefit the Met’s acquisition fund.

“We have over 4,200 Chinese ceramics, so we’re looking to thin out the collection where it’s duplicative or the quality is not there, to raise funds for things we really need,” said Maxwell Hearn, chairman of the Met’s Asian art department, adding that the winnowing was conducted in consultation with outside experts.

“About 60 percent of the things we’re deaccessioning came in 1879, so there wasn’t that much scholarship, there wasn’t that much discrimination,” Mr. Hearn. “They’ve really been extensively reviewed; most have never been exhibited or published.”

The selection features Song dynasty (960-1279) Jun wares, blue-and-white porcelains from the Ming (1368-1644) and Qing (1644-1911) dynasties, and pieces from the Kangxi (1662-1722), Yongzheng (1723-1735) and Qianlong periods (1735-1795).

Many of the items have impressive provenance, including porcelains from the collection of the trustee Samuel Putnam Avery, part of the Met’s first acquisition of Asian art in 1879.

Under the guidelines of the American Association of Museum Directors, museums are allowed to sell works to support acquisitions, but not for operating funds.

For a small museum like the Colby College Museum of Art, in Waterville, Me., acquiring a set of Picasso etchings is a big deal. So Colby is especially grateful to the donors Peter and Paula Lunder, longtime Colby supporters, who in 2013 gave their collection of American art, valued at more than $100 million, to the museum.

Some of the 100 etchings will be exhibited from June 2 to Aug. 21, with all of them on view during spring and summer 2018.

Rendered in a neo-Classical style that the artist adapted from his studies of classical sculpture, the suite explores themes of mythology, identity and sexuality.

“You see the artist as maker,” said Sharon Corwin, the museum’s director and chief curator. “It captures the themes and tropes that define his career.”


