


Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in a new version of the Playlist column. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like the new format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.

A nonrevealing reveal about Jay Z’s feelings on Beyoncé’s “Lemonade.” A visible and generous squashing of old beef. A rare verse from a rapper who likes to remind you that he’s an executive. A rare verse that makes you think executive problems might be as troubling as rapper problems. A strategic re-establishment of a New York beachhead. (See also, remixes by Jadakiss, Fabolous, Dave East and more.) A nod to a pair of fallen stars. A parent’s wish: “Blue looking like Pac in the tub.” A reminder that kings — even lapsed ones — never really stop surveying their subjects. (A Tidal exclusive.) JON CARAMANICA

Last Sunday, Kesha sang Bob Dylan’s “It Ain’t Me, Babe” at the Billboard Music Awards, in full-throated, dramatic, pop-country style. She had to be given legal clearance to do so; her record label, Kemosabe, had earlier suspended approval for her to sing the song, fearing that she would use it as an opportunity “as a platform to discuss the litigation” between her and her producer, Dr. Luke. If you’ve heard Kesha’s recording of Dolly Parton’s “Old Flames Can’t Hold a Candle to You,” you already knew she could sing like that. But how about the song itself? Mr. Dylan may have cribbed the first line from the traditional English folk song “Go Away From My Window,” recorded by Jeannie Robertson and John Jacob Niles, among others. It’s also possible that he deliberately constructed an emotional photonegative of the earlier song, whose narrator is keeping someone out, proactively setting up boundaries. (“Don’t enter in,” Robertson sang, worriedly.) Mr. Dylan’s narrator, by contrast, is dismissing someone with a shrug. That’s the song Kesha chose — just as pointed, in a way, as the other song she performed the following night at Dylan Fest in Nashville: “I Shall Be Released.” BEN RATLIFF

“Send My Love (To Your New Lover)” is the song Adele made after hearing Taylor Swift’s “I Knew You Were Trouble,” which introduced her to the rigorous pop genius of Max Martin and Shellback. Typically, great Adele songs seep into all available crevices, but this one is a wispy jaunt: just Adele, a guitar, some drums, and not much else. The video, though — which had its debut during the Billboard Music Awards last weekend — manages to look like Adele typically sounds, thanks to a simple effect. She was filmed several times in the same setup — wearing a bright, floral dress, in front of a black backdrop — and then shots were layered atop each other with differing transparencies, creating a sort of visual row-row-row-your-boat effect. As ever, Adele displays how to do the most with the least — she is a master of the offhand facial expression. But the overlays can be striking: singing direct to the camera in one shot, burying her head in her hands in another; stern hand gestures paired with a look of cold angst; spinning around and flaring out her dress in one, giving a firm tsk-tsk with the hand in the other. J.C.

The Australian electronic-music producer Flume (a.k.a. Harley Streten) avoids direct four-on-the-floor propulsion. When percussion sounds arrive among his pillowy sustained chords and flutelike melodies, they’re likely to be the snickering syncopations of trap, while the strongest rhythm comes from deep, viscous bass tones that skid and lurch like improbably prolonged drunken stumbles. “Can I, should I find my way home?” Beck sings in “Tiny Cities,” the capstone of Flume’s new album, “Skin.” In four minutes of unstable pomp, with a touch of Animal Collective, Beck’s lyrics muse on conundrums — “How can I convince myself to not believe in what I know?” — while his vocals are multiplied into edifices of baroque counterpoint over a slow, fitful march. The music is at once grand, vertiginous and liable to disappear at any moment. JON PARELES

There’s as much U2 as country in Dierks Bentley’s new album, “Black”; drums boom and guitars reverberate in grand spaces. “Different for Girls” — not Joe Jackson’s “It’s Different for Girls” — insists that women can’t power through breakups like men can; he’s trying to sympathize. “Nobody said it was fair,” Mr. Bentley allows. “When love disappears they can’t pretend it was never there.” Elle King harmonizes with him and takes a verse herself: “Yeah, the guys can just act tough.” But wait a minute! Ms. King might just be the last person to share these Mars-and-Venus generalizations about how women are naturally more romantic. Just last year, she was the one heartlessly notching up conquests in her own “Ex’s and Oh’s.” J.P.

The surface is mostly subterfuge, especially at the beginning: the perky electroacoustic plink of the arrangement, the galloping beat and vocal harmonies of the chorus, the video clip that’s devoted to boys-will-be-boys high jinks. But listen to the lyrics, and Olivia Hally and Pepita Emmerichs, the two songwriters who lead the Australian group Oh Pep!, are singing about dealing with an unplanned pregnancy — and with the boyfriend, parents, doctors and, finally, the narrator’s own choice. At the end, the instruments drop away for a stark a cappella: “Nine months til the deadline/and nine weeks to make up your mind.” J.P.

“Here it comes,” sings Jenny Hval, dispassionately, in the chorus of her new track, “Female Vampire.” What does she mean by that, exactly? The song is her first single from “Blood Bitch” — an explicitly sanguine album, concerned with blood as a substance both vital and mundanely intimate. (Another track on the album bears the wry title “Period Piece.”) Ms. Hval, who hails from Norway, is an artist of inscrutable intention, predisposed toward any premise that leads you, disoriented, a fair distance from where you started. “Female Vampire” is built on an ominous, strobing electronic backdrop, over which the vocals float in a soothing disquiet. The lyrics are hardly clear about their vampiric implications — “I’m so tired/Of subjectivity” isn’t a phrase you’ll find in the “Twilight” series — but Ms. Hval evokes a goth sensibility that’s fully compatible with the milieu. There should be more (a lot more) to talk about when “Blood Bitch” is released by Sacred Bones on Sept. 30. NATE CHINEN

More than most musicians with her training, the singer-songwriter, composer and bassist Esperanza Spalding has shown a creative savvy when it comes to the visual image. So her contribution to “Gaze,” a short film directed by Allie Avital under the banner of Ray-Ban films, is decidedly on brand. On its face the film is about yearning obsession, featuring Kate Lyn Sheil as a photographer stalking the firefighter next door. But it’s also about the act of seeing and being seen — or as the case may be, frustratingly unseen. Ms. Spalding appears first in a photo shoot and later in a surreal dream sequence, performing a song with a chamber-electronic texture. She also wrote the mournful string arrangements that provide a score for much of the film, including a finale that pushes Ray-Ban’s current #ItTakesCourage campaign to the point of absurdity. N.C.

For the occasion of Eddie Palmieri’s excellent concert last weekend in Harlem’s Marcus Garvey Park, reimagining some of the music and the style of his 1971 Latin-funk opus “Harlem River Drive,” Red Bull Music Academy created a short documentary about the great pianist and that moment in New York music history. (It’s the second film in an ongoing series called “The Note.”) As always, Mr. Palmieri delivers great value. He walks around his old neighborhoods in Harlem and the South Bronx. He tells a vest-pocket history of his career. At the piano, he breaks down Afro-Cuban music into structures: rumba, guajira, son montuno, mambo. Great video clips from the past show him playing live, in transports. The poet Felipe Luciano and musician/historian Aurora Flores talk about the history of the Young Lords, the Latino activist group; the drummer Bernard Purdie and the timbalero Nicky Marerro talk about meshing funk and Cuban rhythm. There’s an awful lot in 14 minutes. B.R.

This is string-band music in the digital era, with riffs like loops and allusions to fiddle tunes, dance music and deep gospel. Leyla McCalla played cello in the Carolina Chocolate Drops, the self-conscious reincarnation of a string-band tradition by music-school students; she continues that mission — to look way back but to push forward — on her own. “A Day for the Hunter, a Day for the Prey” is the title song of her new album, and with its six-beat pulse it is at once African, Minimalistic, percussive and rootsy — aware of its antecedents and not daunted by them. J.P.

One of last year’s best out-of-left-field jazz releases was “In the Moment,” a double LP of smartly atmospheric beat music by the Chicago drummer Makaya McCraven. Distilled from a mess of live recordings, the album felt cooled-out but alert, reflecting multiple allegiances: to deep house, hard bop and the non-genre sometimes pegged as “post-rock.” Mr. McCraven now has a worthy follow-up, “In the Moment E & F Sides,” made up of material from the same club residency but mixed more recently, and mastered by the stylish producer Daddy Kev. The music, featuring Mr. McCraven with ace collaborators like the guitarist Jeff Parker and the vibraphonist known as Justefan, suggests an organic yet state-of-the-art melding of modern jazz and hip-hop, without a speck of compromise. It’s also refreshingly grounded in a sense of place: during a soulfully polyrhythmic track called “She Knew,” you hear some spirited crowd chatter. It doesn’t feel at all like a problem. N.C.


