


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

Finale season is here! A few shows have already ended, but this week Fox and ABC get in on the game, too. The end of the network season used to mean the start of all reruns, all the time. But between cable and streaming, year-round programming is more robust than ever. Hallelujah.

Amid the finales, there’s also a knockout episode of “The Americans.” I have a theory that “The Americans” is TV for TV obsessives — the more complex dramas you’ve watched, the more you’ll appreciate what the show is pulling off.

I’d love to know what shows you feel like you missed the boat on. I put off watching “Bates Motel” and then somehow four seasons went by, and now it feels a little late to join the party. Let us know what show slipped through the cracks: Email watching@nytimes.com, or tweet us at @Watching. Have a great week.

“The Americans” has become the most arresting, vital drama on TV — fascinating and beautiful, and somehow getting better and better in its current fourth season. Keri Russell and Matthew Rhys star as Elizabeth and Philip Jennings, the mother and father of a normal American family in 1983. Except that they’re actually Soviet spies, and they wear various disguises and participate in long-term cons to gather intelligence.

The spycraft is interesting in its own right, but the show is much more about marriage and parenthood, and the impossibility of knowing who anyone really is. Episodes that weave in actual culture and pop culture tend to be especially resonant, and this week’s episode, “The Day After” — a reference to the TV movie about nuclear war — is particularly so. And as often as “The Americans” is shocking and as strong as the espionage plotting can be, what I appreciate most is the show’s refusal to engage in “twists.” What the show presents as true is true; many of the characters engage in profound, spirit-crushing deceit, but the audience never feels lied to. There’s no rewatching old episodes in a new light now that something has been revealed.

Here’s how to catch up: Seasons 1-3 are on Amazon Prime, and Season 4 is available to purchase individually on Amazon and iTunes, but is free on several cable OnDemand packages. Yes, you need to watch all of it, not only because it’s so terrific (it really is!) but also because the show is very methodical: Characters reappear after long stretches away, ideas germinate for several episodes and consequences are not always immediate.

“The Americans” can be very violent, and it occasionally includes torture, though it’s not gratuitous. Watch more than four episodes at a time and you’ll start feeling like a sad monster. Season 1 is good, but Season 2 is when things really launch. (Wednesdays, 10 p.m., FX)

• “New Girl,” “Grandfathered,” “The Grinder,” Tuesday, starting at 8:00 p.m., Fox. “New Girl” (which is showing two episodes) has been renewed for another season, but “Grandfathered” and “The Grinder” are still waiting. Both are on the bubble, but get your viewing in while you can, just in case.

• “The Big Bang Theory,” Thursday, 8 p.m., CBS

• “Scandal,” Thursday, 9 p.m., ABC

• “The Amazing Race,” Friday, 8 p.m., CBS

• “The Vampire Diaries,” Friday, 8 p.m., The CW

• “Once Upon a Time,” Sunday, 7 p.m., ABC

• “Last Man on Earth,” Sunday, 9:30 p.m., Fox

• “Quantico,” Sunday, 10 p.m., ABC

“Botched” (Tuesday, 9 p.m., E!) returns for a third season this week, but don’t write it off with its crasser and sadder brethren. It’s oddly comforting and is the rare show where people in legitimate dire straits get actual help. Don’t get back-alley discount plastic surgery in Tijuana! Agh!

Also this week, the series premiere of “Chelsea” (Wednesday, 12:01 a.m., Netflix), Chelsea Handler’s new streaming talk show.

Finally, the lovable and affirming “Steven Universe” (Thursday, 7 p.m., Cartoon Network) is back with new episodes, starting with “Super Watermelon Island,” which kicks off with one of the most enchanting dream sequences in living memory.

The third season of “Peaky Blinders” premieres May 31 on Netflix. That gives you just enough time to watch the first two seasons, which are only six episodes each. Cillian Murphy stars as a crime boss in 1920s Birmingham, where vile behavior abounds.

Game of Thrones This week’s episode was a talky one, Jeremy Egner writes. “The episode’s lone bit of action occurred in the past, but it was a big one: Bran vision-quested his way back to his father’s swordfight with the legendary Arthur Dayne.” For a spoiler-filled explanation about why that scene was so important, read this piece over at Vulture.

Outlander “Even when I’ve disagreed with Claire’s decisions in the past I have found it almost impossible to not get swept up in her passion and at the very least understand the thoughts behind her actions,” Angelica Jade Bastién writes. “But for the first time there is something inauthentic to how certain events play out.”

Veep After Selina sends an ill-advised tweet, things get bad with China. “This is how international incidents get started, apparently,” Jen Chaney writes. “Not with a bang or even a security breach, but with a direct message accidentally made public.”

Silicon Valley “The writers of ‘Silicon Valley’ have a special talent for engineering elaborate systems for the sake of a good running joke,” Scott Tobias writes of this “Ocean’s Eleven”-spoofing episode.

Fear the Walking Dead “I know from reading your comments that a lot of you feel cheated,” E.A. Hanks writes about the hopes of many viewers that this series would take a wider view of the zombie apocalypse as opposed to, like “The Walking Dead,” focusing on one small group of survivors.

“Captain America: Civil War” made an estimated $181 million in North America this weekend, so it’s safe to assume that many of you saw it. Still, some of you haven’t. So we’ll be vague when pointing to some of the more interesting pieces about the film.

The Hollywood Reporter has an informative look at that thing with the dad and how it happened in the comics.

Vanity Fair is not very enthusiastic about that thing that happens between that man and that woman.

Vox writes about the film’s post-credits scenes — the one with that important guy in that place and then the second one with that new guy in his house.

Yahoo asks the screenwriters about five key moments. At least one of them involves that one bad guy.


