


ATLANTA — Matt Harvey pitched five innings Friday night against the Braves in an outing that did little to silence the questions surrounding him.

The right-handed Harvey, nominally the Mets’ ace, entered his fourth start of the season with an 0-3 record and a 5.71 E.R.A. Those numbers concerned the Mets, as did a number of other things: the number of innings he pitched last season, his lack of work in spring training, problems with his mechanics and his inability to get through six innings.

Right fielder Curtis Granderson helped out Harvey with a grand slam, a solo home run, a single and five R.B.I. in the Mets’ rain-delayed 6-3 win over the Braves at Turner Field.

Harvey gave up two runs and seven hits to the Braves, although five of those hits were soft line drives, including an opposite-field, run-scoring double by the rookie Mallex Smith. Harvey threw 101 pitches (68 strikes, 33 balls). He walked one and struck out five in gaining his first victory of the season. He had entered the game with just nine strikeouts in three starts.

Harvey did not allow any well-hit balls that sailed into the gaps or over the heads of his outfielders, but his 101 pitches were a reflection of his inability to put away hitters.

“Still a work in progress,” Harvey said after the game. “Parts of the game, obviously, felt better and felt like I was releasing the ball the way I should be. Other times, it was not that way. There’s more positives than negatives out of this game.”

Meanwhile, there was no debate over whether Granderson had broken out of his own early-season troubles. He crushed a pitch over the right-field fence off Bud Norris with the bases loaded in the second inning, then homered off Norris again in the fourth.

Granderson, who came into the game hitting .175 with an on-base percentage of .299, also singled as the game’s leadoff hitter. His five R.B.I. tied a career high, and his blasts gave the Mets 21 home runs in their last seven games, the most in franchise history over such a span.

“I’ve felt all right from the start of the season until now,” Granderson said. “Obviously, you want things to go a little differently statistically for you, especially getting out of the gate.”

Center fielder Yoenis Cespedes left the game just before the 56-minute rain delay in the eighth inning after aggravating a bruise on his right leg.

Harvey faced two important at-bats in the game, and the results were mixed.

In the bottom of the second, Harvey faced the Braves’ best hitter, Nick Markakis. There were runners on second and third, and the Braves had scored two runs on four hits, although none of them had been hit particularly hard.

Harvey got ahead on a 1-2 count with a rising 96-mile-per-hour fastball that Markakis swung at and missed for strike two. After a foul ball, Harvey threw a 95-m.p.h. fastball inside that rode back over the edge of the plate for a called strike to end the inning.

In the Braves’ two-run second inning, Harvey hit 94 m.p.h. throwing from the stretch, then 96, then 95. The Mets were worried that he had been losing his velocity, especially out of the stretch and with runners in scoring position.

In three games, hitters were batting .538 against Harvey with runners in scoring position; with a runner on base, the batting average against him was .464.

“He’s having a tough time putting anybody away,” Manager Terry Collins said. “He gets ahead of them, he’s pounding the zone, and it’s foul ball, foul ball, foul ball.”

The other important at-bat came in the bottom of the fifth. Harvey walked Markakis and then, with two out, allowed a soft single to Adonis Garcia. With runners on first and second, A. J. Pierzynski approached the plate and took ball one. He then hit a sharp liner to center field, but Cespedes fielded it cleanly and threw it home on the fly. Travis d’Arnaud tagged a sliding Markakis for the third out.

Collins said before the game that Harvey had worked on a mechanical flaw in his delivery while throwing out of the stretch with runners on base. Collins said that Harvey had worked with the pitching coach Dan Warthen and that the pitcher’s first words to Collins after the session had been, “I’m back.”

Both starting pitchers may have been affected by a 10-minute delay at the start of the second inning, when the home-plate umpire Jeff Kellogg has left the game with an apparent injury after being hit by a foul ball. He was replaced by Alan Porter, who had been umpiring at first.

“You saw what happened when the umpire got hurt,” Collins said. “It threw both pitchers a little bit out of whack.”

Still, he preferred to look on the bright side of Harvey’s outing. “It was a step forward,” Collins said. “Hopefully, he grows from it and gets better.”


