


UNITED NATIONS — The United Nations is scheduled to host a global meeting to stop the AIDS epidemic. Should groups that represent transgender people or drug users be allowed to participate?

No, according to a number of countries that belong to the 193-member General Assembly. And they have managed to block the participation of nearly two dozen organizations, from countries as diverse as Cameroon, Jamaica and Russia.

No reasons have been offered. None are required. The General Assembly operates by consensus, which means member countries can object to the participation of any nongovernmental organizations that are not accredited by the United Nations.

The blacklisted organizations and their supporters have loudly objected. Michel Sidibé, executive director of the Joint United Nations Program on H.I.V./AIDS, known as Unaids, warned in an email that “the list of excluded groups are many organizations that courageously and effectively speak to the needs of key population groups.”

Mr. Sidibé went on to say that it would be “impossible to end the AIDS epidemic as a public health threat without much closer involvement of key population groups in planning and delivering services.” His email, sent to other United Nations officials and outside groups, was seen by The New York Times.

Russia, Cameroon, Tanzania, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, a 57-nation bloc, objected to the participation of 22 nongovernmental organizations, or N.G.O.s. According to a United Nations official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity in talking about private diplomatic exchanges, the objecting countries also opposed to making the list and the names of their own countries public, which infuriated senior officials within the United Nations.

Their initial list included 39 groups. Lobbying by the president of the General Assembly, Mogens Lykketoft, a Danish diplomat, trimmed it to 22.

The Islamic bloc even objected to groups from far-flung countries that are not part of the Islamic bloc, the United Nations official said.

Mr. Lykketoft, asked for comment, said in a text message: “We have done our utmost to include as many of the N.G.O.s as possible. Unfortunately it is not within my mandate to overrule objections by the member states or to make the objecting countries known to the public.”

About 560 N.G.O.s, are participating in the two-day meeting scheduled on June 8, according to Mr. Lykketoft’s office.

The 22 organizations that have been barred reveal the sensitivities of certain countries on both gay rights and drug policy.

For instance, the blacklist includes a Russian group, Esvero, which works with users of injectable drugs who are particularly vulnerable to H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS. Russia vigorously objects to what are widely known as harm-reduction strategies that treat drug addiction as a public health issue.

The blacklist also includes Colour Pink, an advocacy group for gay men and transgender people in Jamaica, and a Cameroonian organization, Actwid, which works for people with H.I.V. Several Arab and African countries criminalize homosexuality — and at the United Nations, they are part of a coalition of countries that do not support gay rights.

“The U.N. should be a voice of inclusivity and transparency not a tool of discrimination and prejudice,” Ben Plumley, who heads an advocacy group called Pangaea Global, said in an email.

His group was among several dozen groups recently wrote to the heads of the General Assembly and Unaids,expressing its “profound outrage” and saying it was counterproductive to bar organizations that work with some of the most vulnerable groups.

“By excluding organizations from these communities, the General Assembly is sending a terrible message to the world that it is prepared to let discrimination and prejudice yet again hamper our collective efforts to end AIDS,” the letter said. “It also signals a disregard for communities most affected by H.I.V. worldwide and Member State intentions to weaken the outcome of the High Level Meeting through exclusion and subsequent omission.”

Of the excluded groups, 16 will be attending as part of the delegations of other accredited organizations.

Gay rights is increasingly a contentious issue at the United Nations. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has forcefully spoken out for the rights of gay, lesbian and transgender people.

Earlier this week, to mark a day for gay rights, the head of Unaids, Michel Sidibé, spoke out against discrimination on Twitter. He used the hashtag for the high-level meeting: #HLM2016AIDS.

“Let’s use #HLM2016AIDS to work towards a brighter, more compassionate future for all. Embrace diversity. Leave no one behind.”


