


BOSTON — In New England, where professional sports are woven into the fabric of the culture as tightly as the seams on a baseball, the fortunes of the local teams are always monitored carefully.

But most of those clubs have not fared well in recent days. The Boston Bruins did not even make the playoffs, and on Thursday the Celtics were eliminated by the Atlanta Hawks.

Fans of the New England Patriots were harboring anger toward the N.F.L. for taking away their first-round pick in the annual draft, a steep penalty for possibly tampering with footballs two years before, and for the reinstatement of Tom Brady’s four-game suspension.

So, on Friday night, all eyes turned to the Red Sox and the Yankees at Fenway Park, where a fading rivalry was re-energized for another night.

Alex Rodriguez and David Ortiz, two 40-year-old sluggers with nearly 1,200 home runs between them, reached back to hit long, powerful homers in a game that evoked memories of their battles from earlier this century, especially the ones the Red Sox won.

It has happened more often than not since Ortiz came to Boston, changing the balance of power in the rivalry. His home run was the decisive one, the memorable one, the winner.

Ortiz redirected a Dellin Betances breaking ball into the seats above the Green Monster with one out in the eighth inning to break a tie and propel the Red Sox to a 4-2 win over the struggling Yankees.

It was Ortiz’s first hit off Betances and his 48th home run against the Yankees — the 14th that gave the Red Sox the lead. That does not include his five against the Yankees in the playoffs, the most memorable of which came in the 2004 American League Championship Series.

The intensity of the rivalry has plummeted since then, but on a chilly night, with the stands full, Ortiz gave a refresher course on his knack for crushing the Yankees’ spirits, especially at Fenway Park.

“When you’re playing at home you know the adrenaline is flying all over the place when you are playing against the Yankees,” Ortiz said. “Whenever something like this happens, you really enjoy it.”

Before the game the video board showed a montage of some of the more volatile moments in the passionate history between the clubs, and some of the nastier ones, including fights between Thurman Munson and Carlton Fisk, Rodriguez and Jason Varitek, Pedro Martinez and Don Zimmer.

Those days of baseball Armageddon seem very far away, and Rodriguez and Ortiz are the only two players who were in uniform then and now.

The rivalry may be at a low ebb, owing to the misfortunes of these teams over the past two seasons, but two things have not changed at Fenway Park since the peak of the competition between 1999 and 2005: They still sing along to “Sweet Caroline” in the eighth inning, and they still boo Rodriguez.

The defeat was especially difficult for the Yankees, who lost their third straight game and their seventh in their last 10. But Manager Joe Girardi said it is too early to panic.

“Now is not the time,” he said. “I really believe we are going to bust out of this. We haven’t yet, and I know I keep saying it. But I really believe in my heart that these guys are going to hit and we are going to score a lot of runs.”

The Red Sox do not have that worry now, at least not with Ortiz, who announced before the season that this would be his final one. He does not look like a fading star. He is batting .307 and the home run was his fourth.

“I’m going to try to enjoy my retirement,” he said. “If I get bored I’ll just tell the Red Sox to activate me again.”

Masahiro Tanaka pitched very well through six innings for the Yankees, but in the seventh he surrendered the lead the Yankees had held since Rodriguez’s home run. Jackie Bradley Jr. hit a two-run double off the Green Monster and the Red Sox drew even, 2-2.

Betances replaced Tanaka and induced a fly ball from Mookie Betts to end the seventh inning and prevent Boston from taking the lead there.

But in the eighth, Betances gave up a single to Xander Bogaerts and then Ortiz’s 507th home run. Rodriguez has hit 691.

In the ninth, Rodriguez grounded out to Bogaerts for the second out in a 1-2-3 inning, and Boston could finally cheer again.

“Those games between us and the Yankees, everyone is on their toes,” Ortiz said. “It’s enjoyable. Next year I’m going to become a fan and probably going to be feeling the same way watching the game.”


