


“A coffee shop is not just a coffee shop,” Majora Carter said the other day.

Ms. Carter, who hails from the South Bronx and has been a longtime agent of change in what was once viewed as the most hardscrabble of New York neighborhoods, was talking about the arrival last week of Birch Coffee, whose exposed brick, reclaimed wood and $2.75 macchiatos make it an outlier on a stretch of Hunts Point Avenue dominated by dime stores, bodegas and auto shops.

A coffee shop, she was saying, can be a community hub and a tinderbox of creativity. People collide and cross paths over cappuccino, sharing catalytic ideas and business plans, and Hunts Point hasn’t had a spot quite like it for as long as she can remember.

“I find it funny and sad at the same time when people walk in and say, ‘Hey, I feel like I’m in Manhattan,’” said Ms. Carter, who has collaborated on the cafe with Jeremy Lyman and Paul Schlader, the entrepreneurs who have planted seven Birch outposts in other parts of the city. “You know what? You are in the Bronx, and we can have this here as well.”

But what’s truly remarkable is that the South Bronx suddenly has two such overnight arrivals. Over in Mott Haven, a few stops away on the No. 6 train, in the shadow of the Major Deegan Expressway, a shop called Filtered Coffee opened in April with a red La Marzocco espresso machine, drowsy indie rock on the sound system and financier pastries shaped like teddy bears.

If a coffee shop can serve as a town hall, it can also act as something else: an early signal flare of incoming gentrification. With the financiers come the financiers. Jon Gray, a leader of a Bronx-based group of food lovers called Ghetto Gastro, said all the exposed brick and barista lingo could occasionally feel like code for “It’s safe to come, we’ve got lattes.”

These two new cafes share a vintage-industrial look and an overlapping sense of both mission and opportunity. “The historical role of a coffee shop is a place to meet and have a conversation,” said Karen Paul, one of the entrepreneurs behind Filtered, which occupies a high-ceilinged space at the corner of Third Avenue and 134th Street. (There is also a Filtered Coffee in Harlem.)

Ms. Paul and Aaron Baird, her business partner, talk about how Filtered could become a crossroads for creative expression in Mott Haven. “Certain businesses come to fill a void in the community,” Mr. Baird said.

But they talk, too, about how nearby buildings have been filling with young people priced out of Brooklyn and Manhattan. “Basically, we always try to look for what’s an up-and-coming neighborhood,” said Mr. Baird, who grew up in Nebraska. “A lot of friends are moving here now.”

If the two are a tad sensitive about “the G word,” as they called it, that’s because Mott Haven has experienced friction over the prospect of gentrification. Not long ago, developers tried to rebrand parts of the South Bronx with a lyrical new name: the Piano District. Locals recoiled.

One of those developers, Keith Rubenstein, the chief executive of Somerset Partners, which owns property nearby, is an investor in Filtered. After touring Ms. Paul and Mr. Baird’s cafes in Harlem, he encouraged them to build a branch in an empty warehouse. “They brought life to a place that was probably a little bit lifeless,” he said of the corner.

Although he waved away the suggestion that Filtered would be a stealth gentrification tool (“It’s got no purpose other than providing great service, great food and great beverages,” he said), Mr. Rubenstein made it clear that he’d like to see more restaurants and other amenities to increase foot traffic.

“I think every single restaurateur in New York should be looking around the area,” he said. High rents may be killing restaurants in Manhattan, he said, but not in the South Bronx.

In Hunts Point, Ms. Carter and her husband and business partner, James Chase, started out with the idea of possibly opening a coffee shop on their own. Mr. Lyman and Mr. Schlader had no intention of opening a Birch branch in the Bronx; they visited the site because Ms. Carter had rented a space and had asked, through a mutual friend, for their expert counsel.

The duo offered a lot of counsel — about brewing equipment, ice supply, drainage. Ms. Carter replied with her own proposal: to join forces on the shop.

“The neighborhood is craving it,” Mr. Schlader said, noting that Hunts Point doesn’t even have a Starbucks. “There’s underserved and then there’s unserved,” he said.

Ms. Carter, whose impact as an entrepreneur and a community leader in Hunts Point is so well known that there is a painted mural of her face mounted on a fence not far from the coffee shop, paid out of her own pocket to get the cafe started. “No bank was going to finance this ever — no!” she said. “‘Oh, yeah, we’re going to do a specialty coffee place in the South Bronx.’”

Her involvement may deflect some anxieties about gentrification. “She’s a pillar in the community,” said Mr. Gray, of Ghetto Gastro. “I like the concept of ‘for us, by us.’”

And why should Manhattan have a monopoly on macchiato? “We like to see the work that we do as self-gentrification,” Ms. Carter said. “People in low-status communities like nice things, too.”


