


Financial disclosure statements from a former senior aide and campaign manager to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, currently at the center of an investigation involving improper lobbying and conflicts of interest, show that he earned at least $70,000 in consulting fees in 2014 from two entities that do business with the state.

The aide, Joseph Percoco, was one of Mr. Cuomo’s closest confidants and was employed by him as his executive deputy secretary until early January, when he left for a job as senior vice president at Madison Square Garden.

Federal prosecutors in Manhattan and the Federal Bureau of Investigation are currently looking at whether Mr. Percoco and his wife failed to properly disclose thousands of dollars in income they had received from entities doing business with the state, according to people briefed on the matter.

The state’s Joint Commission on Public Ethics, known as Jcope, received a federal grand jury subpoena seeking copies of Mr. Percoco’s financial disclosure forms more than a week ago, according to a person familiar with the subpoena. F.B.I. agents from the Buffalo office have executed search warrants at locations around Buffalo, Albany, New York City and Washington, several people briefed on the matter said.

Also last week, the governor’s office received a grand jury subpoena seeking a broad range of records, including correspondence and other documents, reflecting whether Mr. Percoco may have sought a benefit on behalf of any of the companies that paid him and his wife, or anyone else, a person with knowledge of the subpoena said.

According to records provided by Jcope, Mr. Percoco reported earning between $70,000 and $125,000 in outside income in 2014 from COR Development, a development company in central New York, and CHA Consulting, an engineering company based in Albany. Mr. Percoco received between $100,000 and $150,000 from the Cuomo campaign itself, which he managed.

Mr. Percoco’s wife, Lisa Toscano-Percoco, is also listed on the Jcope filings as earning between $75,000 and $100,000 from Chris Pitts L.L.C., which appears to be related to a Democratic operative in Connecticut who has worked for Competitive Power Ventures, one of the entities being investigated by federal authorities. Efforts to reach Mr. Pitts by phone and email were unsuccessful.

It is not clear when Mr. Percoco earned the consulting fees and if they overlapped with his time on the state payroll; he left the administration on April 20, 2014, to work on the governor’s successful re-election campaign, and rejoined it on Dec. 8, according to state officials.

Mr. Percoco, a longtime Cuomo loyalist who has been referred to as a brother by the governor, is also believed to be one of the focuses of a review ordered by Mr. Cuomo on Friday, shortly after news of the federal inquiry surfaced. Bart M. Schwartz, a former federal prosecutor, is to conduct the review; it involves the Buffalo Billion, a signature Cuomo administration program meant to revitalize that long-suffering city, and other elements of the governor’s nanotech initiative, on which he has hinged much of his upstate economic policy.

In his first public comments since the revelation of the federal investigation, the governor offered a qualified declaration of support of Mr. Percoco, who was in his small inner circle during his first five years in office.

“I know Joe Percoco for many years, and he is a good man,” Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, said in remarks to reporters after speaking on Monday evening at an Association for a Better New York dinner in Manhattan. “And I would be shocked if he did anything wrong.”

Mr. Cuomo said he had been aware that Mr. Percoco was considering taking on consulting work for other clients when he left the administration to consult for his re-election campaign. During the campaign and after Mr. Percoco formally rejoined the administration, however, Mr. Cuomo said that they never had a second conversation about which companies Mr. Percoco had consulted for, or even whether he had done so.

“You’re in the private sector; you can do whatever you want to do,” Mr. Cuomo said. “So there would be no reason to say, ‘Well, who did you represent?’”

COR, a major developer in Syracuse involved in several upstate nanotechnology and development projects receiving state funds, told The Post-Standard on Saturday that it had not paid any money to Mr. Percoco. On Monday, Maggie Truax, a spokeswoman for COR, repeated the statement: “COR Development did not hire, retain or pay Joe Percoco in any capacity and intends to fully cooperate with any investigation into this matter.”

Michael McGovern, a lawyer representing CHA Consulting, which also has business with the state, said: “We are cooperating fully with the U.S. attorney’s office and have been responding to their requests. Based on those discussions, it is our understanding that we are not a target of the investigation.”

A spokesman for Mr. McGovern would not say if someone had specifically told him or his client that CHA was not a target; the spokesman also would not say if CHA had been searched, and had no comment on Mr. Percoco’s disclosure that he had received consulting fees from CHA.

Both COR and CHA — founded as Clough, Harbour & Associates — have been significant donors to Mr. Cuomo. According to records with the State Board of Elections, Clough, Harbour & Associates contributed $195,000 to the Cuomo campaign between 2013 and 2015, including donations of $50,000 in late May 2014, about a month after Mr. Percoco began working for the campaign.

COR Development is also a major contributor; its president, Steven F. Aiello, donated $65,000 to Mr. Cuomo’s campaigns between 2011 and early 2016, while other Aiello family members and officials also donated tens of thousands of dollars.

Mr. Percoco’s lawyer, Barry A. Bohrer, did not respond on Monday to questions emailed to him about the payments.

As a part of the governor’s team when he first took office in 2011, Mr. Percoco has deep connections to Mr. Cuomo, with the former aide often acting as Mr. Cuomo’s political enforcer and occasional de facto bodyguard. In October, Mr. Cuomo’s office confirmed that Mr. Percoco — who was earning $175,828 a year — would leave the administration to pursue more lucrative opportunities outside Albany.

On Monday, Mr. Cuomo said that he was concerned about Mr. Percoco, whom he characterized as “distraught.” But he called for a full review of the facts before any judgment was made.

“Let’s know what it was,” he said. “You don’t know what happened. I don’t know what happened.”


