


The Utica City School District settled a lawsuit on Thursday over its treatment of young refugees, who, the suit charged, were being excluded from the city’s lone high school because of their age and because they did not speak English.

The lawsuit, filed last year on behalf of six refugees by the New York Civil Liberties Union and Legal Services of Central New York, claimed that Utica shunted refugees who were older than 16 into lesser alternatives to high school, like a G.E.D. program only for English-language learners. New York law provides the right to a free public education until age 21.

Similar allegations, that refugee children are being excluded from public schools, have been leveled at districts elsewhere around the state and across the country.

Utica, in central New York, has become a magnet in recent years for those escaping persecution in their home countries. Today, nearly one out of six city residents is a refugee, according to the Civil Liberties Union.

The agreement would require that the district contact all school-age students documented by the Mohawk Valley Resource Center for Refugees over the past four years who are not enrolled in high school to explain that they have a right to attend. The refugee center is the first stop for many immigrants entering the city.

It would also require that fliers outlining the right to attend high school and giving instructions on how to contact the district be distributed in five languages at more than a dozen places in Utica frequented by immigrants, including the Bosnian Islamic Association of Utica and the Golden Burma Asian Market.

The Utica City School District admitted no wrongdoing as part of the settlement. Donald R. Gerace, a lawyer for the system, said it was already doing many of the things outlined in the settlement.

The New York Civil Liberties Union said it expected a judge to approve the Utica settlement in a matter of days. A lawsuit filed against Utica last year by the New York State attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, which also said students were being funneled into alternative programs, is continuing.


