


A big game by DeMar DeRozan and an even bigger Raptors comeback gave Toronto a three-games-to-two lead in its first-round Eastern Conference playoff series Tuesday night.

DeRozan scored 34 points in a 102-99 victory over the visiting Indiana Pacers, who nearly sent the game into overtime, but Solomon Hill’s 3-pointer was ruled to have come after the buzzer.

“It’s all about patience,” DeRozan added. “You can’t get flustered, you can’t get frustrated. You’ve got to stay the course. That’s what we’re going to continue to do.”

The Raptors overcame 39 points from Paul George and a 13-point deficit in the fourth quarter, getting 14 points from Kyle Lowry. Bismack Biyombo had 10 points and 16 rebounds for the second-seeded Raptors, who can clinch the first seven-game playoff series victory in franchise history by beating the Pacers in Indiana on Friday night.

“If we don’t come in with the mentality like we had in the fourth quarter, it’s going to be a long game,” Raptors Coach Dwane Casey said.

The Pacers, who led by as many as 17 and never trailed through the first three quarters before coming unglued in the fourth. The Pacers made 4 of 15 shots and scored just 9 points in the period.

“It’s awful to have had a chance to win on the road, go up, 3-2, and come back home,” George said. “Once again, we failed to live up to that moment.”

HAWKS 110, CELTICS 83 Kent Bazemore fueled a stunning turnaround with three straight 3-pointers in the second quarter, and host Atlanta reclaimed the upper hand in their playoff series against Boston.

The Hawks are ahead by three games to two in the Eastern Conference series and positioned to close it out Thursday in Boston. If Game 7 is needed, it will be Saturday in Atlanta.

The game started out horribly for Atlanta, which could not make a shot and trailed by 29-19 midway through the second quarter. Then, suddenly, the Hawks looked like a different team.

Atlanta went on a 28-8 run to take control before halftime and blew the game open with a 42-point third quarter that gave them an 89-62 lead.

KERR IS COACH OF YEAR Steve Kerr, who led the Golden State Warriors to the best regular-season record in league history, is the N.B.A.’s coach of the year.

Kerr got 64 first-place votes from the panel of 130 news media members who regularly cover the league. Portland’s Terry Stotts was second in relatively close voting. San Antonio’s Gregg Popovich was third.


