


A private school in Texas has been sued for more than $3 million by the family of a black girl who accused three white classmates of wrapping a rope around her neck and dragging her to the ground during a school trip — leaving her with severe rope burns and a mark that looked like a necklace.

Lawyers for the girl, who is identified in court papers filed on Monday only as K.P., said evidence suggested that race played a role in the episode, which occurred during an overnight outing in April by students from the Live Oak Classical School in Waco. The girl was 12 at the time.

But while lawyers for the girl and the school agree that something happened to the student, they disagree about virtually everything else — whether what occurred had been a deliberate act, the severity of her injuries, who was to blame and if race was a motivation.

The girl’s mother, Sandy Rougely, said in an interview on Thursday that she thought her daughter was wearing a necklace when she first saw her after the trip. She said when she learned that the marks had been caused by a rope, “that just tore me into pieces.”

“It looked like somebody ripped my daughter’s neck off and stitched it back together,” Ms. Rougely said. The marks are still visible, she added.

Ms. Rougely said she took her daughter to an emergency room, where she was treated for severe rope burns, and the police were called.

Lawyers for both sides said the Blanco County Sheriff’s Office was investigating. Sheriff’s officials could not immediately be reached.

“I don’t think this happens a lot of places other than Waco, Tex.,” a lawyer for the girl, Levi G. McCathern II, said.

But David N. Deaconson, a lawyer for the school, said the plaintiffs’ lawyers were exploiting the hot-button issues of race and bullying. He said what had happened to the girl was purely an accident.

“Anyone can allege anything they want in a lawsuit no matter how inaccurate they may be,” he said. “That’s the case here.”

According to the lawsuit, the girl had transferred in 2014 from a public school to Live Oak, which has about 400 students in junior kindergarten through 12th grade and affirms the principles of Christianity. It is made up predominantly of white children, the suit says. Ms. Rougely said her daughter had a partial scholarship to attend the $7,000-a-year school.

The girl had been flourishing in fifth grade, the suit said, but in sixth grade, she reported that her classmates would not talk to her and physically bullied her. She was pushed to the ground, and a classmate kicked and shoved her when a teacher was not looking, court papers said. Ms. Rougely said school officials blamed her daughter, and when the mother met with administrators and counselors, she felt rebuffed.

It was against this backdrop that the girl and 21 other students went on the trip to a bucolic property near Johnson City, Tex., for an end-of-year school trip on April 28.

The lawsuit said the episode occurred at a swing: a disc-shape basket hanging from a tree with a separate rope that the children pulled to lift the swing higher. The girl said she had been pulling on the rope but then became tired and stood to the side. She then felt the rope around her neck, and she was “violently jerked” to the ground.

“When it got around my neck, no one helped me, so I had to pull it off by myself,” she said in an interview with The Dallas Morning News.

The lawsuit said three boys — including one who previously targeted the girl — were standing behind her. She said that her neck was “really hurting” afterward and that a chaperone put Vaseline on the wound and gave her Motrin.

Mr. McCathern, the girl’s lawyer, said of school administrators, “They froze and they didn’t tell anybody.” That officials did not notify the girl’s parents, he said, “reeks of race.”

Mr. Deaconson, the school’s lawyer, said he had investigated what happened and gave this account: As many as a dozen children were pulling on the rope to give the swing height, and when they let go, the rope whipped past the girl, hit her in the neck and left her with a rope burn.

He said that the girl’s lawyer sent emails on May 11 that said the plaintiffs would settle for $2.7 million and remain quiet about the case, and that if a settlement was not reached by 5 p.m. May 12, Mr. McCathern would begin releasing information to the news media to coincide with observances of the 100th anniversary of the last lynching in Waco, on May 15.

Mr. McCathern, however, called Mr. Deaconson’s description of what happened “cockamamie.” As for the emails, he said, he sent them because the school wanted details of the damages being sought in writing, so that they could be passed on to an insurer.

Lawrence L. Germer, the owner of the property where the students went on the trip and a defendant in the suit, said, “From any perspective, it’s sad because the little girl got hurt.” But he added that her injuries were the result of “terrible, bad luck” and that the lawsuit misrepresented what had happened.

Mr. Germer, who is also a lawyer and says his daughter is a dean at the Live Oak school, said that he had hosted Boy Scouts and church groups at his property before without incident.

The swing remains in place, he said.

Ms. Rougely, who said she had hoped the situation at the school would improve, had signed up her daughter for seventh grade. But after the trip, she withdrew her daughter and the girl completed her sixth-grade studies at home.


