


Mike Grajewski, a former sheet metal worker, owns a Chicago accent so delightfully thick that it veers toward “Saturday Night Live” parody.

A man who takes words like “this” and “that” and expels them as “dis,” “dat” and “dee udder,” Mr. Grajewski, 64, who is of Polish and Ukrainian heritage, seems an unlikely champion for Filipino cooking. So does his diner, Uncle Mike’s Place, in the city’s Ukrainian Village neighborhood.

But then you sit down at the counter, and a bowl of porridge appears before the menu is even offered. Cloudy with boiled rice, the dish is speckled with chopped scallions and fried garlic chips, slivers of chicken within, and topped with a half-moon of lemon. This is lugaw, and Uncle Mike’s Place has given a free bowl to each customer for nearly a decade.

Mr. Grajewski’s wife, Lucia, was born in the Philippines, and he decided that serving longaniza sausage, tocino pork and garlic fried rice would distinguish his diner from others. Lugaw would be his friendly hello.

Many countries can claim some variant of chicken rice soup as an elixir for what-ails-ya. The Philippines has lugaw (also called arroz caldo), a breakfast bowl with viscosity, a high comfort quotient and a flexibility with ingredients.

Lugaw resides in the family of congee, the catchall name for boiled rice porridge that has a version in almost every Asian nation. The accouterments stirred into the bowl are what give congee (called jook in Hong Kong, chao in Vietnam, bubur in Indonesia) its regional identities.

At its essence, Filipino lugaw requires ginger and chicken, said Marvin Gapultos, who wrote “The Adobo Road Cookbook” and runs the Filipino-food blog Burnt Lumpia. From there, it can be layered with classic Filipino flavors: calamansi, fish sauce, scallions, crispy garlic chips, slices of hard-boiled eggs. A breakfast staple, lugaw is also a fixture of the Christmas Eve celebration meal known as Noche Buena.

The version Mr. Grajewski serves is not big on frills, but it’s more than a one-note dish. It has the sharp bite of ginger and green onions, the crunch of fried garlic and a subtle tang from the lemon, where most congees would settle for savoriness.

Many of those versions are boiled only in water and rely on toppings to provide flavor. The undertow of chicken broth makes lugaw an attractive and easy starter congee.

Recipe: Lugaw


