


CAIRO — A prominent human rights lawyer was arrested here on Thursday, joining more than 1,200 people detained after protests against the transfer of two Red Sea islands to Saudi Arabia.

The lawyer, Malek Adly, was arrested on a raft of charges that included plotting to overthrow the state and spreading false news, his lawyer said. He is being held in pretrial detention for an initial period of 15 days, but under Egyptian law it could stretch to several years.

His arrest signaled how President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, evidently rattled by public opposition to the transfer of the two islands, Tiran and Sanafir, is determined to quell growing criticism from lawyers, journalists and activists.

Mr. Sisi, who only a year ago seemed unchallengeable, is grappling with a steep economic downturn and unusually vocal criticism. Demonstrations in the center of Cairo and other cities on April 15, though small by Egyptian standards, were the largest since 2013 when Mr. Sisi introduced a tough new law effectively outlawing public protest.

Mr. Sisi has blamed unspecified hostile forces for his woes, and in speeches he has urged Egyptians to give him their unwavering support. “The more you succeed, the more the forces of evil will look for new wiles and more schemes,” he told farmers at a wheat harvest event this week.

At the same time, security officials have undergirded his authority with mass arrests. The Front for the Defense of Egypt’s Protesters, a network of lawyers and civil society groups, said the security forces arrested 1,277 people after the April 15 protest and a second, smaller protest on April 27.

Hundreds were quickly released but at least 577 of them have been formally charged, said Ragia Omran, a lawyer with the protesters’ group. “After the protest law, a lot of people stepped away from the political scene,” she said. “This recent incident has given them a spark to go back to the protest movement.”

The government is also under fire from journalists after the police stormed the headquarters of the country’s only press union on Sunday and arrested two reporters. Days later, the arrests turned to embarrassment for the government when the Interior Ministry accidentally released its guidelines for combating negative publicity over the episode.

As the furor over the arrests mounted during the week, the union called for the resignation of the interior minister, Maj. Gen. Magdi Abdel-Ghaffar, and ordered newspapers to refrain from publishing his name. It has also called on newspapers to publish partially blacked-out front pages as a protest on Sunday.


