


THOUSAND OAKS, CALIF. — There is no way to spoil the end of HBO’s “All the Way.” The final scene is the same as it was in the 2014 Broadway play on which it’s based and the same as what actually happened in November 1964. Lyndon B. Johnson wins, and it’s a landslide.

A bungalow in the foothills an hour northwest of Hollywood stands in for the patio of Johnson’s Texas ranch. Here at dusk on a cool September evening, vans began dropping off the 120 extras from a base camp several miles away. The night’s scene was an intricate Steadicam shot that would travel 360 degrees around Bryan Cranston and Melissa Leo, who play President and Lady Bird Johnson.

“This is the night of the election,” said the director, Jay Roach, standing on set a few hours before the overnight shoot was to begin. “L.B.J. gets the news here with this vocal party of Democratic operatives and Hubert Humphrey and Lady Bird.”

“All the Way” is about the turbulent year from the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in November 1963 to President Johnson’s victory over Barry Goldwater. It has the same frontman and writer as the play: Mr. Cranston, who won a Tony Award for his Broadway performance, and Robert Schenkkan, who faced the challenge of adapting his play to the screen and staying true to history.

Mr. Schenkkan’s film is bigger and smaller in different ways than the Broadway production. The play condenses an event-filled year — the assassination, President Johnson’s address to a joint session Congress, months of cajoling Southern legislators over the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the F.B.I. director J. Edgar Hoover’s surveillance of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the 1964 election — into two and a half hours. In writing the film, Mr. Schenkkan was able unspool those events to locations he couldn’t present onstage while keeping the focus on Johnson’s deep-seeded insecurities, outsize personality and political philosophy that an ugly win is still a win.

“The great advantage of film is the ability to get close and to depict the internal life of a character,” Mr. Schenkkan said. “You can do that onstage, but film offers you so many more tools to get at that.”

One of the most obvious changes was the elimination of Johnson’s direct addresses to the audience. Mr. Cranston memorably delivered those monologues to powerful effect in the 1,450-seat Neil Simon Theater, but Mr. Schenkkan changed all but one of those to voice-over in his screenplay.

Johnson’s one direct address in the film — a speech about dragging the Democratic Party “into the light kickin’ and screamin’ every inch of the way” — comes just before he walks into the victory party at his ranch. In take after take over the course of a long night of shooting, Mr. Cranston’s turn to the camera and his growly, chilling delivery puts a charged punctuation mark on the end of the film.

Or, rather, it would have.

The producers, who included Mr. Roach, Mr. Cranston and Mr. Schenkkan, changed the scene in postproduction to a voice-over. “We shot it both ways and ultimately decided in the editing room, and when we tested it, that the direct address was too jarring,” Mr. Schenkkan said. “We wound up using that sequence with the monologue as a voice-over, and I think it’s very effective.”

Mr. Schenkkan did a significant amount of research before writing the play, and Mr. Roach did a lot of his own preparation, as he did for “Recount” and “Game Change” for HBO Films.

“There were a few things that we got to do from new research that weren’t available when Robert wrote the play,” Mr. Roach said. “We got more from [the Johnson aide] Walter Jenkins’s story through people that we talked to at the L.B.J. library. We talked to as many people as we could. We talked to Congressman John Lewis about Dr. Martin Luther King. We talked to people who had been in the White House.”

Everyone interviewed for this article was acutely aware of the criticism that the film “Selma” received in 2014 for its depiction of President Johnson as an antagonist to the civil rights movement and stressed their efforts to depict the events of “All the Way” with historical accuracy.

“The bottom line is that we’re really just trying to get it right,” said Len Amato, the president of HBO Films. “Often, the people who participated in these events are still around. We talk to them, we do our research, we vet our research.”

Mr. Schenkkan’s comments were more pointed: “Ava DuVernay is a talented filmmaker, and there was a lot to like about ‘Selma.’ She did a wonderful job with the relationship between Dr. King and Coretta and with the nuances and delicacy of handling that, but I did feel that the film was unfair in its portrayal of L.B.J. To suggest that he was not concerned with or didn’t care deeply about civil rights is simply not true, and I don’t think any historian would subscribe to that.”

Ms. DuVernay is in production and said via email that she was not available to be interviewed for this article but that she stood by her work. In the past, she has said, “I think everyone sees history through their own lens.”

President Johnson’s reputation is enjoying somewhat of a renaissance. The 50th anniversaries of the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965; the establishment of Medicare and Medicaid; and recent books, including Julian E. Zelizer’s “The Fierce Urgency of Now” and Randall B. Woods’s “Prisoners of Hope,” have put a focus on his legislative accomplishments.

The events of the Vietnam War and President Johnson’s bowing out of the 1968 election will have their own 50th anniversaries over the next few years. And Mr. Schenkkan’s play “The Great Society,” which covers those years and had its premiere last year at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival, is in the early stages of heading to Broadway, he said. That production could come in 2017 or 2018.

Mr. Cranston reflected on the figure he has played onstage and onscreen. “History has a tendency to develop a more clear picture over time,” he said, adding that the pain of Vietnam was so unbearable that it was for a time what you first associated with President Johnson. “Now that that pain has subsided — not forgotten, subsided — people are able to look at the entirety of his accomplishments.”


