


This summer’s science horror blockbuster is a remake: Return of the Leaping Electric Eel!

If you have any kind of phobia of slimy, snakelike creatures that can rise from the water and use their bodies like Tasers, this story — and the accompanying video — may not be for you.

The original tale (there was, alas, no video) dates to 1800 when the great explorer Alexander von Humboldt was in South America and enlisted local fishermen to catch some of these eels for the new (at the time) study of electricity.

He wrote that the men herded horses and mules into a shallow pond and let the eels attack by pressing themselves against the horses. The horses and mules tried to escape, but the fishermen kept them in the water until the eels used up their power. Two horses died, probably from falling and drowning.

Or so Humboldt said. Though the story was widely retold, no other report of this kind of fishing-with-horses phenomenon surfaced for more than 200 years, according to Kenneth Catania, a scientist with a passion for studying the eel species in question, electrophorus electricus.

In 2014, he reported on how the eels freeze their prey. They use rapid pulses of more than 600 volts generated by modified muscle cells and sent through the water. These volleys of shocks cause the muscles of prey to tense at once, stopping all movement. The eels’ bodies function like Tasers, Dr. Catania wrote.

But they can also project high-voltage pulses in the water in isolated couplets rather than full volleys for a different effect. The pairs of shocks don’t freeze the prey, but cause their bodies to twitch. That movement reveals the prey’s location, and then the eels send out a rapid volley to immobilize then swallow it.

Dr. Catania noticed another kind of behavior, however. He was using a metal-handled net — wearing rubber gloves — while working with eels in an aquarium, and the eels would fling themselves up the handle of the net, pressing themselves to the metal and generating rapid electric shocks.

This reminded him of von Humboldt’s tale, and he ran some experiments. A partly submerged metal rod, like the leg of a horse in the water, or a metal-handled net, or a hand in the water, can act as a conductor.

The eels attacked all of the above, pressing what you could generously call their chins against the invader, much as Humboldt described them doing with horses.

Except that they actually climbed up the offending limb or rod, raising their bodies almost completely out of the water, behavior not included in Humboldt’s description.

Dr. Catania noted that during the dry season, the pools in which the eels live become smaller and shallower, leaving them no escape. That’s also their breeding time.

He thinks that the leaping, high-voltage attack probably is defensive, and has nothing to do with hunting. The eels eat what they can swallow whole, and do not bite or chew. So, they couldn’t eat the kind of large mammal that might be willing to risk a shock from the eels to hunt them.

The eels’ usual hunting method of electrifying the water around them works if the prey is completely submerged. But if a land animal that was hunting the eels put only a paw in the water, it might be able to tolerate the electricity.

Dr. Catania included some appropriate scientific videos of his work with his report published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

But he also included the video above, which shows, first in suspenseful slow motion and then in heart-stopping real time, a hand entering the water as the eel responds to the apparent threat.

Spoiler alert!

The hand looks real, not least because Dr. Catania put a wedding ring on it for theatrical effect, but it isn’t, which becomes obvious when embedded LED lights flash, channeling the power of the eel’s assault.

He wanted his colleagues, to whom he showed the video, to believe at first that it was his hand, and think, if not shout out loud, “No! Don’t do it.”

Even so, Dr. Catania, who is thoroughly entranced with the extraordinary abilities of his subject, said, “I hope this doesn’t make people more fearful, because they are wonderful creatures and only shock people in self-defense.”


