


KISSIMMEE, Fla. — His hair was carefully styled, a chestnut wave atop his head, slicked to the left. His slender face looked pale under heavy makeup. A rosary with white beads and a gold crucifix threaded his hands, which rested on the white T-shirt bearing his image and name: Luis Omar Ocasio-Capo.

And suddenly, for those close to him, his death became real. So much so, in fact, that Alberto Capo, his uncle, could hardly bear to look. He raced out of the Funeraria San Juan here on Thursday afternoon, into the stifling air, and took refuge beneath a sprawling tree at the side of the low-slung building. He squatted close to the ground, dipped his head and wept.

“I didn’t believe it,” he said, sobbing. “I did not believe it at all, whatsoever. I see him in that box and it’s just totally different.”

Days after grappling with the shock, the anger, the politics, the questions about what could and could not have been done, the families and friends of the 49 people fatally shot in a gay nightclub in Orlando early Sunday now find themselves confronting the raw emotions of saying goodbye.

The long procession of funeral services, which started Wednesday, continued Thursday with send-offs for Mr. Ocasio-Capo, 20, and Eric Ivan Ortiz-Rivera, 36.

The ceremonies played out as short services in the funeral homes, followed by lengthy wakes.

During a roughly hourlong service on Thursday, Mr. Ocasio-Capo’s loved ones reminisced about a man who sought Hollywood stardom. He loved to dance and wanted to be a famous choreographer.

“He never left us,” Fernando Torres, another uncle, recalled telling the mourners. “Now he’s in heaven, shining like he always wanted to be, like a star.”

Mr. Ocasio-Capo’s open coffin sat in a dim room brightened by a pink lamp and large bouquets of flowers, some provided by Disney. Much of the funeral arrangements are being paid for through an online fund-raising page that has raised millions of dollars.

Several companies have contributed, including Target and airlines that have provided flights to immediate family members and are flying some of the deceased back to Puerto Rico. Starbucks, where Mr. Ocasio-Capo worked, provided coffee for Thursday’s gathering.

Mr. Ocasio-Capo moved to Orlando about two years ago from Cleveland to live with his mother, who was seeking a warmer climate, Mr. Capo said. Mr. Ocasio-Capo will be cremated and returned to his hometown, Ponce, P.R., Mr. Torres said, where his mother will sprinkle his ashes on La Guancha, an entertainment boardwalk that suited his festive personality.

“He always wanted to look real good,” said his cousin, Nayshka DeJesus-Ocasio.

She joked that although his hair looked pristine in the coffin, it was done with gel, rather than the way he usually did it: blow dry first, then straighten with a flat iron.

“If he was here, he would have been like, ‘No, boo, do it the right way. Do it Omar style,’” she said.

Mr. Ocasio-Capo had four brothers (each with the same first and last names but a different middle name) and one sister. Asked what he thought made his brother special, Luis Arberto Ocasio-Capo shook his head and put his hands over his eyes.

“I don’t know,” he said. “I mean, I’m just trying to process this.”

A group of motorcycle riders, some with American flags staked on their rides, posted themselves in front of the funeral home for protection as rumors swirled that anti-gay protesters would show up at the funerals. None did. Not here or at Funeraria San Juan’s other location in Kissimmee, where Mr. Ortiz-Rivera’s close relatives from Puerto Rico wore T-shirts with the smiling face of the man they had lost.

He was a joker and an artist, they said, a great friend with a creative streak that could not be suppressed.

“He liked to dance so much,” said his mother, Maria de los Angeles Rivera, who flew from Puerto Rico. “He liked any kind of music that let him move his body.”

To see him lying still, at only 36, in an open coffin in a small funeral home in a strip mall, brought great pain to many. For several hours on Thursday night, through sun and rain showers, dozens of friends and family members came to pay their respects. A priest said a small private prayer. Gov. Rick Scott visited, hugged Ms. de los Angeles and told her to call him if there was anything he could to do help.

Mr. Ortiz-Rivera “was special,” said Orlando Gonzalez Sr., 57, a cousin whose son was close with Mr. Ortiz-Rivera. “It’s hard to understand.”

Asked for a memory, he took out his cellphone and scrolled through a series of photos. One showed an elaborate nativity scene that Mr. Ortiz-Rivera, who worked at Party City and Sunglass Hut, had designed. Another showed a room of Mr. Gonzalez’s house that Mr. Ortiz-Rivera had painted with the colors and logos of Mr. Gonzalez’s favorite team, the Pittsburgh Steelers.

“He had a ton of imagination,” Mr. Gonzalez said. “He could make something out of nothing.”


