


BEIJING — A labor arbitration panel in the southwestern Chinese province of Guizhou ruled on Tuesday against a transgender man, the plaintiff and his lawyer said, in what has been described as the country’s first transgender job discrimination case.

The plaintiff, 28, who has been identified in Chinese state news media only as Mr. C and has declined to provide his real name out of privacy concerns, was born a woman, but has said he considered himself a man and has worn men’s clothes since college. He filed his case in March with a labor arbitration committee in Guiyang, the provincial capital, after the Ciming Health Checkup Center dismissed him last year after a brief probation period on the grounds that he dressed like a gay man and would strike customers as “unhealthy,” Mr. C quoted a human resources manager as saying in an earlier interview.

The panel ordered the company to pay Mr. C 402.30 renminbi, about $61, as Mr. C’s wage for his one-week probation period, and rejected his demand for an additional month’s pay, about 2,000 renminbi, as compensation and a written apology, Mr. C’s lawyer, Huang Sha, said in a telephone interview.

In a text message, Mr. C said he was disappointed by the ruling and would file a court case soon.

“Although I got the wage, but that wasn’t what I have wanted at all,” he said. “In the process of this case, I learned that discrimination against gender expression and transgender individuals is even more serious than I imagined. I hope the law wouldn’t keep supporting discrimination.”

Mr. Huang said that the panel accepted the company’s argument that it fired Mr. C because he was incompetent and said that the manager’s comments on Mr. C’s appearance, which Mr. C recorded, did not represent the company’s view.

“What I’m worried about the most is that the ruling has been a result of politics instead of arbitration,” Mr. Huang said.

A woman who answered the telephone Tuesday afternoon at the office of Jin Yuping, the Ciming Health Checkup Center’s human resources manager, said that Ms. Jin had left work and would not be available for comment.

The company, which had said at the first hearing, on April 11, that it had fired Mr. C because he was incompetent, accused Mr. C at the second hearing, on April 29, of missing work for a day and said that the decision to fire him was made jointly by the company’s shareholders, Mr. Huang said. Mr. C denied that he had been absent from his job.

In late April, after Mr. C’s case and three others — one involving a woman and two cases involving H.I.V.-positive men who said they faced job discrimination, 32 lawyers across 14 Chinese provinces formed an “anti-labor discrimination lawyers’ group” to provide legal assistance to individuals and companies.

Tingting Shen, a director of advocacy, research and policy at Asia Catalyst, an organization in New York that works with transgender people in China, expressed regret over the ruling on Tuesday, saying “China’s legal system failed to recognize the issue of discrimination against gender identity and gender expression in the workplace.”

Still, Ms. Shen, who is based in Beijing, called the case a “landmark,” adding that Mr. C’s courage would encourage more transgender people to stand up for their rights.


