


Dwyane Wade saved the Miami Heat in regulation, then finished off overtime with an emphatic dunk. Now this Eastern Conference semifinal series is even again.

Wade scored 30 points, Goran Dragic had a huge 3-point play with 22.4 seconds left in overtime and the Heat beat the visiting Toronto Raptors, 94-87, in Game 4 on Monday night.

Dragic and Joe Johnson each scored 15 for the Heat, who rallied from a 9-point deficit in the fourth quarter. Terrence Ross and Cory Joseph each scored 14 for Toronto, which shot 39 percent. Game 5 is in Toronto on Wednesday night.

Miami was down by 77-68 midway through the fourth and trailed by 79-72 when Kyle Lowry got the roll on a 15-footer with five minutes left.

That is when Wade went to work.

He scored the next 5 points for Miami, and eventually provided the equalizer with 12.6 seconds left, getting to the rim for a layup that knotted the game at 83. Joseph missed a jumper to end regulation, and the Raptors scored a mere 4 points in the extra session.

It was not an offensive showcase, by any measure. The first shot of the night was an air ball by DeMar DeRozan, which might have been a harbinger of what awaited both offenses. The best example? When Wade tried a scoop shot from the right side of the lane in overtime, the ball bounced on the back of the rim a few times and stayed there.

Kings Hire Joerger Two days after being jettisoned by the Memphis Grizzlies, Dave Joerger landed in Sacramento as the latest coach looking to end the Kings’ decade-long playoff drought. Joerger replaces George Karl and becomes the Kings’ ninth head coach since the team last went to the playoffs, in 2006 under Rick Adelman.

Joerger went 147-99 in three seasons with the Grizzlies and took them to the playoffs each year.

Spurs’ G.M. Honored R. C. Buford was named the N.B.A.’s executive of the year after deftly leading a retooling of the franchise’s aging front line, resulting in a team-record 67 victories in the regular season.

Last off-season, the Spurs signed LaMarcus Aldridge, the most coveted free agent on the market, and persuaded the veteran David West to turn down about $11 million more from the Indiana Pacers. Buford also locked in Kawhi Leonard with a maximum contract.

Around the N.B.A. Hornets point guard Kemba Walker had surgery on a torn meniscus in his left knee. Arkansas center Moses Kingsley withdrew from the N.B.A. draft.

A home run by the Miami Marlins’ J. T. Realmuto was negated when he passed his teammate Marcell Ozuna after rounding first base. Ozuna, who started on first base, misjudged the fly and retreated to first, allowing Realmuto to briefly trot past him.

Realmuto was credited with a single and an R.B.I. and ruled out at second base, while Ozuna scored to give Miami a 1-0 lead. The Marlins beat the Brewers, 4-1.

Around the Majors Moments after Bryce Harper was ejected from the dugout, pinch-hitter Clint Robinson hit a game-ending solo homer to give the Washington Nationals a 5-4 comeback victory over the Detroit Tigers. Los Angeles Angels shortstop Andrelton Simmons will require surgery after tearing a ligament in his left thumb while diving to stop a grounder during a weekend game.

The rookie Mattias Janmark ignited a three-goal first period and Kari Lehtonen made 35 saves for the Dallas Stars, who forced Game 7 in the Western Conference quarterfinal series with a 3-2 victory over the St. Louis Blues.

Vernon Fiddler and Jason Spezza also scored for Dallas, which reclaimed home ice for Wednesday’s decisive game despite getting outshot 37-14. But home ice has meant little this series, with the road team winning four of six.

In Nashville, Viktor Arvidsson scored 2 minutes 3 seconds into overtime as the Predators forced a deciding seventh game for their second straight series by beating the San Jose Sharks, 4-3.

Arvidsson jumped the puck between three Sharks and skated up the left side before throwing a backhand past goaltender Martin Jones. Colin Wilson, Ryan Johansen and Roman Josi also scored for Nashville.

United States Falls to Finland Finland handed the United States its second loss, 3-2, at the world ice hockey championship in St. Petersburg, Russia. The game featured two players being considered for the No. 1 pick in next month’s N.H.L. draft, Finland’s Patrik Laine and the United States’s Auston Matthews.

Around the N.H.L.The Florida Panthers signed defenseman Erik Gudbranson, the No. 3 overall pick in the 2010 draft, to a one-year contract. The University of North Dakota’s Drake Caggiula, who was named the most outstanding player at the Frozen Four, signed a two-year, entry-level contract with the Edmonton Oilers.

After Venus Williams beat CoCo Vandeweghe, 6-4, 6-3, in the first round of the Italian Open, she teamed up with her sister Serena but lost to Andreja Klepac and Katarina Srebotnik, 6-1, 7-5. Top-ranked Serena, a three-time Rome champion, had a first-round bye in singles.

It was the first time the sisters played doubles together since the 2014 United States Open. They are preparing for an attempt at a fourth Olympic gold medal in doubles this summer in Rio de Janeiro.

Jamie Vardy has given Leicester a huge boost by insisting he will stay with the Premier League champions next season. Vardy led Leicester’s miraculous charge to the title with 24 goals, and his blistering form prompted speculation he could be lured away by one of the league’s superpowers.

But with Leicester looking forward to competing in the Champions League and defending the title, Vardy, 29, is adamant he will ignore any big-money offers.

(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)


