


CAIRO — The Egyptian authorities expelled a French journalist this week, an unusually harsh step that highlighted the crackdown on press freedoms by the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Egyptian and French officials said on Wednesday.

The journalist, Rémy Pigaglio, had worked in Egypt for almost two years and had residency permits and media accreditation that allowed him to do so legally, according to an article in the French newspaper La Croix, one of several outlets that Mr. Pigaglio contributed to. Egyptian security agents detained him at the Cairo airport on Monday as he was returning to Egypt from a 10-day vacation. He was held for 30 hours before security agents deported him without giving a reason, La Croix reported.

Egypt’s authorities have arrested and prosecuted scores of Egyptian journalists over the last two years, but they have generally been reluctant to take action against foreign journalists, fearing unwanted international scrutiny. It is even more unusual for the government, with its emphasis on procedural rules, to take action against international correspondents who have been accredited to work in Egypt.

Mr. Pigaglio’s expulsion threatened to strain relations between France and Egypt at a time when the two countries are cooperating to locate the debris of EgyptAir Flight 804, which plunged into the Mediterranean last week during a flight from Paris to Cairo. Investigators are searching for the airplane’s cockpit data and voice recorders — the black boxes — to explain the flight’s descent soon after it crossed into Egyptian airspace.

During a visit with French lawmakers on Tuesday, Mr. Sisi reiterated the alliance between the two countries and “stressed the importance of increasing Egyptian-French efforts to reveal the circumstances” of the plane crash, according to a statement from his office.

France has been one of Egypt’s most prominent allies in recent months, even as the Egyptian government has been accused by other European countries of human rights violations. During a visit to Cairo by President François Hollande in April, Egypt signed a deal to buy $1 billion of French weapons, as well as agreeing to commercial agreements.

Amnesty International, a human rights organization, said in a statement that France and 12 other European countries should suspend weapons sales to Egypt. Otherwise, the group said, the European countries risk “complicity in a wave of unlawful killings, enforced disappearances and torture” that the group says have been carried out by the police and government forces.

On Wednesday, France’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said it “deeply regrets” Egypt’s decision to deport Mr. Pigaglio, and urged Mr. Sisi’s government to reconsider.

Ambassador Salah Abdel Sadek, the chairman of Egypt’s official State Information Service, confirmed Mr. Pigaglio’s deportation but said he had not been fully briefed on the reason for the journalist’s expulsion.

Mr. Pigaglio had been reporting for French news organizations for two years, including La Croix and RTL, a French radio station, according to a group of French correspondents in Egypt who wrote a letter protesting Mr. Pigaglio’s deportation.

“All French correspondents in Egypt find unacceptable the growing repression (surveillance, intimidation, deportation and detention) exerted by the authorities on Egyptian and foreign media alike,” the correspondents wrote.


