


Chief Sean Whent of the Oakland police has resigned amid an investigation of sexual misconduct allegations involving several officers. Chief Whent said in a statement late Thursday that he had worked to make the city safer by forging better ties with its diverse communities, and that the vast majority of Oakland officers shared that commitment. He gave no reason for stepping down. Chief Whent made his own decision about leaving the job, Mayor Libby Schaaf said Friday. The long troubled department is investigating allegations that several officers had sex with an underage girl. Two officers have resigned and two others remain on paid leave. Prosecutors are reviewing the Police Department’s initial investigation of the allegations, the mayor said. Ben H. Fairow, deputy police chief at the regional transit system, replaces Chief Whent. (REUTERS)

A Navy admiral will be sentenced in August after pleading guilty to lying to federal authorities investigating a $34 million fraud scheme involving a Malaysian contractor. The officer, Rear Adm. Robert Gilbeau, 55, becomes the highest-ranking military official to be taken down in the widespread scandal and is believed to be the first active-duty naval flag officer to be charged in federal court. At a hearing in San Diego on Thursday, Admiral Gilbeau stood before the judge with a small, fluffy white service dog and told the court that he was guilty as charged. He declined to comment after the hearing. The prosecutor, Mark Pletcher, said details would emerge at his sentencing hearing Aug. 26 when evidence would show Admiral Gilbeau’s “pervasive attempt to mislead the investigation.” The case involved the contractor Leonard Glenn Francis. His company, which has provided fuel, food and other services to Navy ships in Asia for two decades, overbilled the maritime branch by more than $34 million, according to court documents. He is awaiting sentencing. So far 14 people have been charged in the case — including 11 current or former Navy officials. Half of them have pleaded guilty. (AP)


