


Joe Paterno’s family can’t rest.

How can they, when his legacy continues to unravel almost five years after he was fired by Penn State in the wake of a child sexual abuse scandal involving one of his assistant coaches? How can they relax when Paterno’s reputation, once pristine, grows more threadbare with every development in the case?

They can’t. Not now, probably not ever. I get it. After all, that’s what family is for.

But that doesn’t make it any less uncomfortable when people defend Paterno again and again.

This week, a judge’s ruling in a civil case filed in Philadelphia revealed a claim that in 1976, a boy claimed to have told Paterno that Jerry Sandusky, then one of Penn State’s assistant coaches, had sexually abused him.

If the claim is true, that would be a quarter-century earlier than Paterno had said he first learned of Sandusky’s abuses — from another staff member in 2001. In that instance, Paterno said that he had reported the accusation against Sandusky to his superior, as required by law. But he did not say that he had ever followed up, or moved to cut Penn State’s ties with Sandusky, who is now serving what amounts to a life sentence in prison.

The latest development was a reminder that we will probably never know what Paterno, who died in 2012, knew of the abuse, or when he first learned of it.

On Twitter, Scott Paterno, one of Paterno’s sons, tore into the latest accusation against his father, writing: “It would be great if everyone waited to see the substance of the allegation before they assume it’s true. Because it’s not.”

In another Twitter message, he claimed the new story made no sense. Joe Paterno, the son said, would never have protected Sandusky, whom he labeled “an obscure assistant coach no one had yet heard of” in 1976, nor would he have left his own young children alone with him. “It’s bunk,” Scott Paterno wrote.

But is he right? Who can know for sure? Joe Paterno can’t tell us. What we do know is that Sandusky did terrible things to children, and even after hearing that Sandusky was discovered in the shower with a boy of about 10, Paterno didn’t call the police. He didn’t seek to have Sandusky barred from Penn State’s athletic facilities, or apparently even question his assistant about what he had been told, even though the two men had been colleagues for decades.

All that makes the Paterno family’s continuing efforts to defend the coach hard to watch.

It’s sad to see a family grapple so publicly with the death of their beloved patriarch, and to focus so many of their statements on his legacy and on what the history books will say about him. The harsh truth is that there will be a long chapter in those books about the Sandusky scandal, and about Paterno’s role — or lack of one — in preventing it.

One of Paterno’s sons — the former Penn State assistant coach Jay Paterno — wrote a book titled, “Paterno Legacy: Enduring Lessons From the Life and Death of My Father.” In it, he writes, “I resented the people who’d done this to my father, to our university and to me.”

Paterno’s wife, Sue, wrote an email to the Penn State lettermen last fall, just before the fourth anniversary of her husband’s forced departure from his storied program. In it, she blamed the university’s board of trustees, the N.C.A.A. and what she called the “flawed” report compiled by the former F.B.I. director Louis Freeh for taking “a terrible tragedy” and making it worse.

“I write to you now to let you know that we have not given up on setting the record straight — and we never will,” Sue Paterno wrote. “Four years of secrecy are enough. The victims, their families, each of you and everyone who cares about Penn State deserve the truth.”

That sentiment is what makes the whole of the Paterno family’s efforts, while understandable from their point of view, seem tone deaf. How can it be appropriate for any of the Paternos, or anyone from Penn State, to speak for the victims or their families, given all that we know?

It’s one thing to rage about the loss of a father, or about a respected coach’s reputation blackened by someone else’s actions. It’s another to forget that sensitivity for the victims and their families should be the key here.

Unfortunately, it often seems the Paternos and their supporters are interested only in writing and talking and tweeting about Paterno’s mistreatment; about the N.C.A.A.’s overreach in its investigation; about how Paterno’s statue should return to its former home outside Beaver Stadium.

It’s yet another tragedy that the victims have to keep hearing all this. For them, this case already will live on and on, in their minds and memories, for the remainder of their lives.

So, no, they can’t rest either.


