


By 1973, the Italianate painting studio that Thomas Cole had designed for himself in Catskill was in decrepit condition. His heirs sold it, and the new owners demolished it. The building was constructed in 1846 as part of a family enclave called Cedar Grove, a property that included the artist’s still-standing Federal style home, as well as an adjacent storage barn that housed his former studio.

This year, the Thomas Cole National Historic Site celebrates the construction of Cole’s New Studio, a replica built upon the footprint of the original building, and according to the artist’s architectural plan. The space’s inaugural exhibition, “Thomas Cole: The Artist as Architect,” through Oct. 30, is a pleasant surprise.

Those familiar with Cole, an English émigré who is considered to be a founder of the Hudson River School, America’s first indigenous art movement, know of his passion for capturing the identity of the newborn nation in his paintings. But his ambition to influence its architectural character, the subject of this exhibit, is less known. In this gem of a show, the curator and catalog author Annette Blaugrund provides an architectural perspective to Cole’s story that is particularly fitting for the New Studio’s debut.

Two drawings of Cole’s original studio — one by Frederic Edwin Church (1848), another by Jasper Francis Cropsey (1850) — illustrate both Cole’s architectural talents and the restoration team’s meticulous attention to his specifications: an entrance portico, stately floor-to-ceiling paned windows, a low hip roof and decorative bargeboard with acorn-shaped finials. Mindful that the interior would function as a gallery, not a work space, restorers painted the walls an iron-ore red and added moldings to tame the building’s sweeping 18-foot ceilings. These touches lend an intimacy to the expansive, light-drenched space, making it more inviting to art viewers

Thomas Cole, born in 1801, immigrated to the United States from Lancashire at age 17. A textile print designer, wood engraver and mostly self-taught painter, he was, by 1825, a rising star in New York City, known for composing expansive vistas of untrammeled wilderness. Paintings like “Sunrise in the Catskills” (1826), with its details of blasted trees, craggy rocks and dark mountains swathed in luminous light, were based on sketches he made during his sojourns to the Hudson River Valley.

Inspired by Cole, two generations of artists — Albert Bierstadt and Sanford Robinson Gifford among them — set their sights beyond the Hudson and crossed the continent to document the new nation’s natural wonders, and the Hudson River School was born. The movement vividly resonated with Cole’s contemporaries, the Transcendentalist writers William Cullen Bryant and Ralph Waldo Emerson.

Cole indicates an early architectural interest in “View of Monte Video, the Seat of Daniel Wadsworth, Esq.” (1828), which portrays Wadsworth’s estate set within an expansive wooded scene. But his focus on architecture sharpened following several trips to Europe. “A View Near Tivoli” (1832) details the crumbling remains of the Emperor Nero’s Roman aqueduct, a symbol of past glorious empires and the decadence that felled them.

For “View of Florence From San Miniato” (1837), Cole shifted his eye from close-up to a panorama of the Italian city, capturing the eclectic architectural forms — domes, spires, arches and steeple — that Cole was already using in works like “The Course of Empire: Consummation” (circa 1835-36).

“The Architect’s Dream” (1840), composed like an operatic stage set, epitomizes Cole’s architectonic imagination. Billowing tieback curtains unfurl to reveal a figure — presumably Cole — reclining on a pedestal, architectural plans in hand, books piled high. He gazes toward a surreal cityscape, an architectural hodgepodge of Egyptian New Kingdom structures, Greek temples and a Gothic Cathedral. It’s an over-the-top fantasy, to be sure, but one that conveys the breadth of Cole’s architectural knowledge as well as his ambition to construct a defining aesthetic for a new republic. Given a fresh start, might the United States reinvent the grandeur of lost empires, and get civilization right? If nothing else, Cole hoped to raise the level of American taste.

Cole also sought to become an architect for hire, listing himself as such in New York City directories from 1834 to 1836. In 1838 he entered a competition and won a prize for his design for the Ohio Statehouse. The building, completed in 1861 with many intervening revisions, drew significantly from Cole’s original plans, which included a long, horizontal, Doric colonnaded structure, flanked by recessed windows and capped by a unique drum wearing a low saucer dome.

Also on view are Cole’s designs for the Washington Monument; plans for the Gothic Revival-style St. Luke’s Episcopal Church in Catskill, built in 1841 and later torn down; and studies for a villa he hoped to build as a new family home. But Cole died in 1848, at age 47.

One wonders, had Cole lived longer, how much farther from the Hudson River School his vision might have roamed.


