


Send your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.

While in a coffee shop, I was hit on by a man who was about 20 years older than me. He gave me a compliment and handed me a note with his name and email address. I wasn’t excited about it, but I didn’t feel creeped out or threatened.

As one does, I searched for him on Google. It turns out he’s an accomplished figure in the industry in which I work, and in which I am trying to cement myself more firmly. He’s been doing his job for a long time, and I would guess he has a lot of wisdom to impart, not to mention connections.

I’m definitely not interested in him romantically or sexually (I’m in love with someone else). I am, however, interested in a professional connection.

But is that a bad idea because it’s not why he approached me? Or because he’s expressed a presumably romantic or sexual interest and it will therefore be forever uncomfortable to have any other kind of relationship? Or even because the kind of guy who would do that in the first place is someone you want to stay away from? Our field is small, so I don’t want to burn any bridges.

ANONYMOUS

My suspicion is that converting this into a useful career contact is a long shot. I suppose neither one of us really knows what this man is like, so it’s possible that I’m being unfair. But I think you should proceed with caution.

You’ve already covered most of the arguments for not following up. The only one I’d add is that he might conclude that an anecdote about him hitting on a significantly younger woman in a coffee shop is now circulating through his tightknit work community.

But the best argument for any sort of follow-up may be that you’ll end up running into him professionally at some point anyway, and that could be awkward for you both. Even with that as a rationale, I’d make any communication clear and concise. Be direct about being in a relationship — or however you want to put it — in a manner that removes all ambiguity about the romantic angle. Then matter-of-factly note that you later realized you’re in the same line of work. (Take care in explaining that: Googling him might be interpreted as evidence that you’re more interested than you claim. Is it plausible that his name rang a bell and that’s why you searched it?)

Finally, rather than pivoting to a networking or mentoring request, maybe say something more neutral: Small world — maybe your paths will cross professionally at some point.

He should get the message that you’re not looking for a date but that you respect his role in your mutual line of work (and you’re not out there gossiping about him). Leave it up to him to decide whether to offer some sort of shoptalk opportunity.

This may not lead anywhere. But it should at least clear the air, and keep expectations modest — on both sides. Maybe he’ll turn out to be a thoughtful and generous guy who has no problem separating the personal and the professional when he’s not busy handing out his email to attractive strangers. But you’re probably better off if you’re not counting on that outcome.

A while ago, I had a job interview scheduled via Skype. Ten minutes before it was supposed to happen, the interviewer canceled. We arranged another appointment. This time my interviewer simply never showed up. I emailed him afterward, but he did not respond.

I contacted his immediate superior (with whom I’d had brief email contact previously), politely suggesting an alternative interview situation. This person told me to try to set up a new time with the same interviewer. I threw up my hands. It’s difficult to envision things going well after you’ve brought an interviewer’s shortcomings up to his boss.

How would one handle this with delicate but determined self-advocacy?

ANNE, AUSTIN, TEX.

One the most surprising things about the Workologist inbox is the number of anecdotes involving disappearing employers: recruiters who vanish, interviewers who fail to materialize at the scheduled time, etc.

The most practical response is to get over it and move on. That’s probably not very satisfying, but consider the most likely explanations for such behavior. One is that the position will be filled internally, but there’s some kind of pro forma process that involves talking to theoretical outside candidates. The other is that this company simply does not have its organizational act together.

You’ve already tried the best and most difficult response: finding a workaround that indicates your continued interest and that some deeper problem is gumming up the works. Maybe pushing back with that superior could yield something productive. If you accept that you have nothing to lose here, you could state diplomatically yet firmly that you’re open to an interviewer contacting you if there is serious interest — but your time is too valuable to keep chasing someone who doesn’t show up for appointments. You may never hear back, but at least you sent the right message.

Employers, stories like this show that if your basic hiring procedures are sloppy, it affects your reputation — maybe more than you realize. Keep appointments, and follow up even with rejected candidates. It’s not that hard.


