


On Tuesday, America’s two foremost ballet companies, playing at adjacent theaters at Lincoln Center, are reviving two of the world’s finest full-length ballet love stories: American Ballet Theater is dancing Frederick Ashton’s “La Fille Mal Gardée” and New York City Ballet is performing George Balanchine’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.” These masterpieces were made in the early 1960s by the two superlative creators of 20th-century ballet, both born in 1904. Here, by way of introduction, are two YouTube clips that show their contrasting ways of depicting love.

The story for “La Fille Mal Gardée” (1960) goes back to pre-Christian comedy: The heroine’s mother wants her daughter to marry the wrong man, but cannot prevail against the evident rightness of young love. A comedy (the mother, Widow Simone, is played by a man) set in the farming countryside, it shows the rural community that knows and celebrates the lovers.

Lise, the heroine, and her beloved, Colas, have no fewer than five love scenes, each showing differently their mutual devotion; the final one is part of their wedding. Here, though, is their first scene.

Its charm lies in the way it shows these children growing up. They dance with ribbons, a leitmotif throughout the ballet. At first they merely play at being horse and driver; the ribbons are harness, reins and whip. But Ashton shows you the moment (1:26 to 1:29) when they put away childish things.

Colas, who has had the ribbon in his mouth like the horse’s bit, stops, turns around and stands, suddenly locked in Lise’s eyes; and the dynamics and tempo change, melting in lyrical tenderness. It’s often played smilingly, as here by Marianela Nuñez and Carlos Acosta (a wonderful “Fille” partnership). But I’ve also seen it played with doting seriousness — at one 1977 performance (Galina Samsova and Desmond Kelly), this was the first moment in the performing arts that flooded my eyes with tears. (I had seen the tragic emotion of “Romeo and Juliet” and “Swan Lake” without crying; and I already knew “Fille.” But the heartfelt simplicity of this lovers’ gaze melted me.)

A note in Ferdinand Hérold’s score says “Love is upon them”: Absolutely. Their ribbon games turn into poetry; in one of the most beloved moments in ballet, they make a cat’s cradle together — a child’s game, but one that now expresses all the intricacy of their love.

Balanchine’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” (1962) has three pairs of human lovers (Hermia and Lysander, Helena and Demetrius, Hippolyta and Theseus) and one married pair of fairy monarchs (Titania and Oberon). The plot of Act I shows the confusions between them. (One pas de deux is for Titania with Bottom the weaver when he is transformed into an ass.)

But it is in Act II that Balanchine demonstrates the ideal of Romantic love: two anonymous dancers at the wedding divertissement dance to Mendelssohn’s string symphony No. 9. The music is high, sweet and tender; the dance seems timeless, and suspended. The opposite of the “Pyramus and Thisbe” amateur-dramatic show that Shakespeare provides at this stage in the drama, it floats above the ballet’s plot like the moon.

The pas de deux is about the chivalry whereby a man showcases a woman and joins her in perfect harmony. This exquisite performance — the clip shows the beginning, middle and end of the duet spliced together almost seamlessly — is by the City Ballet principals Tiler Peck and Jared Angle at last year’s Vail International Dance Festival in Colorado.

Though there are jumps, balances and lifts, there are no highlights; the choreography’s greatest beauty lies in the silken legato flow that threads together a wide range of steps. The most miraculous passage is the ending (1:26 to 1:54), a long arc in which the dancers seem to move in slow motion beyond gravity. Mr. Angle lets Ms. Peck fall one way in his arms, next raises her so that she opens up into a soft arabesque (1:44), and then gently tips her so that she falls back the other way, turns to face him and subsides in a crescent. He supports her with his right hand and frames her with his left. (Ms. Peck dances it on Tuesday and Friday at City Ballet, with Mr. Angle’s brother Tyler; Jared Angle dances it on Saturday evening with Abi Stafford.)

In these two great works — as often elsewhere — Ashton and Balanchine show why, for many people, the male-female pas de deux is where ballet reaches its most moving. Ballet has never surpassed these peaks.


