


Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.

1. This is how ‘gun free zones’ kill.

After taking out the door security, there was no one left in the club that could shoot back.

— Spencer in Georgia, reacting to an article about the shooting at a gay club in Orlando, which left 49 people dead.

This comment received more than 40 reader responses.

2. A question for Republicans: Why do you pass laws to stop non-existent bathroom attacks and almost non-existent voter fraud but you do nothing to act against gun violence when hundreds die every week?

Of course you do send your prayers. How nice!

— David Buchmueller in El Paso.

This comment received more than 2,500 reader recommendations.

3. As an older LGBT American living in Orlando, you are our youth. We love you and will do anything we can to help and protect you. Stay strong.

— Fred Will Wallace on The Times’s Facebook page.

This comment received more than 130 likes.

4. The terrorist hated gay men and so does ISIS. That attack in Orlando was brutality at its worst in our homeland.

We have to protect ourselves by any means necessary because they will kill us by any means available. The desire by the left to be politically correct at the expense of our people is dangerous.

Donald Trump and people like me are tolerant but we are realists.

To us, Americans come first whether black, white, Latino, Muslim, Jew, gay or straight.

Stop being politically correct and put your country and family first.

— Reagan in Boonton, N.J., reacting to an article about Donald Trump blaming Muslims in the Orlando shooting.

This comment received more than 180 reader recommendations.

5. The source of too many problems, killings, domestic violence, is not limited to a race, or a religion, a political persuasion as some want to say.

The common denominator that we seem to avoid is that source seems to stem from aggrieved, angry men with a gun.

The angry man with a gun is a much broader problem that exists across the races, religion, politics. Until we recognize that we are avoiding the elephant in the room.

— Marie Gunnerson in Boston, reacting to an article about the correlation between domestic violence and mass murder. The ex-wife of the gunman in Orlando said he beat her severely during their marriage.

This comment received more than 220 reader recommendations.

6. I was at Disney World two months ago staying at the Polynesian resort right next door to the Grand Floridian.

My 5- and 2-year-olds loved the beach there. They made sand castles, ran up and down the shore, pulled sea grass from the water and stuck their toes into the lagoon with the dozens of other children doing the same thing.

There was a “no swimming” sign. I thought it must be because the water wasn’t clean enough and/or there was no on duty lifeguard.

It never occurred to me until reading this story that I needed to be concerned about alligators. I am not from Florida and it never occurred to me.

If I had been alerted to the danger by Disney, I would not have let my kids play on the shore. I am sure these parents would not have either.

— LW in California, reacting to an article about a 2-year-old Nebraska boy, Lane Graves, who was drowned by an alligator while playing at a Disney World resort.

This comment received more than 1,200 reader recommendations.

7. The politics of assassination exist because they work.

Anyone who lived through the sixties in America knows that.

Kill the leaders and no one is left to inspire the people, and then the dogma of fear-mongering takes over and the right is in power for decades.

I celebrate the courage of our political leaders in times like this.

— Hugh Massengill, of Eugene, Ore., reacting to an article about Jo Cox, a member of British Parliament who was fatally shot Thursday after meeting with her constituents.

8. I am a lawyer in practice for 25 years. Make no mistake, the American Bar Association created this mess.

The A.B.A. has certified too many law schools and has placed ridiculous standards on these schools, thus driving up tuition to back-breaking levels.

Now law schools are admitting unqualified students to keep their numbers up.

It is scary to observe many of these recent graduates.

They are poorly read, lack critical thinking skills and are loosely educated.

You better believe there are dozens — yes, dozens — of law schools that need to close.

— Peter in Albany, reacting to an article about the glut of recent law-school graduates who, having racked up hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt, cannot find jobs in their field.

9. I grew up in the 50s when there were no plus sizes for a fat girl.

From the age of 10, not a day didn’t go by without a parent or sibling admonishing me to stop eating, look in the mirror, or ask if I wasn’t ashamed to go out looking like “that.”

The cruelty and ridicule could have been expected from other kids, but my own family? My mother once took me shopping for clothes when the salesgirl blurted out, “You’re the most beautiful child I’ve ever seen.” (Yes, I had “such a pretty face, why don’t you slim down?”)

My mother laughingly scolded the salesgirl, telling her not to give me ideas about being beautiful since I was so fat.

The ensuing years were a constant frenzy to lose weight by artificial means, diet pills, diet camps, diet candy to expand your stomach, support groups, Atkins, etc. I have probably lost and regained a million pounds in the last 55 years.

I’m obese, with extremely low self-esteem.

So yes, I’m scarred.

— Joanna in Edison, N.J., reacting to an article about harmful comments parents make about their children’s weight, and the recommendation in a study that the topic be avoided.

10. During a very painful time, I starting walking my friends’ dogs and taking on dog-sitting jobs.

I wasn’t in a position to have my own dog, but even just this contact kept me going while my life slowly pieced back together.

We humans are awfully lucky to have dogs and cats.

— Sarah D. in Monague, Mass., reacting to a Modern Love column about learning to love via pet ownership.


