


Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.

1. If there is ever a litmus test to be president, can’t it be [that] you cannot have ever asked a stranger [if] your 16-year-old daughter is hot?

— Melissa in Los Angeles, reacting to an article about Donald J. Trump’s treatment of women during his decades in the public eye.

This comment received more than 1,000 reader recommendations.

2. As a builder, the article shows Mr. Trump helped to empower women in the 1980s in the New York construction industry. He should be applauded for this. He gave real power to talented women who demonstrated their ability in a male-dominated world.

If all leaders could have promoted women like Mr. Trump did in the construction industry in the 1980s, America would have been better for it.

— Sigmar in Boston.

3. When you’ve been constantly repeating the need for a “revolution” and it still hasn’t happened, you are probably not the one who will be leading it.

— John in Winter Park, Fla., reacting to an article about Senator Bernie Sanders seeking to damage Hillary Clinton’s standing late in the Democratic race.

This comment received more than 2,000 reader recommendations.

4. This is supposed to be an election, not a coronation: the voters of California deserve to have their voices heard before all is said and done.

Those of us who believe in things like single-payer health care, aggressive action on climate change, and real attempts to level the playing field for working people in America deserve to have a seat at the table in presidential elections.

Bernie has been right to call out what have been fairly obvious, anti-democratic biases against his campaign by the Democratic Party since the start of the race.

— Richard Hull in New York.

This comment received over 1,500 reader recommendations.

5. Saint Peter is watching Morley Safer drive up “to ask God a few questions.”

— Marc Sylvestre on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about the death of the longtime “60 Minutes” anchor.

6. Yes, of course, there are safety risks when employees are high ON THE JOB.

That’s not really the point — the point is, that because someone smokes pot when they come home from work, they can’t get hired — but when someone drinks a six-pack after work, it’s not a problem.

What somebody did two weeks ago shouldn’t make them ineligible to get a job, and what someone does after work on their own time, shouldn’t make them ineligible to keep it.

— Lindsay in West Virginia, reacting to an article about employers nationwide who say they are having a difficult time finding workers who can pass a pre-hiring drug test.

This comment received more than 420 reader recommendations.

7. While the Levys’ story is inspiring and hopeful, and underlines all we don’t know about disease and health, it misses the more common outcome of terminal disease, which is death.

Had Andrew died as everyone expected, their decision to stop treatment would still have been right for their family, as ours was for ours.

— Mama Rachel, M.D., in Solana Beach, Calif., reacting to a New York Times Magazine article about a family who made the decision to cease treatment for their child’s rare cancer.

8. For all those who say “not again...!” about a slavery narrative, I believe that this part of our history must never be forgotten. Ever. People say that about Holocaust stories, too. Never forget. Never repeat.

— MH in Washington, D.C., reacting to an article about a revival of the popular 1970s mini-series “Roots,” set to air simultaneously on three cable networks over the Memorial Day weekend.

9. This is a disaster. Our local Savannah team is named Savannah Bananas as a result of an online contest. Mascot is named Split.

— Nancy Cyr on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about the Class AA Binghamton Mets baseball team turning to the Internet for a new name.

10. Equal pay is only warranted when equal work and experience is involved. Is she as regarded as Kevin Spacey? Does she get as much air time? Their genders are irrelevant.

— Amanda Kuehnle on The Times’s Facebook page, reacting to an article about the actress Robin Wright negotiating compensation equal to that of her “House of Cards” co-star Kevin Spacey.

This comment received over 860 likes.


