


A performance by the embattled pop star Kesha at the Billboard Music Awards on Sunday, May 22, has been called off as the legal and public relations fight between the singer and her longtime producer Dr. Luke rages on.

Dick Clark Productions, which is overseeing the awards show, said in a statement on Tuesday that Dr. Luke’s Kemosabe Records, to which Kesha remains signed, rescinded its approval of the appearance after anonymous media reports last week that said Kesha’s performance would directly reference her dispute with the producer.

Kesha has accused Dr. Luke of sexually and emotionally abusing her during the course of their professional relationship and is suing him to get out of her contracts with his music companies. Dr. Luke has denied all of her claims, most of which have so far been rejected by a New York judge; the producer has also sued Kesha for defamation and breach of contract.

In a statement posted to Instagram late Tuesday, Kesha said she had planned to sing a cover of Bob Dylan’s “It Ain’t Me, Babe” at the show and did not intend to address Dr. Luke.

“I was never going to use a picture of him, speak of him or allude to my legal situation in any way,” she wrote. (The broadcast of Kesha’s live performances fall under her contracts with the producer.)

A representative for Kesha said that on Monday the singer had provided Dr. Luke with a written assurance that she would not mention or allude to the producer or her legal situation during the performance or on the red carpet.

Representatives for Dr. Luke declined to comment.

Kesha’s performance was to be introduced by Lena Dunham, said a spokeswoman for the actress. Ms. Dunham has previously expressed support for the singer, writing in her feminist newsletter, Lenny: “The public outcry about Kesha’s case has been truly heartening: the swell of shock and indignation from fans and fellow performers alike.”

For months, Kesha’s cause has been championed on social media using the #FREEKESHA hashtag, drawing support from some of the most prominent women in music, including Adele, Lady Gaga and Taylor Swift.

After years of professional dormancy, Kesha has returned to the stage and studio. Earlier this month, in an appearance not subject to Dr. Luke’s approval, she performed a cover of Lady Gaga’s “Til It Happens to You,” a song about sexual assault, dedicating it to “every man, woman, child and animal that has ever been abused.” And in April, Kesha released her first track since 2013 — a collaboration with the electronic producer Zedd that Dr. Luke and Kemosabe signed off on.


