


LONDON — Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, castigated Boris Johnson on Tuesday for “absurd arguments” and “political amnesia” after the former London mayor, a leader of the campaign against British membership in the European Union, equated the bloc with Hitler.

In an interview with The Sunday Telegraph, Mr. Johnson, a Conservative whose mayoral term came to an end this month, said that European history had been marked by repeated and ill-fated attempts to unify the Continent, in efforts to recreate the “golden age” of the Romans.

“Napoleon, Hitler, various people tried this out, and it ends tragically,” he said. “The E.U. is an attempt to do this by different methods.”

The comments, just weeks before Britain holds a referendum, on June 23, on whether to leave the European Union, highlighted the increasing vociferousness of the debate.

Conservative and Labour supporters of British membership in the bloc criticized the remarks as incendiary and offensive, even as some campaigning for Britain’s exit jumped to Mr. Johnson’s defense.

Adding his voice to the criticism, Mr. Tusk, a former prime minister of Poland, said he could not remain silent as the European Union, the world’s biggest trading bloc, was compared to the former dictator.

Emphasizing that he did not wish to lecture and that it was up to voters in Britain to decide for themselves, Mr. Tusk said at a news conference in Copenhagen that he nevertheless felt compelled to speak out.

“When I hear the E.U. being compared to the plans and projects of Adolf Hitler, I cannot remain silent,” he said. “Such absurd arguments should be completely ignored if they had not been formulated by one of the most influential politicians in the ruling party.”

“Boris Johnson crossed the boundaries of rational discourse, demonstrating political amnesia,” he continued, adding that, while Mr. Johnson’s view may be shared by many Europeans, there was no excuse for what he called a “dangerous blackout.”

The comments from Mr. Johnson and Mr. Tusk laid bare one of the central fissures in the debate over whether Britain should remain in the European Union.

While critics of the European Union like Mr. Johnson say they view the bloc as a reckless superstate that is undermining Britain’s influence and sovereignty, supporters of membership view it as an essential anchor that has brought peace and stability to Europe after decades of conflict and war.

After the interview, the Labour official who speaks for the party on foreign affairs, Hilary Benn, said those who advocate a British exit from the bloc, often referred to as “Brexit,” had lost the economic argument and were also losing their moral compass.

“After the horror of the Second World War, the E.U. helped to bring an end to centuries of conflict in Europe,” he said. “For Boris Johnson to make this comparison is both offensive and desperate.”

Mr. Johnson, who remains a member of Parliament, has stood by his comments, which have also drawn support.

Jacob Rees-Mogg, a Conservative lawmaker who supports a British exit, was quoted by the BBC as saying that Mr. Johnson’s remarks were “absolutely true.”

While Mr. Johnson has said that Hitler and Napoleon wanted to create a single European power using force, he said, “the E.U. is trying to do it by stealth.”


