


Last summer, the great mass of the American political punditocracy scoffed at the possibility that Donald Trump would win a single state in the Republican race. Now he’s all but certain to win the party’s presidential nomination.

Also last summer, British bookmakers took bets at 5,000-to-1 odds that Leicester City, a historically weak English soccer team, would win the Premier League. The team has won, and it has reportedly cost the bookmakers 25 million pounds, or $36 million, the biggest loss on a single sports event in British gambling history.

Anyone can simply be unlucky. But there are systematic biases and errors our puny human brains tend to make repeatedly when we try to predict the future, some of which are evident in the biggest political and sports upsets of 2016.

It’s fine and well to make fun of people (including myself) who were sure that Mr. Trump had no shot at the presidency, or who offered overly generous odds to try to bring bettors into a betting parlor. It’s even possible that those projections were correct — that these outcomes really were highly unlikely but that randomness prevailed (even a million-to-one lottery ticket might hit).

But it seems more likely that the odds were misjudged all along. And if that’s the case, understanding the mental errors behind those mistakes can be valuable for anyone who cares about forecasting and prediction (which, one way or another, is pretty much all of us).

The biggest is recency bias, a concept most often evoked in financial markets by people who study the intersection of psychology and finance. We tend to overweight recent history in thinking about the likelihood that something might happen. People who have experienced a recent stock market crash are more likely to think another one is imminent, for example.

That helps explain why, even when Mr. Trump entered the presidential race and rocketed to the top of the Republican polls, so many smart people remained so skeptical of the idea that he would win.

Remember the 2012 Republican race, when a string of improbable candidates like Michele Bachmann and Herman Cain briefly rose to the top of the polls, while Mitt Romney, who had the support of establishment donors, made a slow-and-steady path to the nomination. You could say the same of the 2004 Democratic race, when anti-establishment Howard Dean led in the polls for months but John Kerry won the nomination.

But it hasn’t always been that way. Wendell Willkie is the closest counterexample. Amid a divided Republican party in 1940, Willkie, a businessman who had never held public office and had been a Democrat just a year prior, emerged from nowhere to claim the Republican nomination. Barry Goldwater in 1964 was opposed by many Republican party leaders.

And in English soccer, in the last 21 years, only four teams with big budgets and reputations — Chelsea, Manchester City, Manchester United and Arsenal — had won. But before that, there are examples of teams emerging to challenge the elite, like the 1995 champion Blackburn Rovers.

Knowing history in other words — and not just recent history — can help a person avoid assuming that the way it has been recently is the way it always is.

A related lesson is to be aware of just how small the sample is when looking to the past for guidance. American presidential elections take place every four years, and English soccer championships once a year. A basic lesson of sampling is that one should have less confidence in the results the smaller the sample is, which in turn implies great modesty about what might happen in the future.

But it’s not just that the sample is small. It’s also that in these games — running a presidential campaign or managing a soccer team — the rules are always changing. This is a version of what Nassim Nicholas Taleb, author of “The Black Swan,” called the “ludic fallacy.” (It’s derived from Latin for “game.”) The idea is that it is a mistake to apply the kind of simplified statistical model of a game to the circumstances of real life.

In a game, the rules are fixed. If you spin a roulette wheel, or even send a baseball team out on the field to face an opponent, there are a set range of things that can happen, and it’s relatively straightforward to figure out the probability of each.

But in politics, external events, media coverage, public opinion and the strategies of opponents — even the number of opponents — are constantly in flux in unpredictable ways. That means something that happened in a past year may or may not be good evidence for what will happen this year.

And in sports, while an individual matchup might follow the usual rules of probability, a team’s long-term strategy doesn’t. A smart owner or manager can come up with new insights on how best to select and deploy talent that gives an edge over rest of the league that simple odds won’t predict. Here’s one analysis of the techniques Leicester City’s owners and managers used to prevail.

Another example is the National Basketball Association’s Golden State Warriors, who in the 2011-2012 season won only about third of their games. They had been to the playoffs once in 18 years. Relying more on 3-point shots than the rest of the league — with the help of Stephen Curry, of course — they rose to be last year’s champion and set the record for regular-season wins this season.

Prediction is hard. Complex systems with constantly changing rules, a limited historical sample to analyze and our own psychological biases and short historical memories make it harder. And that has rarely been more evident than in the worlds of politics and sports in 2016.


