


NORRISTOWN, Pa. — Prosecutors in Pennsylvania on Tuesday crossed their final hurdle to bring Bill Cosby to trial on charges that he drugged and sexually assaulted a woman he once mentored, with a judge ruling that enough evidence existed for the case to move forward.

While Mr. Cosby is fighting numerous civil cases involving similar accusations, the ruling, by Judge Elizabeth A. McHugh, means that the once popular entertainer must face at least one of his accusers in a criminal proceeding, likely to take place here this year.

“This case will move forward,” Judge McHugh told the crowded courtroom in Montgomery County Courthouse.

The hearing, while routine, attracted widespread attention, with more than 100 members of the news media and public packed into the courtroom, and 50 others were seated in an overflow room nearby.

The day came more than 11 years after Andrea Constand, a former Temple University staff member, took her complaint to the police about what she said was a drugging and sexual assault at Mr. Cosby’s home near here in early 2004.

Although a former district attorney in Montgomery County chose not to pursue charges in 2005, current prosecutors reopened the investigation last year after many other women came forward with similar accusations against Mr. Cosby. The move also followed the publication last summer of parts of a deposition Mr. Cosby gave in a 2005 civil suit brought by Ms. Constand, in which he admitted obtaining quaaludes as part of his efforts to have sex with other women.

Mr. Cosby, 78, who sat flanked by his three lawyers throughout the hearing, stood at the end and said, “Thank you.”

The judge wished him luck.

The ruling, a formal requirement for criminal trials in Pennsylvania, ended a first round of legal skirmishing that began as soon as the charges were filed five months ago.

Mr. Cosby’s lawyers had argued that the former district attorney promised never to prosecute Mr. Cosby as a way to induce him to testify in the civil suit brought by Ms. Constand, which was ultimately settled. But at a hearing in February, a trial court judge dismissed the defense’s challenges.

Now a second round of potential legal battles begins. After the ruling, Mr. Cosby waived a formal arraignment, which means he automatically enters a plea of not guilty. The case now moves back up to the state’s trial court level, where another judge will be assigned. That judge will set a trial date.

Mr. Cosby’s lawyers are then likely to battle to suppress evidence including Mr. Cosby’s deposition from the 2005 civil case because confidentiality was part of the settlement.

Mr. Cosby is also expected to fight any attempt to introduce evidence from other women who have come forward.

A taste of that battle came on Tuesday during the contentious three-and-a-half-hour hearing.

Brian J. McMonagle, Mr. Cosby’s lawyer who led the cross-examination, attacked the prosecution for relying on a statement Ms. Constand gave to the police in 2005 rather than calling her as a witness.

Also entered as evidence was a 2005 statement Mr. Cosby gave to the police during an interview in New York, parts of which were read by the police chief of Cheltenham Township, where Mr. Cosby’s home is. Mr. Cosby described giving Ms. Constand the same over the counter medication he typically took to relax. He said she had taken it willingly.

Mr. McMonagle said that using the report of a 12-year-old event that Ms. Constand did not tell the police about until a year later was denying Mr. Cosby the right to confront his accuser. “This citizen deserves more,” he said.

The defense team noted the fact that Ms. Constand had made revisions to her police statement, and cited earlier encounters between her and Mr. Cosby, including one when Mr. Cosby touched her thigh. Despite this, Ms. Constand still returned to his home, they said.

Afterward, at a news conference outside the courthouse, District Attorney Kevin R. Steele said that for Tuesday’s hearing, the prosecution had only to show there was enough evidence to establish a case that a crime had been committed and that the defendant was connected to it.

“We are here because we want to seek the truth,” Mr. Steele said.

Mr. Cosby was helped from the courtroom by his aides without speaking further. His lawyers got into a separate car and, when asked how Mr. Cosby was feeling, said nothing beyond one of them offering a thumbs-up.


