


A scrap between two well-known soccer players in a vital Premier League game is certain to make news. But when a manager later bizarrely raises the specter of “sex masochism,” interest in the incident will undoubtedly explode.

While tangling during a corner kick in the first half on Sunday, defender Robert Huth of Leicester pulled on the expansive hair of Marouane Fellaini. In response, Fellaini drove an elbow into Huth’s neck area.

The referee missed the episode, and neither player was punished, although both could still face three-match bans for violent conduct.

But the incident wound up being overshadowed by Manchester United Manager Louis van Gaal’s memorable postgame reaction, which roamed into areas not normally discussed in sports interviews.

Asked about the scrap, van Gaal told an interviewer, Manish Bhasin, of BBC Sport, “When I grab your hair now, you’ll react also.”

Punctuating the remark by gesturing to pull Bhasin’s hair, he said, “Because it’s not in the books that somebody has to grab with the hair and pull it behind.”

“Only in sex masochism. Then it is allowed,” he added, lifting the session into the pantheon of extraordinary interviews.

Bhasin thanked van Gaal for not pulling his hair, but perhaps prudently elected not to follow up on van Gaal’s surprise remark.

Mirth ensued in Britain over the comment.

The game ended in a draw, 1-1. The result delayed Leicester’s clinching of the Premier League title and also was a blow to Manchester United’s hopes for a top-four finish and a Champions League place. It now stands 4 points behind Manchester City for the vital fourth place with a game in hand.

Van Gaal has made statements that went into strange territory before. In February, he was asked, “Is that the challenge then, to match the same sort of desire the other team has?”

He replied: “Yeah, you are right, and your word is fantastic. ‘Desire.’ ‘Hungry.’ And a lot of times I use the word ‘horny’ to my players.” After laughter from reporters, he turned to midfielder Juan Mata, to his right, and asked, “Is true?” Mata nodded yes, with an uncomfortable grin on his face.

Van Gaal walked out of a news conference after five minutes at Christmastime last year after being deluged with questions about his job status. His unusual farewell line was, “Enjoy the wine and a mince pie.” Last summer, he referred to his player Chris Smalling as “Mike.”

English is not the native language of the Dutchman van Gaal, who has also coached in the Netherlands, Spain and Germany. The language gap can certainly go a long way to explain his unusual locutions. Those who mocked Pedro Martinez for saying the Yankees were his “daddies” often did not account for his efforts to use a modern idiom in a language not his own.

There may not be many more van Gaalisms being issued from Manchester. Widespread speculation is that he will be fired after two seasons, probably to be replaced by José Mourinho, the former two-time Chelsea manager.

Still, van Gaal remains defiant. After Sunday’s game, Leicester Manager Claudio Ranieri told van Gaal in a friendly way that he was “doing a fantastic job.” Van Gaal replied, “I am.”


