


INTERNATIONAL

An article on March 12 about China’s struggle to come up with legislation imposing tighter controls on foreign nongovernmental organizations two years after it was first proposed misstated the timing of a visit to the United States by China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, during which he spoke about NGOs in China. The visit took place in February, not last year. The error was corrected online shortly after the article was published, but editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

NATIONAL

An article on May 9 about widespread claims of sex abuse at private schools omitted some context involving the St. George’s head of school, Eric F. Peterson. While Mr. Peterson has faced calls for his resignation amid criticism that he responded too slowly to the abuse claims, the incidents occurred before he came to the school in 2004.

•

An Upshot article on Tuesday about the expense of instituting a single-payer health care system in the United States misstated the average salary of general practitioner doctors in Britain, which has a single-payer system. The average salary is around $130,000, not between $81,000 and $122,000.

•

An Associated Press article on May 9 about the distribution of $1.5 million to family members of the nine shooting victims of Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C., misidentified the state where Clementa C. Pinckney, the church pastor and a victim, was a state senator. It is South Carolina, not North Carolina.

NEW YORK

A caption last Wednesday with eight photographs of places other than the Stonewall Inn that were important to the gay rights movement in New York City misstated the given name of a man who was killed in 1980 at one of the establishments, the Ramrod Bar. He was Jorg Wenz, not Joig. (His name was also rendered incorrectly in articles in 1980 and in 1981 — as Jiog, Joig and as “George Wentz.”)

•

An article in some editions on May 7 about the Campaign for One New York, a group with ties to Mayor Bill de Blasio, saying it would refuse to comply with a subpoena issued by a New York State ethics panel misspelled the given name of one of the group’s lawyers. He is Laurence D. Laufer, not Lawrence.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Matthew Lee, a blogger whose access to the United Nations has been curtailed, misidentified the type of press pass he is now using. It is a four-month “nonresident correspondent” pass, not a daily pass.

BUSINESS DAY

Because of an editing error, the DealBook column on Tuesday, about stock market uncertainties in a presidential election year, misstated the date of the 2016 presidential election. It will be Nov. 8, not Nov. 3.

•

An article on Friday about the University of Minnesota Law School’s decision not to lower its admission standards despite declining enrollment misstated the number of law schools in Minnesota. There are three, not four.

THE ARTS

An article on May 7 about art auctions in New York City the following week and guaranteed minimum prices to sellers, using information from Sotheby’s, misstated the number of lots that house guaranteed with minimum prices, using solely its own finances, at the auctions in May 2015, and the total low estimate for those lots. It was five lots at $61 million, not eight with a total low estimate of $80.2 million.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the art collector and dealer Adam Lindemann’s transactions at and views of the auctions in New York City last week referred incorrectly to Alfred H. Barr Jr., who was once the owner of a Calder work being sold at Sotheby’s. He was the founding director of the Museum of Modern Art, not the founder.

SCIENCE TIMES

The Raw Data column on Tuesday, about the Science of Consciousness conference in Tucson, misstated the surname of the composer of “The Planets.” He is Gustav Holst, not Holt.

FOOD

A brief report in the Off the Menu column last Wednesday about Tapestry, a new Indian restaurant at 60 Greenwich Street in Manhattan, misstated the nearest cross street. It is Perry Street, not 11th Street.

OBITUARIES

An obituary last Wednesday about Ramón Carlín, a sailboat skipper who won the first Whitbread Round the World Race, misstated the surname of a sailor who was lost during that race. He was Bernie Hosking, not Hocking.

OPINION

An Op-Ed article on May 10 about the regulation of “dark money” in political campaigns misstated the nature of two-thirds of anonymous, third-party spending during this election cycle. It is political advertising spending, not overall spending.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


