


The confession came in bits and pieces over two and a half hours. The suspect had been interrogated most of the night. Now a prosecutor and two detectives were asking him questions again with a video camera rolling.

At first, the suspect, Conrado Juárez, said he had helped his sister only dispose of the little girl, folding her tiny body into a cooler and leaving it in a Manhattan park. He said he had found the child lying lifeless in his sister’s hallway. Later he admitted he had molested the girl, but said the abuse had happened days before she died.

The prosecutor, Melissa Mourges, challenged Mr. Juárez. How had Anjélica Castillo, the toddler known as Baby Hope, died? “We just want to find out what happened so Angie can rest and we can answer the mystery,” Ms. Mourges said. “We know the sex and the death happened close together.”

A few minutes later, two hours into his videotaped statement and 16 hours after he was taken into custody, Mr. Juárez said he had suffocated the girl, covering her mouth with a pillow while trying to have sex with her on a bed in a spare room at his sister’s apartment in Queens.

“She was suffocated with a pillow,” Mr. Juárez said, speaking in Spanish, as he did throughout.

“How did you do it?” he was asked by a Spanish-speaking detective who served as an interpreter.

“I covered her mouth,” he replied.

The videotaped confession was recorded on Oct. 12, 2013, at the Cold Case Squad’s office in Brooklyn. It was played publicly for the first time on Wednesday, at a hearing in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to determine whether the statements could be admitted as evidence at Mr. Juárez’s trial.

Mr. Juárez’s arrest ended a 22-year search for the killer of a girl no one reported missing and whose identity had been a mystery for two decades. She was found in July 1991, stuffed in a cooler left in some woods near the Dyckman Street exit of the Henry Hudson Parkway. Investigators named her Baby Hope.

Mr. Juárez, 55, a restaurant worker, was taken into custody and charged with murder a few days after the police, acting on a tip, identified the dead girl as Anjélica Castillo and began interviewing her family members. Mr. Juárez was a cousin of Anjelica’s, who was 4 and lived with Mr. Juárez’s two sisters in Queens.

The prosecution’s case against him rests entirely on statements Mr. Juárez made to the police and prosecutors. There is no scientific evidence tying him to the crime, prosecutors have said.

Mr. Juárez’s lawyer, Michael J. Croce, has argued his confession was coerced and should not be allowed into evidence. Detectives took him into custody around 4:30 p.m. on Oct. 11, 2013, near the restaurant where he worked in the West Village and interviewed him until just before 5 a.m. the next day. That interview was not recorded and the only accounting of it was a memorandum prepared by the detectives, based on their notes, days later, Mr. Croce said.

That memorandum was read in court on Tuesday by a detective, Evelin Gutierrez. It said Mr. Juárez denied killing Anjélica and blamed his sister Balvina Juárez Ramirez, who is now dead but at the time was the girl’s guardian. Mr. Juárez told detectives he had helped his sister dispose of the body. He also admitted he had had sexual intercourse with the girl, but said he did not know how she had died, Detective Gutierrez said.

Two hours later, Ms. Mourges, the prosecutor, arrived and began a new interview of Mr. Juárez, along with the lead investigator, Detective Robert Dewhurst, and Detective Carlos Vazquez, who acted as a Spanish interpreter.

At times Mr. Juárez seemed confused. He initially said he did not want to talk, but when he was shown the waiver to his right to silence that he had signed earlier in the morning, he agreed to answer questions.

He said he was living in the Bronx in 1991 but would sometimes stay at his sisters’ apartment in Queens on the weekends because it was closer to his job at the time. One night, he said, he got in late after work, while the house slept, and encountered Anjélica as she was coming out of the bathroom. He was drunk, he said.

Mr. Juárez said he led the girl to a spare bedroom and molested her, but denied he had intercourse with her. Told his story was unbelievable, he said he had smothered her with a throw pillow. “You had the pillow in your hand and pushed it to her face?” Ms. Mourges asked. “In my hand, yes,” he answered.

Then he said he woke his sister and asked for help. It was her idea, he said, to put the child’s body in a cooler and leave it in a distant park. He described folding Anjélica in half, putting her in a garbage bag and tying it with a cord. He said they put cans of sodas on top of her. Then they took a cab to Upper Manhattan, carried the cooler into some woods off the Henry Hudson Parkway, and left it, he said.

“I went home and I felt very sad,” he said.

Mr. Juárez said the police discovered the cooler about two weeks later. Other members of his family knew the dead child was Anjélica as soon as they saw police sketches on television, but said nothing to the authorities. The family told people that Anjélica had been sent to live with relatives in Mexico.

When the interview ended, Mr. Juárez thanked the prosecutor. “When you keep things inside and then you release them, it makes a big difference,” he said.

Mr. Croce, his lawyer, said the confession was false. Mr. Juárez told the prosecutor what he thought she wanted to hear after detectives leaned on him through the night to say he had killed Anjélica, Mr. Croce said. “When he realizes he’s not giving them what they want,” he added, “he tries to give them what they are looking for.”


