


Jennifer Hudson’s departure from the cast of “The Color Purple” prompted a drop in the show’s box office grosses last week.

The show, a much-praised production that is a strong contender for the Tony Award for best musical revival, had seen its revenues increase after Ms. Hudson, an Oscar-winner for “Dreamgirls,” announced her planned departure — rising to $967,352 in her final week as audiences flocked for a last chance to see her in the supporting role of Shug Avery, a nightclub singer.

That number then dove to $604,552 during the week that ended May 15, according to figures released on Monday by The Broadway League.

A show’s grosses often drop after the departure of a celebrity, and the show’s producers are hopeful of a rebound as word-of-mouth builds about the strong performance of Ms. Hudson’s replacement, Heather Headley, a Tony and Grammy winning-performer known for her roles in “The Lion King” and “Aida.”

Last week was a bit of a down week for Broadway — overall the 36 shows grossed $26.3 million, down from $27.6 million earned by 37 shows the previous week. But the dip could be explained by the reduced schedule of two high-grossing shows, “Paramour” and “The Lion King,” so that their theaters could be used for the television upfronts, and by a subsidized matinee of “Hamilton” for students at New York City public high schools.

“Bright Star,” the new musical featuring music by Steve Martin and Edie Brickell, had its strongest week, earning $477,058, apparently the result of a Tony nomination for best new musical. The other non-”Hamilton” contenders in that category, “School of Rock,” “Shuffle Along, or the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All that Followed,” and “Waitress,” were all up slightly. (They have all been doing well at the box office, unlike “Bright Star,” which has been struggling.)

The Broadway season, which ends this week, appears poised to set another record: Cumulative grosses are up 0.6 percent over last season, and attendance is up 1.6 percent.


