


“Swan Lake” rejoined American Ballet Theater’s repertory this week — and, with it, the most notorious step in the ballet repertory: the 32 fouetté turns! Odile, the dangerous but seductive antiheroine, returns to the stage near the climax of her grand pas de deux with the hero, Prince Siegfried, and revolves on one leg 32 times. Her raised leg, never touching the ground, provides most of the propulsion. After the first 16 bars, the music changes character; she carries on regardless.

“Fouetté” is French for “whipped,” and it’s that whiplash motion of the raised leg that gives the turn its brilliance. That quick up-and-down of the ballerina’s foot sometimes sends her traveling downstage; but the ideal sequence of 32 fouettés never travels from a single spot.

Men can do fouetté turns, too. But part of the excitement with a ballerina is that she does most of the turn on point. She comes off point as her raised “working” leg shoots out to the front and sweeps around to the side; but then, as she rises up onto point, that working leg whips inward.

Here’s a YouTube clip of a ballet student taking us through the mechanics of a fouetté turn:

And here’s video of Pacific Northwest Ballet principal Carrie Imler, one of the America’s strongest ballet technicians, rehearsing the “Swan Lake” sequence:

You may also want to consult 32fouettes.com, where you can see an anonymous dancer in practice costume doing 32 at the top, with an ensuing analysis and history of the step. Go to YouTube and hunt “Swan Lake fouettés” and, though individual performances come and go, you’ll usually find several examples of Odile’s grand pas de deux with the fouettés near the end.

Gillian Murphy dances the role on Monday and Friday. On Wednesday afternoon,Ms. Murphy returns to the role on Monday and Friday. On Wednesday afternoon, Misty Copeland, new to it last year, dances it again. How will her fouettés be? Last year she did only the first 16. How much does this matter? My chief reservation was not about her turns but about her interpretation, which was too contained and clichéd. But amid the general brouhaha about Ms. Copeland, for many people one issue alone mattered: those damned fouettés.

The 32 fouettés aren’t the hardest assignment in ballet, but they’re the most exposed example of virtuoso technique. If something goes wrong, the audience will see. I remember one ballerina falling flat on her backside around turn No. 14 and several who stopped (or switched to another step) after about 20. There used to be great ballerinas who avoided them: Anna Pavlova, Alexandra Danilova, Alicia Markova, Maya Plisetskaya did alternative steps. Margot Fonteyn, who delivered them for over 34 years in “Swan Lake,” laughs in her memoirs about how an American critic described her wandering path during them as her “Cook’s tours of the stage.”

For some of us, 32 fouetté turns — which became famous in the 1890s — have long been a bore. The rare artist is not the one who does the most turns but the one who makes them interesting and, above all, musical.

Just now, however, they’re part of a noteworthy moment in our perception of the sexes in ballet. A recent Twitter discussion proposed, with good reason, that it’s male rather than female dancers who post selfies of themselves doing difficult steps. Some American women have been changing the pattern, though, showing themselves in — you guessed it — fouetté turns.

On Saturday, Ms. Murphy posted, for her 53,400 Instagram followers, a short video of herself doing them in practice costume onstage at the Metropolitan Opera House amid the décor for Ballet Theater’s “The Golden Cockerel.” She titles this “Black Swan in the Golden Cockerel’s nest”; listen with the sound up and you hear a piano playing the famous music that accompanies the fouettés in “Swan Lake.”

More remarkably, on April 26, the New York City Ballet principal Ashley Bouder (40,700 Instagram followers) posted footage of herself doing fouettés when 39½ weeks pregnant. (It has been viewed over 200,000 times. Ms. Bouder is back in class, but has not yet posted any postbaby fouettés.) On April 24 Isabella Boylston (143,000), another American Ballet Theater principal, generously posted video of eight other women at the company doing fouetté turns (and other bravura steps) simultaneously in a rehearsal for her huntress companions in Frederick Ashton’s “Sylvia”: two of the hashtags she gave the clip were #SQUADGOALS and #WOMENPOWER.

Of these examples, it’s Ms. Murphy’s fouettés that are worth arguing about. Technically, they’re phenomenal — in the Instagram rehearsal, she does the first fouetté after a triple-pirouette preparation and, after several doubles along the way, she ends her 11th with no fewer than four revolutions on point. But all those embellishments take her way off the music.

Ms. Copeland, by contrast, was always musical in the 16 fouettés she did during her first Metropolitan Opera House performance of Odile last year. She’s a shrewd dancer; she quickly did another step — very rhythmically — to fill in the space of the other 16. For me, she’ll have made progress if she deepens the role in terms of music-drama; for many, her fouettés are all that count.


