


SANDESTIN, Fla. — Years ago, when he first began chasing down high school football players in small towns across the Midwest, Bret Bielema quickly learned one undeniable fact in the seedy and often controversial world of recruiting.

You recruit your own problems.

“Hasn’t changed since I first started in the 1990s,” Bielema said.

He was a 20-something assistant at Iowa then, and now he is a 40-something head coach at Arkansas. The only difference in recruiting over the last two decades is the rules that apply. For one high-powered conference, change is coming and it’s not just in football. It will apply to all sports and to both men and women.

This week, the Southeastern Conference is expected to approve rules that would prohibit players with a history of sexual assault, stalking or interpersonal violence from transfering to any of its 14 member universities.

“We set the standard last year, and others have followed,” SEC Commissioner Greg Sankey said Tuesday after the first day of the league’s annual spring meetings. “Our policies will become more clear this week. We’ll see if they continue to follow.”

Last year the SEC approved a rule that prohibited its members from accepting transfers — any player that was not a freshman signee — who had been disciplined by previous schools for “serious misconduct.” The definition of serious misconduct was “sexual assault, domestic violence or other forms of sexual violence.”

Now, on the heels of the sexual assault revelations at Baylor and how it mishandled off-field allegations of sexual violence, college sport’s most powerful conference wants to expand last year’s language to cover a majority of offenses involving violence and stalking.

The conference will also have a standardized set of questions that each member university must use before accepting a transfer. If a player’s behavior results in an expullsion from another university, that player will not be accepted into the SEC.

One big difference this spring from last year is that there is unanimous agreement on the changes from the conference’s 14 head football coaches.

“It’s a good thing, a smart thing,” Florida Coach Jim McElwain said. “It’s the right thing to do.”

Georgia introduced the “serious misconduct” legislation at last year’s SEC spring meetings after Jonathan Taylor was signed by Alabama a year after he was charged with sexual assault and kicked off Georgia’s football team. Less than two months after signing with the Tide, Taylor was kicked off the team after he was accused of domestic violence.

Later that summer, Sankey built a committee, one that included student-athletes, to expand on the concept of “serious misconduct” for transfers.

Some coaches in the conference — including South Carolina’s Will Muschamp — would like to see the misconduct rule extended to freshmen. Muschamp has a history of dealing with poor player behavior. When he replaced Urban Meyer at Florida in 2011, the program was littered with cases of bad player behavior and drug problems. Thirty players had been arrested in the previous six years.

He cleaned up the program, changed the culture and won 11 games in his second season, but was fired after his fourth season when he could not consistently produce a winning team.

When asked if he would support stronger player behavior rules — including an initial clearinghouse much like the N.C.A.A.’s academic clearinghouse for all incoming freshmen — Muschamp said, “That’s going to be a lot of work for somebody, but I wouldn’t be against it.”

Alabama Coach Nick Saban said his team used a list of 13 specific questions his assistant coaches must ask those closely involved with a potential student-athlete.

But many of those closest to players — guidance counselors, principals, parents, coaches — want the players to earn scholarships. “You don’t know if you’re getting the truth,” Saban said. “We do the best we can. It’s not the perfect circumstances.”

A few months after Taylor was kicked off the Alabama team, he resurfaced at Southeastern Louisiana, where he is on the 2016 roster.

“There are always second chances out there,” Muschamp said.


