


My longtime partner has severe emphysema and will probably die soon. He has four siblings who live in our small town. Over the years, he has been closer with two of them, but they are all ignoring him now. My partner says he doesn’t mind; in fact, he says he prefers it. But his face lights up whenever any of them is mentioned. I don’t want or need their help taking care of him, though I got along fine with them when we were in touch. Should I do anything here? (A year ago, I asked his sister to call more often. She said she would, but she hasn’t.)

ANONYMOUS

Trying to engineer specific outcomes among adult siblings (otherwise known as meddling) is not usually effective. Or as my brother used to say to my mother when she attempted such magic: “Hey, look at your nose! It’s in my shizzle again.” No one likes to feel pushed or manipulated. But I spy a few openings here.

The biggest (and worst reasoned) is that I feel terrible for your difficulties. More legitimately, it is helpful that there doesn’t seem to have been a rupture between the siblings, only a gradual drift. Also good: You aren’t asking them to pitch in to the endless and emotionally grueling work that sick rooms often entail. (And we aren’t going to judge them for failing to volunteer.)

Call one of the friendlier sibs and ask him or her to come for coffee or drinks at a specific date and time. (Less room for blowing you off than with an open invitation.) You can handle the negotiations without letting your partner know how much arm-twisting is required. If it’s a flat “no,” he never needs to hear about it. But if the date goes reasonably well, start on the other siblings. A little meddling to make your partner’s final days happier seems like a minor lapse to me.

A friend and I were riding our bikes in Central Park. I saw a man and his young daughter on one bicycle with a bike seat. The daughter was wearing a helmet; the father was not. So I shouted, “If you fall and break your neck, who is going to help your daughter?” I rode on. My friend said it wasn’t my business. What say you?

RAYNA

When people yell criticisms at me (even well-founded ones), the shock and awe allow me to dismiss their excellent points and focus on their aggression (and my dislike for them) instead. But if those same folks flagged me down with a polite “Excuse me,” and made their same good point in a softer way, I would accept it more easily. I suspect I am not alone in this. (As for your friend, remind her that this is New York City; everything is everyone’s business.)

We are giving a wedding and face a dilemma about inviting a couple who are in the process of divorcing. We care for both of them deeply and certainly don’t want to take sides. But they have many issues that are not yet resolved, and their state may be acrimonious enough that one will refuse to attend if the other does. How should we work our way through this?

ANONYMOUS

Assuming the couple are separated and possibly not speaking (much) with each other, the kindest thing for you to do is to make sure that each knows the other has been invited. That way, they can discuss their attendance (if they are speaking) or send regrets if they are not (and don’t want to run the risk of bumping into each other at the chocolate fountain). I would call them. The warmth of your voice may help.

Also noteworthy: Is their relationship so acrimonious that it may spill over onto innocent guests and mar your lovely day? (Don’t be too quick to dismiss this. No one makes a scene quite like a couple on the rocks.) In which case, choosing one — or taking sides, as you put it — may be the lesser evil.

I am a pastor, which is a wonderful profession. It is my privilege to be with people during the most important times in their lives. But everywhere I go, if I identify myself as one, people start telling me immediately about their sins, illnesses and life histories. Usually, I am happy to engage. But occasionally, on days off or vacations, it would be nice to have a normal conversation. Still, if someone asks what I do, I refuse to lie. Can you suggest a solution?

MONICA

Just because someone asks you a question is no reason to answer it. How much money do you earn as a pastor, Monica? (None of my business.) So when the stranger sitting next to you on an airplane asks what you do for a living, offer the following nonreply (with a friendly smile): “Actually, I’m on vacation! And I intend to stay that way by not talking about work.” Pause. “Do you think they’ll be bringing us those warm nuts soon?”


