


Anna Netrebko, one of opera’s leading sopranos, has withdrawn from a production of Bellini’s “Norma” scheduled to open the Metropolitan Opera’s 2017-18 season.

A spokesman for Ms. Netrebko said in an email on Tuesday that she would not be adding the famously difficult title role to her repertory “for the foreseeable future.” Ms. Netrebko also announced that she would be dropping out of the “Norma” production that will open the Royal Opera House’s season in London this September.

That production, directed by Alex Ollé, was to be her debut in the role, but in a statement she said, “I have come to the unfortunate conclusion my voice has evolved in a different direction.”

“Knowing that tickets will soon go on sale and not wanting to mislead anyone,” she added, “I feel I must now be honest with myself as an artist and make this very difficult decision.”

This is the second time that Ms. Netrebko has withdrawn from a Royal Opera House debut: Two years ago, she canceled performances as Marguerite in Gounod’s “Faust,” saying that she felt the role was not right for her.

“We are, of course, very frustrated that Anna has felt it necessary to cancel a major role debut with us for the second time,” Kasper Holten, the company’s director of opera, said in a statement. “We have done everything we can to avoid this situation.”

In 2014, after triumphing as Lady Macbeth in Verdi’s “Macbeth” at the Met, Ms. Netrebko said in a New York Times interview that she planned to sing more dramatic repertory, including Norma, a daunting bel canto role that is most associated with Maria Callas. “It’s scary, but what can you do?” she said at the time, adding, “Every soprano dreams to sing that.” In that interview, she noted that her voice was changing and had grown bigger since she had a child in 2008.

Antonio Pappano, the music director of the Royal Opera House, said that a new Norma would be announced shortly. “I am of course saddened not to be doing this iconic opera with Anna,” he said in a statement. “We had planned this project around her ambition to take it on some time ago but we all have to accept that things sometimes change.”

“Anna and I have some other plans for the future at Covent Garden,” he added, “in particular one of the major roles in which she has recently triumphed.”


