


Prof. Justus Rosenberg pulled a tattered, marked-up copy of Voltaire’s “Candide” out of a mushroom-brown soft zippered pouch emblazoned with the old Channel 13 logo. “We have an existential problem,” he said, waving the paperback at a seminar of 10 students at Bard College. “The concept of the El Dorado. What does it mean, the El Dorado?”

A young woman with a Bernie 2016 sticker on her MacBook offered an interpretation. Dr. Rosenberg repeated her answer in his hard-to-place European accent: “The city of God on Earth! The perfect world!” He nodded approvingly, and then continued to teach, without pause, for 120 minutes.

Officially, Dr. Rosenberg, who turned 95 in January, retired from teaching 20 years ago. Retirement didn’t suit him.

“His breadth of historical knowledge is evident in every class,” said Amelia Maggio, 20, as her classmates packed up their things.

The students know that he lived through World War II, that he speaks several languages. And yet he has left that history a bit vague. “He has talked about his experience in the war in Paris, and how he had to flee, but he doesn’t really get into the full details,” said Vikramaditya Joshi, 19, who pressed Dr. Rosenberg to come further out of retirement and be his adviser.

The details are worth knowing. Justus (pronounced YOO-stice) Rosenberg is thought to be the last remaining member of an extralegal team assembled by the journalist Varian Fry in 1940 to provide safe passage out of Vichy France to anti-fascist intellectuals and cultural figures fleeing the Nazis. Mr. Fry was something of a Raoul Wallenberg for artists: Two thousand men and women, including Hannah Arendt, Marc Chagall and André Breton, were shepherded to safety by Mr. Fry’s network.

When he fell in with Mr. Fry, Mr. Rosenberg was 19 and looked 14, blond and blue-eyed with flawless French, enabling him to fly under the radar of the Vichy authorities. He was quickly entrusted with scouting border crossings, ferrying to refugees crucial — often doctored — documents, and running errands from menial to dangerous. He went on to serve with the French Resistance and then the United States Army.

In a war when all survival, especially by Eastern European Jews like him, was unlikely, his experience was particularly remarkable.

“I think of my life,” Dr. Rosenberg mused on a frigid February afternoon in the kitchen of his Rhinebeck, N.Y., home, “as what the French call concours de circonstances — a confluence of circumstances.” Seventy years after the series of improbable events that enabled his survival, he remains cheerfully amazed at his good fortune. “I was very lovable, in those days,” he said with an impish laugh.

He has spent the last seven decades teaching American students, including 50 years divided between the New School in Manhattan and Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, where he arrived to teach French, German and Russian literature in 1962. “He bears witness to history and to intellectual tradition,” said Leon Botstein, president of Bard. “I think he has been an inspiration to students.”

Born in the Free City of Danzig (now Gdansk, Poland) in 1921, Justus Rosenberg had a younger sister and parents who prospered in an import-export business. He attended secular schools. Jewish life was limited to Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur.

After the Nazis rose to power, anti-Semitism grew in Danzig. In 1937, his parents suggested he continue studying in England or France. He chose Paris. “You can imagine the wonderful thoughts in my mind,” Dr. Rosenberg said with a chuckle. “I was dreaming of beautiful French girls. I was 16. Let’s not kid ourselves.” He boarded at a prestigious school and quickly became fluent in French. “That would save my life,” he said. “That, and that I looked very young.”

When the Nazis invaded Poland, in September 1939, he lost contact with his family. Suddenly penniless, he took odd jobs — first selling vegetables, then as an extra in a French theater. (He had a single line in the Jules Verne play “Around the World in 80 Days”: “Liverpool bound!”) But war loomed. He set out from Paris just days before the Nazis arrived. He took a Métro to the end of the line and continued by foot and by bicycle, first for Bayonne, where he had been told, erroneously, that he might be able to board a ship. He turned and headed for Toulouse.

“I was supposed to take an exam at the Sorbonne before the invasion of the Germans,” he said, “and they said we cannot have the exams here — the university will withdraw to Toulouse. Get to Toulouse and you can take your exam there. Except by then France had fallen.”

He was not alone. The roads were clogged with families, their worldly possessions in wheelbarrows. Toulouse was overrun, Dr. Rosenberg recalled: “People slept on benches. The hotels were overcrowded. They said there was a former movie house called Cinema Pax, and there they allowed people to stay overnight. They ripped the chairs out and put straw bags on the floor.” He knew no one in the city.

He happened to be assigned to a spot on the floor next to someone who was visited by a young American student named Miriam Davenport, who took a liking to Mr. Rosenberg. She said he reminded her of her younger brother, and suggested that Justus, whose name she Americanized to “Gussie,” follow her to Marseille.

He did. By then Ms. Davenport had connected with two other Americans: a young heiress named Mary Jayne Gold and the American journalist Varian Fry. Mr. Fry, then 33, had been sent by the hastily constructed “Emergency Rescue Committee” — a group of New York intellectuals eager to cast a lifeline to their European counterparts. The committee was formed during an emotional luncheon held in June 1940 in Manhattan at the Commodore Hotel at 42nd Street and Lexington Avenue. They needed money, visas and an on-the-ground contact in Europe. Mr. Fry arrived in Marseille with $3,000 strapped to his calf, a passport valid for six months, a list of about 200 names and the blessing of Eleanor Roosevelt. The plan was to stay one month.

The armistice France had made with Germany that month included a grim proviso: the “surrender on demand” of all anti-fascist refugees. Desperate migrants immediately appeared at Mr. Fry’s door. Working with the American consul, Hiram Bingham IV, who had already begun a quiet rescue operation of his own, Mr. Fry set up an office, first in the Hotel Splendide and then in an old leather-goods shop, which he later named the Centre Américain de Secours (American Relief Center). It quickly became apparent that 200 was an arbitrary, and low, number. More names were added to his lists, and many more documents were needed, like passports and exit visas with official stamps. Mr. Fry and his team of expats, locals and refugees (including a skilled forger) would supply them all.

Also needed was a courier to deliver messages to refugees and scout out safe passage, especially the overland route through Spain. Miriam Davenport suggested the young “Aryan-looking,” French-speaking Mr. Rosenberg.

“‘We have an office boy who can never get enough to eat,’” Dr. Rosenberg read aloud at his kitchen table, scanning a letter that Mr. Fry had sent to his wife, one of countless mementos that Dr. Rosenberg has preserved in binders and boxes, documentation of his extraordinary journey.

In her out-of-print memoir, “Crossroads Marseilles 1940,” Mary Jayne Gold (who provided crucial additional money for Mr. Fry, as did the heiress and art collector Peggy Guggenheim) described Dr. Rosenberg as a young man: “The boy’s face picked up the light from everywhere, even in my dim little room. His cheeks were pink and high and his hair was a ruddy blond. … There was a rather pointed nose running down the middle. In fact, he looked like a fox, a nice little fox. … The boy was young and curious.”

As the year progressed, life in Marseille became increasingly dangerous, and the refugee crisis increasingly dire. Both the Vichy government and the United States Department of State were losing patience with Mr. Fry. And in August 1941, Mr. Fry was forced to leave France.

“Miriam tried to get Varian to help get Gussie out,” said Pierre Sauvage, a filmmaker who interviewed Ms. Davenport extensively for his coming documentary on Mr. Fry, “And Crown Thy Good.”

“Varian said, ‘Nice kid, but not much I can do.’” he added. “There were probably tens of thousands seeking his help.”

However, according to a letter sent to Ms. Davenport that had been in the archives at the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, Mr. Rosenberg was very much in Mr. Fry’s thoughts.

“You also ask about Gussie,” he wrote in the summer of 1941. “He was born in Dantzig and the Dantzig quota is closed.” It was now “too late” anyway, he wrote, because the new regulations forbade the consulates from issuing visas to anyone with “near relatives” in Germany or occupied countries. Those refugees were now denied passage.

With Mr. Fry gone, Mr. Rosenberg’s protection evaporated. He tried to cross the border to Spain anyway. He was promptly arrested and jailed. “Next time,” the sentencing judge said, “try harder.” He was released after two weeks.

He returned to Marseille and contacted Jean Gemähling, a Resistance fighter and member of Mr. Fry’s network. On his advice, Mr. Rosenberg went to Grenoble. There, in August 1942, he was rounded up with several hundred other Jews, most of them foreign-born. He was taken by bus to a transit camp, Vénissieux, outside the city of Lyon. It was blisteringly hot; he slept on the ground, outside the barracks. On his first night he was shaken awake by a soldier who told him the camp inmates would soon be sent to a labor camp in Poland.

In the morning he ran into a fellow internee, a medical student who was the sister of a friend. He asked her what illness might help him avoid the transport. She suggested peritonitis and told him the symptoms. He fell to the ground — his acting skills in use — and began writhing and moaning. In the camp infirmary he rubbed a thermometer until it registered a dangerous fever. The ruse worked: He was rushed to a nearby hospital and given ether. “When I woke up, I really had pain in my side. I touched it and it had a big bandage.” His appendix had been removed.

When he next woke, a young French nurse sat beside him. She told him that patients from the camp would be sent on the next transport. “I said, ‘Can you do me a favor?’” He asked for paper and pen and implored her to mail a note.

“Have I mentioned it to you yet?” asked Dr. Rosenberg, picking up the narrative the next day as he drove from Bard’s campus to his home in Rhinebeck. It is clear he relishes this story. Within days, he said, a priest connected to the Resistance arrived. “The plan was a simple one,” he continued, recounting how the letter found its way to the network of Abbé Alexandre Glasberg, a priest who had converted from Judaism. Father Glasberg ran an operation of Christians committed to rescuing Jews from the dragnet.

“Keep in mind they had taken my clothes away,” Dr. Rosenberg said. A sympathetic priest would arrange for a parcel to be hidden in the hospital toilet containing a shirt, a pair of shorts and sandals. Below the window there would be a bicycle. He still recalls the priest’s parting words. “‘Good luck. May God bless you,’” Dr. Rosenberg quoted.

Barely healed, he set off from the hospital by bicycle, making his way to a safe house where he could recuperate. There, he received a new identity, Jean-Paul Guiton — a “fine French name” — whose father was dead and whose mother was Alsatian (to account for his accent). His birthplace, he said, was now Saint-Malo, a city whose town hall, and birth records, had been destroyed.

As he recovered, he memorized German insignia to prepare for the Resistance cell he was now working with. “They wanted me to travel to towns, go to cafes and try to recognize the units of the people who were there,” Dr. Rosenberg said. He was then assigned to an outfit tasked with rescuing contraband arms parachuted onto farms. Later he was assigned to a “real guerrilla group” and learned to throw grenades at German convoys. Dr. Rosenberg mimed the action, grinning, describing a vision of a young, tanned Resistance fighter with a magazine of bullets strapped across his chest.

Mr. Rosenberg lived as Jean-Paul Guiton until the summer of 1944, when three soldiers in unfamiliar uniforms wandered into his sight lines. Americans. He went out to meet them — and soon found himself attached to the reconnaissance company of the 636th Tank Destroyer Battalion, as a scout, guide and translator. He assumed a position in the jeep up front, always next to the driver.

Telling the story, Dr. Rosenberg slid an overstuffed binder across the table. In it was a paper stamped “WAR DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL” detailing that assignment. Next he showed a letter from Lt. Col. Peter Rodgers. “To my very dear friend ‘Gus’ — now Dr. Justus Rosenberg — who I hold in the highest esteem. A brave, intrepid soldier …” And then one in French, a certificate of his service to the Resistance, September 1942 to August 1944.

Mr. Rosenberg spent a year with the 636th. One day the men played a joke on him, driving away while he spoke to a farmer. He ran and jumped into the jeep’s back, his regular seat taken. The car then hit a land mine, killing the man in the passenger seat and tearing the legs off the driver. Mr. Rosenberg escaped with cuts and bruises: the confluence of circumstances, again.

After the war, Mr. Rosenberg returned to his studies at the Sorbonne and became a supply officer for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. His parents and sister had also survived: the illegal ship they were on was intercepted by the British; the family was interned on the island of Mauritius for several years. Dr. Rosenberg would not see them again until 1952.

Back in Paris, he applied for a visa to the United States; he was told to return “in six years.” Army pals pulled strings for a preferential visa; Mr. Rosenberg was soon teaching French and German language and literature and finishing his doctorate in Ohio.

Some years later, as a young professor at Swarthmore College, Dr. Rosenberg accompanied students on a trip to meet Fidel Castro in Havana just after the revolution. But his excitement, in this country, came mostly from his relationships with writers. In 1959 he joined the New School teaching political and cultural history once a week — a position he held until 2013. In 1962, he joined the Bard faculty, where he has worked with luminaries like Isaac Bashevis Singer and Chinua Achebe. Two years ago he and his wife of 20 years, Karin, started the Justus and Karin Rosenberg Foundation to fund efforts fighting hate and anti-Semitism.

In 1952, Dr. Rosenberg tracked down Miriam Davenport. He thanked her for her role in his survival. Ms. Davenport replied immediately, writing that she had “simply shrieked with joy” to receive his note. “You were a symbol of sorts, to me, in those days,” she wrote. “Everyone was moving Heaven and earth to save famous men, anti-fascist intellectuals, etc.”

And there you were, she added, “a nice, intelligent youngster with no family, no money, no influence, no hope, no fascinating past.”


