


Stuart A. Schlesinger spent half a century building a reputation and a practice as a personal injury lawyer in New York, representing clients in lawsuits and negotiating settlements on their behalf. But when he appeared recently before a federal judge in Manhattan, he found himself in an unfamiliar position for a lawyer: He was the defendant.

Mr. Schlesinger, 76, had been arrested on a fraud charge in one of the more brazen schemes in the annals of New York law: He settled lawsuits on behalf of clients, sometimes for $1 million or more, and then simply kept much of the money for himself.

When his clients complained that they had not received the proceeds of their settlements, Mr. Schlesinger responded with a litany of excuses. “We are short-staffed,” he said in an email to one client, Kenneth Lawler, a British man who was owed more than $900,000 from the settlement of a medical malpractice lawsuit stemming from the death of his son in a New Jersey hospital. “Our phones and computer systems were down,” Mr. Schlesinger wrote in another email to Mr. Lawler. “Sorry for the delay,” he said in a third email, adding strangely, “Waiting for our golf game.”

Mr. Lawler, 63, said that now, four years after the settlement was reached, he had not yet received a penny. “It’s a betrayal,” he said.

That day in Federal District Court in Manhattan two weeks ago, Mr. Schlesinger admitted to the judge, William H. Pauley III, that he had improperly withheld money from settlements since 2008 and had used it for his personal benefit.

When the judge asked how much money he had taken, he replied, “Approximately $5 million.”

Several former clients watched silently in the courtroom as Mr. Schlesinger pleaded guilty to the fraud charge, which carries a maximum prison sentence of 20 years.

Mr. Schlesinger has never explained what happened to his clients’ money, and his lawyer, Murray Richman, declined to let him be interviewed. Mr. Richman said Mr. Schlesinger had decided to plead guilty because he wanted to see his former clients repaid. “He’s making every effort toward restitution,” Mr. Richman said. “He’s selling everything he’s got.”

One asset he has agreed to forfeit is an eight-bedroom house on five and a half acres in Quogue, on Long Island, which is listed for sale at $11.5 million and is advertised as having a pool and a hot tub overlooking the ocean.

Mr. Schlesinger is also no longer practicing law. Last year, after a lawyer disciplinary committee moved for his immediate suspension, he agreed to surrender his law license and was disbarred. But his case has put a harsh spotlight on the process of discipline for lawyers in New York, which is conducted in total secrecy until a public sanction, like a suspension or disbarment, is imposed.

In Mr. Schlesinger’s case, that process took a full year, during which he continued to represent clients, even filing at least one medical malpractice suit.

It could not be learned when the disciplinary authorities began receiving complaints against Mr. Schlesinger. Several months before the committee opened its investigation in September 2014, for example, it received — but did not pursue — a complaint from a Queens resident. New York court officials, citing confidentiality laws governing investigations into misconduct by lawyers, declined to say when the committee had received its first complaint against Mr. Schlesinger, how many complaints were filed or what they alleged.

David Bookstaver, communications director for the state court system, said, “It would require legislative action to change the law as it pertains to secrecy or transparency in attorney disciplinary proceedings.”

Many questions remain about Mr. Schlesinger’s fall, but there is little doubt about the ripple effect beyond his clients. His longtime law firm, Julien & Schlesinger, closed, and a small collection of partners and associates, including at least one of his sons, had to find work elsewhere.

Mr. Schlesinger earned his law degree from Fordham University in 1964 and joined a small law firm, where he eventually became a partner with a prominent personal injury lawyer, Alfred Julien. Their firm continued to bear both of their names after Mr. Julien’s death in 1989. Lawyers who had worked at the firm either declined to be interviewed for this article or did not respond to messages seeking comment.

Joseph L. Forstadt, a retired partner at the law firm Stroock & Stroock & Lavan who is a longtime friend of Mr. Schlesinger’s, said that he had occasionally referred personal injury cases to him and that Mr. Schlesinger had “a great reputation” for being able to win favorable settlements for clients. “Stuart was known as the guy who could sit down with insurance companies and get the best deal possible,” Mr. Forstadt said.

Mr. Schlesinger also taught as an adjunct professor at New York Law School, and for a time he wrote a column for The New York Law Journal.

When Mr. Schlesinger was arrested in December, he was released on a $1 million bond, which was secured by the Quogue property. His wife, Linda Schlesinger, a real estate agent, and a first cousin, Stephen Lefkowitz, a Manhattan real estate lawyer, signed the bond as guarantors.

“I got a call from his wife saying he was in this difficult situation and would I help,” Mr. Lefkowitz recalled. “And of course I did.”

Mr. Lefkowitz, 78, said that although he had known Mr. Schlesinger since childhood and their families were close, he knew little about his cousin’s legal practice and had been surprised at the news of his arrest.

The lawyer disciplinary committee, one of a number of such panels run by the state court system, has said that Mr. Schlesinger’s misconduct “came to the committee’s attention” through complaints from two clients that arrived on Sept. 2, 2014, according to a confidential legal motion later filed by the committee seeking his immediate suspension. (The motion was released last year after he was disbarred.) The two clients complained that Mr. Schlesinger owed them a total of $66,000 in settlement money, and an investigation “ensued immediately,” the motion said.

But the committee had in fact received an earlier complaint, involving a larger unpaid settlement, which it decided not to pursue. In June 2014, Albin F. Luczak of Queens complained to the committee that Mr. Schlesinger had not paid him his share of a $1.5 million dental malpractice settlement.

Mr. Luczak said in an interview that he had been the victim of medical negligence during a root canal that had required him to undergo several surgical procedures, including the removal of muscle in his neck. Mr. Schlesinger sued on his behalf and settled the case in fall 2013.

Under a retainer agreement, Mr. Luczak was owed about $1.1 million after Mr. Schlesinger took his legal fee.

But despite repeated requests, Mr. Luczak said, Mr. Schlesinger did not send him his share. Mr. Luczak recalled that when he and his wife visited Mr. Schlesinger’s office, the lawyer said: “Please trust me, please trust me. I’m treating you like family members.”

In March 2014, Mr. Luczak retained a new lawyer, Dustin Bowman of Kew Gardens, Queens. After trying unsuccessfully to resolve the problem through phone calls and emails, Mr. Bowman sued Mr. Schlesinger on Mr. Luczak’s behalf and helped him file a formal complaint with the disciplinary committee.

“I am writing to complain about a very serious matter,” Mr. Luczak wrote to the committee on June 13, 2014. He attached copies of the retainer agreement and his lawsuit against Mr. Schlesinger.

Two months later, Mr. Luczak received a letter from Jorge Dopico, the committee’s chief counsel, informing him that because of Mr. Luczak’s pending lawsuit, the committee would “defer further investigation at this time.”

According to the committee’s website, it does not investigate lawyers in cases in which a lawsuit is pending on a similar issue.

Mr. Bowman said he was shocked that the committee did not pursue the matter, given the amount of money Mr. Luczak was owed and what Mr. Bowman saw as an easily provable allegation.

On Aug. 22, 2014, Mr. Bowman wrote directly to the committee, saying that Mr. Luczak was complaining of “very serious ethical violations” concerning the mishandling of client money and was “imploring you to keep the docket open and inquire into this matter.”

Mr. Bowman said he heard nothing from the committee for nine months. Then in May 2015, he received a call from a committee lawyer. Mr. Bowman said he expressed surprise to the lawyer that the committee had not followed up on Mr. Luczak’s complaint and that it had taken so long to respond to his own letter.

According to Mr. Bowman, the lawyer did not offer a satisfactory explanation, except to suggest that the committee was understaffed and had a large backlog.

Mr. Luczak said that he and his wife had concluded at the time that what Mr. Schlesinger had done to them, he had also quite likely done to others. In early 2015, Mr. Luczak said, he contacted the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and within a week, a special agent, James H. Hilliard Jr., came to his home to interview him and to collect copies of his papers. Within a day, Mr. Luczak said, the F.B.I. called him to say it would open an investigation — apparently the inquiry that led to Mr. Schlesinger’s arrest.

Mr. Luczak, 56, said recently that he had yet to receive any part of his settlement, more than two years after it was completed. “Nothing — zero,” he said.

In November 2014, two months after the disciplinary committee began its investigation, Hal R. Lieberman, a lawyer representing Mr. Schlesinger in the misconduct inquiry, wrote to the committee and asked that his client not be penalized.

Mr. Lieberman described Mr. Schlesinger as a “distinguished” lawyer who had practiced “without a blemish for 49 years,” adding that, but for his “extraordinary efforts, there would be no settlement funds to begin with.”

On March 10, 2015, Mr. Schlesinger gave a deposition to the committee in which he expressed remorse for his actions. “I 100 percent acknowledge what I did,” he said. “I did wrong.”

But less than two weeks after making that statement, Mr. Schlesinger filed a new lawsuit, a medical malpractice case, on behalf of Zdzislaw Oleszkiewicz of Queens, to whom he already owed $33,000 from the settlement of an earlier claim.

“I never imagined I could be so taken advantage of,” Mr. Oleszkiewicz said through an interpreter.

In May 2015, the committee filed its motion seeking Mr. Schlesinger’s immediate suspension, citing evidence and his admissions that he had misappropriated settlement money from at least 16 clients.

Victims of Mr. Schlesinger’s scheme said they were uncertain as to whether they would ever recover their lost money, through Mr. Schlesinger’s restitution or other means. Cheryl Parisi, a Staten Island resident who said she was still owed about $60,000 from a medical malpractice settlement, recalled that one of Mr. Schlesinger’s checks had bounced.

Mr. Lawler, who is still owed his share of the 2012 settlement from the lawsuit stemming from the death of his 32-year-old son, Scott, said Mr. Schlesinger’s actions had left him aghast.

Scott Lawler, who had worked as a software developer at Barclays Bank in Manhattan, died after abdominal surgery at a New Jersey hospital, the lawsuit said.

Mr. Schlesinger’s former clients may seek compensation from a special client protection fund that reimburses people whose lawyers have stolen their money, but the awards are capped at $400,000 per client, meaning that people like Mr. Luczak and Mr. Lawler would not fully cover their losses. Others have followed Mr. Luczak’s path and have sued Mr. Schlesinger. Dolores Nordone of South Salem, N.Y., is owed more than $300,000 from her share of an $850,000 car-crash settlement reached six years ago, according to her lawsuit.

Ms. Nordone, 73, a former accountant, said that the accident had resulted in incessant lower back pain, requiring three surgeries, and that she could no longer work. “Words can’t really explain how I feel,” she said. “You put your trust in someone who you believe is going to help you, and it’s unbelievable.”

Her lawyer, Arnold N. Kriss, who went to the courtroom to see Mr. Schlesinger plead guilty this month, said, “I felt embarrassed as a lawyer to sit there.”


