


INTERNATIONAL

Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 22 about suicide attacks by the Islamic State that killed more than 100 people in Homs, Syria, and a suburb of the Syrian capital, Damascus, misidentified the site of two car bombings in Homs. They struck a major thoroughfare in the city, not a neighborhood home. The error was corrected online shortly after the article was published, but editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

•

The United Nations Memo article on April 19, about a debate in the General Assembly over the wisdom of punitive international drug laws, referred incorrectly to the health minister of Canada, which is considering legalizing marijuana. The minister, Jane Philpott, is a woman.

•

An article in some editions on April 15 about what the Pentagon called the failed launch of a ballistic missile by North Korea misstated the name of a South Korean news agency that reported the launch. It is Yonhap, not Yonghap.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Thursday about the widening of a fuel-economy cheating scandal involving Mitsubishi vehicles misstated the surname of the company’s chairman in some editions. He is Osamu Masuko, not Mashiko. The error was repeated in some editions in an article on Friday about Nissan Motor’s decision to buy a substantial stake in Mitsubishi.

•

An article on Thursday about 365, a new small-format Whole Foods store, using information from the company, misstated the term used for items that will be available only for short periods of time. They are “Flash Finds,” not “green and gold” products.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


