


PHOENIX — Lawmakers here early Wednesday reaffirmed Arizona as the only state to not participate in a program that offers health care to children of the working poor.

A proposal to restore the federal Children’s Health Insurance Program, known in Arizona as KidsCare, stalled in the State Senate this week as lawmakers passed a $9.6 billion budget. Senate leaders voiced concern that the federal government would eventually cut payments to the children’s health care program and that the state would be forced to assume the cost.

State lawmakers originally froze enrollment in the program about six years ago amid an economic slowdown. But supporters saw an opportunity to restore the program after Congress last year increased the states’ matching rate by 23 percent, which allowed 10 states, including Arizona, to receive full reimbursement because of their low per capita income.

Arizona’s Republican-controlled House voted, 47 to 12, last month to allow the program to restart, but permitted the state to suspend it if fewer federal dollars came in.

But the measure died Tuesday in the Senate when its president, Andy Biggs, would not allow it to come to a vote. He suggested that he did not trust future legislators to resist public pressure and cut off the benefit if the federal funds dried up.

“The national debt is at an all-time high, the federal government is still engaging in massive spending, and KidsCare is one of the examples of a program that they have no revenue to pay for,” said State Senator John Kavanagh, a Republican from Fountain Hills northeast of Phoenix. “We don’t want our children and grandchildren to foot the bill.”

When budget negotiations began last week, Republicans in both chambers shut out Democrats from the meetings, effectively excluding them from final decisions over school funding, the makeup of the State Supreme Court and the children’s health care program.

Tensions flared and a tenuous bipartisan coalition that had won the program’s approval in the House of Representatives disintegrated. Gov. Doug Ducey, a Republican, stood on the sideline. The reason for the opposition here lies somewhere in Arizona’s messy and deeply divided politics. Whether it is immigration, abortion or the right to bear arms, conservative lawmakers often take hard-line stances against federal social programs.

The fight over the children’s health care program is, at its core, a battle over the state’s identity, with both sides arguing they have the best interest of children at heart. Some 30,000 children could enroll in the program. That represents about 20 percent of the 160,000 uninsured children in Arizona, the third-highest such population in the country.

Democrats and some moderate Republicans say help can wait no longer. But conservative lawmakers, who lead both legislative chambers, maintained that taking the federal money would jeopardize the well-being of those young people by leaving future generations with more debt.

Before the recession, Arizona’s children health care program served as many as 63,000 children whose families earned 138 percent to 200 percent of the federal poverty level — $27,000 to $40,000 for a family of three. The state put in $1 for every $3 the federal government spent, and the families paid a monthly premium.

While freezing the program in 2010 saved $12.9 million in the 2011 fiscal year, the state lost three times as much in federal matching funds, according to an analysis by the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.

In her practice in suburban Phoenix, where dozens of patients were enrolled in the program, Dr. Elizabeth McKenna, a pediatrician, says she has since noticed “fewer kids coming for well appointments, more kids who should have been treated going to the hospital with pneumonia, bronchitis.”

A Gallup poll in 2013 showed that Arizonans’ political ideology was a mirror image of the nation’s — just to the right of center. But that is not the image the Legislature often projects, largely because poor voter turnout means elections are decided by the most passionate, and often more conservative, voters.

On Tuesday, the Legislature approved a budget that included $8 million in tax cuts for businesses, but did not include the resumption of the children’s health care benefits. Mr. Biggs had again blocked a bill to reauthorize it from coming to a vote in the Senate.

“This gives Arizona another black eye,” Dana Wolfe Naimark, the chief executive of the Children’s Action Alliance, an advocacy group, said in a statement.

Blaming Mr. Biggs and “a small number of legislators with an extremist agenda,” Ms. Naimark said, “Arizona will continue to have a tarnished reputation around the nation as our children are left behind children in every other state.”


