


WASHINGTON — Senator Bernie Sanders, his campaign badly battered as Democrats began unifying behind Hillary Clinton, showed no signs of slowing down and did not utter Mrs. Clinton’s name at a Thursday night rally here.

Instead, in an almost hourlong speech, Mr. Sanders urged Washington voters to go to the polls for Tuesday’s final nominating contest and said he was still waiting for the results of the California primary, a contest The Associated Press already declared as a victory for Mrs. Clinton.

It was the kind of address most of the 3,000 people gathered at the event seemed to want, with many shouting, “Stay in the race,” “Bernie or bust” and “Shun the nonbelievers.”

Others in the crowd held up signs that said “Dump the D.N.C.” and “Revolution.”

“Next Tuesday in a few days, here in Washington, you will be having the very last primary of the Democratic nominating process,” Mr. Sanders said to cheers. “It will be extraordinary if the people of Washington, our nation’s capital, stood up and told the world that they are ready to lead this country into a political revolution.”

Yet, the rally came after a tough day for Mr. Sanders.

President Obama formally endorsed Mrs. Clinton on Thursday and called her the most qualified candidate ever to seek the White House, imploring Democrats to unite behind her. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who had carefully stayed out of the race, also formally endorsed Mrs. Clinton.

Briefly posing for photographers before a meeting Thursday afternoon with Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, Mr. Sanders ignored three questions about Mr. Obama’s endorsement of Mrs. Clinton.

His face flushed, Mr. Sanders did not speak at all as Mr. Reid gently scolded the assembled journalists for asking questions at what was supposed to be just a photo opportunity.

But, as many Democrats pivoted toward the general election, Mr. Sanders did not talk about party unity or Mrs. Clinton’s delegate lead. Instead, he held out hope and talked about his vision for America. “We are standing after having won 22 states. And the results have not yet come in from California,” Mr. Sanders said.

Iliana Jaime, 18, a high school senior who lives in Washington, welcomed the stance and said she wanted Mr. Sanders to remain in the race until the convention next month. She said the high-profile endorsements did not affect her thinking about Mr. Sanders’s campaign because Mrs. Clinton could still be indicted over her use of a private email server while she was secretary of state.

“I don’t think a revolution ends with a certain number of delegates,” she said. “It’s crucial he keeps going until the end. His impact is really obvious in a lot of ways aside from just being president. It would kind of be giving into the system that he is trying to reject if he did drop out at this point.”

Ms. Jaime also said, however, that if Mrs. Clinton were the nominee she would vote for her, because she was “the lesser of two evils” alongside Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee.

Her mother, Hedy Howard, a psychiatrist, agreed and said that although she did not trust Mrs. Clinton’s commitment to environmental issues, she would grudgingly vote for her if Mr. Sanders dropped out.

“I’d certainly want to see a woman up for president, but I wouldn’t vote for somebody because what their gender is anymore than what their race is or what their religion is,” Ms. Howard said. “I think all of the things that she does is about making herself great and making herself have a place in history, but I don’t trust that what she would do is about making things better for people or for our planet.”

Andrew Oetman, 34, an environmental protection specialist, echoed that sentiment, saying that as a resident of Washington, he wanted the right to vote for Mr. Sanders, in part because the District of Columbia doesn’t have official representation in Congress. He added that Mr. Obama and Ms. Warren were crumbing to the “establishment hierarchy of political power.”

“It’s super frustrating that President Obama has made the decision to support a candidate before the convention,” he said. “It’s frustrating to see Elizabeth Warren, who essentially has got the same values as Bernie Sanders and has held the same values as Bernie Sanders for her entire time in political office, to automatically degrade herself and the work that she has done by going down a step to a candidate that often votes opposite of the way she votes and does not support the main principles that she has.”

Mr. Oetman said he would not vote for Mrs. Clinton in the general election but had not decided what he would do if Mr. Sanders did not make it to the November ballot.

There were some Clinton supporters in the crowd.

Jim McGrath, 75, the chairman of DC Tenants Advocacy Coalition, stood outside the rally holding a sign that said, “Yea, Hillary, Not Hysteria.”

Mr. Sanders was “endangering the election of a very gifted woman as president of the United States with the danger of putting in a clown instead,” Mr. McGrath said, refering to Mr. Trump. “And that would be a great tragedy indeed. He can walk away free from that but the rest of us can’t. We would have to live with that.”

In remarks at the rally, however, Cornel West, the scholar and Sanders surrogate, alluded to the idea that voters might be choosing between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump in the future.

“Don’t let corporate media convince you that simply because you’re not crazy about the milquetoast neo-liberal sister Hillary that something is wrong with you,” he said. “But we know the difference between a neo-liberal and a neo-fascist, so you make your own decision.”


