


BALTIMORE — Gustav Nyquist, a right wing for the Detroit Red Wings, was fast asleep in St. Petersburg, Russia, where he was representing his native Sweden in the hockey world championship, when his phone began to buzz.

Across the world, his equine namesake had just captured the Kentucky Derby while pushing his record to 8-0. Nyquist, the two-legged version, had a game the next day, but he could not resist sneaking a peek at the replay. He has watched it several times since.

“He did great — the Exaggerator there, he made a run for it at the end, he came hard on the outside, but Nyquist was strong,” said Nyquist, who was not a fan of horse racing before this capable colt came along.

On Saturday in the Preakness Stakes, Nyquist finally was bested on the racetrack by his nemesis Exaggerator, who pulled off the upset on his fifth try. Nyquist finished third.

Even though his namesake lost, Nyquist is still a fan. He calls the Kentucky Derby simply the Kentucky and a race a tournament, but he is learning about the sport fast and now follows the colt’s every move.

“I was never really into it in Sweden,” he said of horse racing. “It’s kind of a big sport, but none of my friends that I grew up with, we never really watched races or anything like that — we were more into hockey.”

Still, excelling with speed and smarts is something Nyquist, or Nike as his teammates call him, can relate to — he scored 17 goals and had 26 assists during the regular season and added another goal during a first-round playoff exit against the Tampa Bay Lightning. (That blemish briefly alarmed the horse’s owner, J. Paul Reddam, before Nyquist won the Derby.)

“Obviously, he has a knack for scoring goals, and he’s scored some big ones for us, so I think that he’s a fun player to watch,” Red Wings left wing Justin Abdelkader said of his teammate. “I think that can probably relate to Nyquist the horse. He’s probably a fun horse for people to watch because he’s really fast.”

Reddam, a Windsor, Ontario, native whose mother worked for a lawyer for the Red Wings in the 1960s, has named eight horses after players on his beloved team. Datsyuk, named after his favorite player, never won a race; Lidstrom won one race and got hurt; Zetterberg, Hudler and Mrazek were solid; Tatar has yet to run; and Kronwall, well, “He’s just a bum,” Reddam said, laughing.

The players had a little fun in the locker room at defenseman Niklas Kronwall’s expense over his namesake’s skills, or lack thereof.

“I think guys are just a little jealous that they don’t have any horses named after them,” Abdelkader said.

Nyquist said he was used to the ribbing from his teammates, but he added: “It’s tough for them to really give me a hard time because he’s doing so well. So it’s easy to get back at them.”

Reddam, who lives in Los Angeles, attends games when the Red Wings play in the area. He watches about 70 games a year via satellite and calls himself a “couch coach.”

He owns some horses with Colorado Avalanche defenseman Erik Johnson, who went to the Derby and the Preakness with Reddam and is partly responsible for Nyquist’s name.

“I was telling Erik that he should sign as a free agent last year with the Red Wings, and he said, ‘There’s no way I’m ever doing that,’ so to tease him I named horses Nyquist and Mrazek,” Reddam said. “Then he said, ‘I want to buy a piece of Nyquist,’ and I said, ‘Buddy, you have no chance of doing that.’ ”

With each victory on the racetrack, the word about Nyquist has spread in hockey-mad Detroit. Tom Mazawey, executive producer and anchor for Detroit Sports 105.1 FM, is an avid horse racing and hockey fan, and he was doing his part to stoke interest.

“I’m from New Jersey, and a big horse guy, so I try to bring my passion to Detroiters,” he said. “They’re not into it as much as I want them to be, but we are doing the best we can around here to push it.”

Abdelkader, a Michigan native, said part of the allure was the unique name.

“It’s not like Jones or Smith — everyone in Detroit knows Gus Nyquist,” he said. “So I think it’s created a lot of buzz, and I think it’s special for the Detroit fan base, the people in Michigan who are Red Wings fans.”

And the attention Nyquist the horse has received because of his hockey connection has extended beyond Detroit. The fandom has reached Sweden, for one.

Eddie Olczyk, who played 16 seasons in the N.H.L. and is now a hockey and horse racing analyst for NBC, said he had been getting a lot of questions about the horse.

“It’s gotten a lot of traction, which is great for both sports, and I’m knee-deep in both, so it’s great to have the ability to cross-promote,” he said. “And you know hockey people obviously know who Nyquist, the hockey player, is, and now they are getting to know the four-legged equine athlete. So there’s a lot of people who are very interested in watching the horse and understand that it’s good for the game and positive for everybody.”

Early Sunday in Sweden, at 12:45 a.m., Nyquist watched as his namesake raced in the Preakness. Nyquist’s perfect résumé might have received a blemish, but according to both horses’ trainers, a showdown between Nyquist and Exaggerator in the Belmont was still a possibility.

Nyquist, the player, is headed back to the United States soon, and the offer would still stand for him and his teammates to come meet his namesake for the first time at Belmont Park on June 11. After all, the colt had already stood next to the Stanley Cup, which arrived at his barn on Derby Day.

“It’s such a big honor to have a horse named after you, for sure,” Nyquist said. “And it’s even better that he’s doing so well.”


