


Amidst the overwhelming sea of design installations at Salone del Mobile, how do you get people to pause long enough to appreciate anything during this extravaganza? Invite them to eat.

“Design week in Milan has become all about the quick fix,” said the designer Tom Dixon at his latest installation, “but Italy for me is all about slowing down.” Dixon’s exhibit for Milan’s furniture fair, in collaboration with the luxury countertop maker Caesarstone, took over the Rotonda della Besana — a cross-shaped hospital from the medieval era — and transformed each of the four wings into its own cozy and welcoming dining hall. Based on the four elements, each quarter is distinct in its design and menu.

Inspired by fire, one wing was filled with soot-colored tables and copper-treated, flamelike glass orb lights; diners munched on black coal flatbreads. Silver globules hung above the water-inspired wing, where hot soup with blast-chilled spring vegetables combined water in all three states of matter — ice, liquid and steam — for guests to contemplate while sitting at a cafeteria-style Tom Dixon table, his interpretations of the elements all around. Dixon, who operates a restaurant in London where he puts in a monthly shift as chef, was enamored with the idea of creating a place to entertain amidst his designs. Reclining in a furry armchair, fresh bread coming out of the oven just behind him, Dixon said, “I always wanted to tell everyone, ‘Come over to my house.’”

This Salone, he wasn’t the only one trying to make people feel at home and stay a while. Airbnb rented out Rossana Orlandi’s snug restaurant, Marta, where Ambra Medda invited designers to fill the space with pieces visitors could use. With paper cutouts spelling out “Share the Love” on the wall, the restaurant was transformed into a crafty, informal gathering space. Guests sat down together for lunch or aperitivo at a Shaker-style communal table from the woodworking designer Giacomo Moor and enjoyed specially commissioned products from 25 designers — including the design studio Dossofiorito’s suspended water carafes — over a panino and a glass of wine.

Max Lamb introduced a splatter-painted stool for the British design brand Hem with an infallible crowd-pleaser: an ice-cream social. Tucked into a Brera courtyard, the exhibit space was fronted by a pushcart serving gelato in color schemes to match the four editions of the stool, and flavors custom-created by the local Gelateria Rigoletto. And Carwan, a Beirut-based gallery, welcomed guests into its curator’s Milan home for a Lebanese meal served from new glazed porcelain pieces by the designer Mary-Lynn Massoud, who prepared the lunch with her brother and fellow designer, Carlo Massoud.

“We’re launching a home collection, so it made sense to show it at home,” said the curator Nicolas Bellavance-Lecompte, setting down a bowl of Kebbeh pastries on his dining table. “And I think everyone needs a break from the rush of design week.”


