


President Obama was thousands of miles away on an official tour of Asia, far from the center of the political battle playing out for the White House, but he could not escape the long shadow of Donald J. Trump.

At a gathering of the Group of 7 nations in Shima, Japan, the president said at a news conference on Thursday that he had discussed Mr. Trump with the leaders of the six other industrialized nations in the group (Italy, Japan, Britain, Canada, France and Germany), and that they were “rattled by him, and for good reason.”

“I think it’s fair to say that they are surprised by the Republican nominee; they are not sure how seriously to take some of his pronouncements,” Mr. Obama said.

He added, “A lot of the proposals that he’s made display either ignorance of world affairs or a cavalier attitude or an interest in getting tweets and headlines instead of actually thinking through what it is that is required to keep America safe and secure and prosperous and what’s required to keep the world on an even keel.”

The president’s scalding characterization came before the announcement on Thursday that Mr. Trump had clinched the delegate majority for the Republican presidential nomination, according to a tally by The Associated Press.

It was not the first time Mr. Obama has questioned Mr. Trump’s fitness for office. Earlier this month, the president said the candidate should be subjected to “genuine scrutiny” and not be allowed to treat the presidential campaign like “a reality show.”

“We are in serious times, and this is a really serious job,” Mr. Obama said at a White House news conference. “This is not entertainment. This is not a reality show. This is a contest for the presidency of the United States.”

In April, the president rebuked Mr. Trump after the millionaire businessman suggested that the United States and its allies should move away from decades of constraints on the use of nuclear arms.

Mr. Obama said at the end of a two-day summit meeting on nuclear security that those statements reflected the views of a person who “doesn’t know much about foreign policy or nuclear policy or the Korean Peninsula or the world generally.”

He added, “We don’t want somebody in the Oval Office who doesn’t recognize how important that is.”

Mr. Obama, who has already visited Vietnam, where he announced the lifting of a decades-old ban on providing military equipment to that country, will head to Hiroshima, Japan, on Friday.


