


Henry Aaron, it begins.

Bernard Aaronson. William Aaronson. Charles I. Abady. Pasquale V. Abate. Victor Emanuel Abate.

On it goes, this roll call of Brooklyn’s dead in World War II, through 11,500 names, including 19 Katzes — Abraham, Abraham, Abraham W., Adolph, Daniel, Harry, Harvey, Herbert L., Irving, Joseph, Leonard, Lester A., Louis H., Morris, Morris N., Murray, Philip, Robert and Solomon — before reaching William A. Zwolski.

In sheer numbers, the roster of the Brooklyn War Memorial in Cadman Plaza dwarfs that of the National September 11 Memorial at the World Trade Center. It fills 15 walnut panels almost 20 feet high with countless three-quarter-inch bronze letters. Dedicated in 1951, six years after the war, the display was meant to overwhelm. It still does.

But you have probably never seen it, because the roster occupies a hall into which the public is rarely admitted. You may have assumed, as I did, that the limestone exterior — two colossal allegorical figures (war and peace, or victory and family) flanking a dedication to the men and women who fought in World War II — was the monument in its entirety.

In recent years, however, Memorial Day ceremonies outside the structure have underscored its fundamental purpose. “All of a sudden, people in the community realized, ‘Wow, this is a memorial,’” said Toba Potosky, president of the nonprofit Cadman Park Conservancy.

The conservancy and the New York City Parks and Recreation Department hope to reopen the main hall of the Brooklyn War Memorial while there are still World War II veterans alive.

“It becomes more of a debt, as the years go by, to honor what they’ve done,” said Stephen A. Varone, president of Rand Engineering and Architecture, which is surveying the structure’s condition for the conservancy. The building — now reached by steps — must be made accessible to wheelchairs, a process that includes the construction of a ramp, the installation of an elevator and the alteration of bathrooms.

Money is in hand to begin that work, said Martin Maher, chief of staff in the Brooklyn parks office: $3.5 million from the federal government as compensation for using part of Cadman Plaza as a construction staging area; $1 million allocated by Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president; and $500,000 allocated by State Assemblywoman Jo Anne Simon.

“Five million dollars gets us what we need to get people inside,” Mr. Maher said.

Over the years, the hall was used by the Heights Opera Company, the Marionette Theater Company and the Creative Artists Public Service Program, which held a competition in 1971 that gave “the place the look of a gallery that has been in a collision with a rummage sale,” as The New York Times described it.

It was the setting in 1973 of the induction of 230 new officers of the Housing Authority Police Department, including Cynthia Brown, the first female recruit. And it was at the center of a 2006 controversy over artistic censorship when the Brooklyn parks commissioner ordered the closing of a Brooklyn College student show as being inappropriate for families.

The art and antiquities unit of the parks department has a workshop in the basement of the building, and the Kings County Jewish War Veterans keeps a part-time office there. But for the most part, the hall has gone unused since the mid-1980s.

Restoration and rehabilitation will proceed by “baby steps,” Mr. Maher said, adding, “We wanted to build a constituency first.” There are a few impromptu exhibits in the hall showing how it might focus on subjects like other wars in history, branches of the armed forces and recipients of the Medal of Honor.

In 2008, the parks department cleaned and stabilized the 24-foot-high exterior sculptures by Charles Keck: a female figure sheltering a child and a male figure wearing a laurel and holding a sheathed sword.

But the agency doesn’t always make repairs on such a large scale. More than a decade ago, parks workers located a bronze “O” in the workshop, said Jonathan Kuhn, the director of art and antiquities. They refinished it and swapped it out for an “A” upstairs.

With that, “Marton Finkelstein” became “Morton Finkelstein.” At long last.


