


The dark satire “The Lobster” imagines a world where single people are devalued. From the Greek director Yorgos Lanthimos (“Dogtooth”), the movie follows a recently divorced man who is sent to a resort where he must either find a mate or be turned into an animal. In this scene, the lead character, David, played by Colin Farrell, arrives at breakfast and must face the seating area of the happily coupled.

During an interview in New York, Mr. Lanthimos discussed the scene and ideas behind his film. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.

Q. Voice-over narration is prevalent in this scene and in the movie, but this is the first film where you’ve used it. Would you talk about that decision?

A. We were trying to introduce, tonally, a different feel as a layer throughout the film. It’s also the first time I’ve used music this way and the voice-over. The goal, adding these layers, the voice-over, the music and the scene, was to create a different tone from what they individually would represent. The music could be dramatic and romantic, the voice-over could be cold and observational, and the scene could be very funny. If you put these three together, they produce a very different tone from each of those elements.

The characters here talk to each other in a kind of deadpan, emotionless way, though the movie is very emotional. How did you come to that style of speaking?

It’s hard for me to consider something in cinema or theater as something realistic. So for me, it’s about choosing the tone that you want to convey your ideas. I wanted to use a text that was funny and brutal at the same time. If actors are trying to convey, in a smart way, the context of the scene, that becomes too self-conscious. So I think when you approach it the simplest way possible, with seriousness, much more of the absurdity is revealed.

When we first see Colin Farrell’s character in this scene, one of his hands is behind his back. What is the significance of that?

Single people who arrive at the hotel, for their first night they’re made to have their hand tied behind their back in order to show them how much better it is to have two things than one.

Were there visual influences for you in this scene?

The wide shot at the beginning where David walks along the tables was a nod to the Orson Welles film “The Trial,” where a character walks along desks in a huge office space.


