


NAYPYIDAW, Myanmar — Less than two months after a civilian government took many of the levers of power in Myanmar for the first time in a half century, Secretary of State John Kerry conducted a seemingly routine diplomatic meeting on Sunday with the most improbable Burmese counterpart: Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning dissident who now sits atop a government that had long kept her under house arrest.

Their discussion focused on Myanmar’s brutal treatment of a Muslim minority group — at a moment when outsiders are questioning whether Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, a hero of the human rights movement, has a double standard — and on the delicate question of whether Myanmar’s military leaders once had a program in place to build a nuclear weapon.

Yet Mr. Kerry seemed struck by the very idea that he was having the conversation at all.

He recalled visiting Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi at her lakeside home in Yangon, when it was still the capital of what was then called Burma, and sparring with members of the junta. They “assured me that there were no political prisoners” in the country, he said, and “tried to tell me that the people of Myanmar prized order more than they prized democratic rights.”

President Obama has already been to Myanmar twice, and Mr. Kerry several times. But it was only in April that Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, 69, became state counselor and foreign minister and moved into her offices in Naypyidaw, a strange capital carved into a valley a dozen years ago by military leaders obsessed with the fear that the United States, among others, was preparing to invade.

The meeting between Mr. Kerry and Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi was a milestone in one of the Obama administration’s biggest foreign policy experiments: to coax isolated, longtime adversaries into engaging with the United States and gradually moving toward more democratic governance. Iran and Cuba have taken steps but strongly resist fundamental change; efforts with North Korea never got off the ground.

Why that policy succeeded in Myanmar will be studied for decades, and had as much to do with personalities as institutions — chiefly inside the military.

“They accepted defeat, and have generally supported the political transition,” Benjamin J. Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser, said in Washington last week, when the United States lifted sanctions on Myanmar. “This work is incomplete, and the military’s role in politics continues to go beyond what would constitute a full transition to democracy.”

In fact, as soon as Mr. Kerry left Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s office, his motorcade sped along this capital’s empty, eight-lane roads up into the hills to see the nation’s other center of power: the commander in chief of the armed forces, Senior Gen. Min Aung Hlaing, a slight man in a green uniform with none of the Nobel laureate’s international profile. His sparkling headquarters, with 40-foot ceilings and gold trim, and huge parade fields outside, left little question who was in charge of the scarce resources of one of Southeast Asia’s poorest nations.

At a news conference with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, Mr. Kerry acknowledged that he had expressed longstanding concerns that Myanmar’s close relationship with North Korea could include the transfer of nuclear weapons technology. In 2011, a State Department report concluded that Myanmar might be violating its pledges under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, though United States officials, citing the classified nature of the data, have never publicly discussed the intelligence behind their suspicions.

“I did raise the issue with her,” Mr. Kerry said when pressed. “And I am satisfied that with respect” to North Korea, he continued, “clearly Myanmar has taken the steps to address that issue, and we’re satisfied that we’re on the same page.”

Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s comment on the nuclear ambitions of her predecessors drew laughter from Burmese and Americans alike. “If they did, they haven’t said anything about that to me,” she said. “The previous government was not in the habit of informing me of what they were doing.”

Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi is not Myanmar’s president because the Constitution, as drafted by the military, prohibits anyone whose children hold passports from another country from serving as president. (Ms. Aung Suu Kyi’s husband, who died in 1999, was British, and their sons, Kim and Alexander, were born in Britain). A political ally, Htin Kyaw, was placed in the office, allowing Ms. Aung Suu Kyi to essentially hold the reins of power.

There has already been a sharp disagreement with her American benefactors. She recently urged the new United States ambassador here, Scot A. Marciel, to avoid calling the Muslim minority “Rohingya,” as they are known by much of the outside world.

“Emotive terms make it very difficult for us to find a peaceful and sensible resolution to our problems,” Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi told reporters on Sunday. “All that we are asking is that people should be aware of the difficulties we are facing and to give us enough space to solve all our problems.”

By United States estimates, 125,000 Rohingya are kept in camps under strict travel restrictions. Battles between Buddhists and Muslims, who have been denied basic rights, including citizenship, broke out four years ago in the western state of Rakhine.

Buddhist nationalists in Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party oppose granting rights to the Rohingya, and her request to Mr. Marciel seemed to be a concession to them.

From the air, Naypyidaw, with its modern airport, luxury hotels and wide, carless boulevards, seems almost like a mirage, since it did not exist when I toured the area 30 years ago on a rail and backpack trip.

The rickety train I took decades ago was a leftover from colonial times. It still runs on the same tracks through the town of Pyinmana, long a military stronghold. A return visit there on Saturday showed that little had changed. While the generals had built themselves a capital city resembling a Florida golf resort four miles away, Pyinmana remains stuck in the 1950s, with run-down markets, badly paved roads and stray dogs soaking up the sun.

But at least there were ordinary Burmese there; few were visible in Naypyidaw, save for the families that came to see the Uppatasanti Pagoda, and a display of captured white elephants, considered a sign of national power.

Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi is clearly adapting her own diplomatic style, and it resembles the style she employed in 15 years of house arrest: utter calm. Asked Sunday about the fact that the United States had retained some economic sanctions as leverage for economic and political reform and a rewriting of the Constitution to ensure civilian control over the military, she seemed unperturbed.

“We’re not afraid of sanctions,” she said. “We’re not afraid of scrutiny. We believe that if we are going along the right path, all sanctions should be lifted in good time.”


