


For his bookshop and website One Grand Books, the editor Aaron Hicklin asked people to name the 10 books they’d take with them if they were marooned on a desert island. The next in the series is the artist and performer Justin Vivian Bond, who stars in “Kiki and Herb: Seeking Asylum!” at the Public Theater this month. (Through May 22, One Grand is also hosting a pop-up shop at Industry City in Sunset Park, Brooklyn; a selection of One Grand curators will be reading from their selections on Sat., May 7 at 5 p.m.)

“Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century,” Greil Marcus

“Lipstick Traces” gives a profound and well-documented introduction to countercultural history and is a wonderfully enlightening window into the intellectual underpinnings of rock ’n’ roll.

“The Man Who Fell in Love with the Moon,” Tom Spanbauer

A spiritual manifesto as well as a heartbreakingly beautiful read, this book explores themes of gender, the oppression of women and queers in the old West and is an intense portrayal of the power of the human spirit.

“Play It as It Lays,” Joan Didion

Turned me onto the poetry of nihilism at a very tender age. Spare and strong, “I know what ‘nothing’ means, and keep on playing.”

“The Thief’s Journal,” Jean Genet

Anarchy. Sexuality. Sodomy. Obsession. Nonfiction. Werque!

“Edie: American Girl,” Jean Stein

In high school I was working at Waldenbooks when this book came in. It wasn’t until years later that I realized that emulating Edie Sedgwick and dying facedown on my pillow, high on drugs, might not be the most glamorous way to go.

“Pentimento,” Lillian Hellman

“Pentimento” begins with the words, “Old paint on a canvas.” I look in the mirror and what do I see? Hellu! The fact that the validity of her memoirs has been disputed does not make them any less inspiring.

"Manifestoes of Surrealism,” André Breton

Nothing in “Manifestoes of Surrealism” makes sense, but it’s endlessly readable nonetheless. When I’m writing and I get stuck I crack it open, point to a sentence and take it from there. Who needs to be linear? Not me. I don’t go anywhere without it.

“Concerning the Spiritual in Art,” Wassily Kandinsky

As a student I was so moved by his paintings of music that I needed to know more. I discovered this book, and the imperative to insert a deeper meaning into my work became very clear. Kandinsky taught that it was possible to do so through technique which, in turn, inspired me to take what I do — even the funny things — much more seriously.

“Still Life With Woodpecker,” Tom Robbins

Cosmic and hilarious. I like books that make me laugh out loud. This one does.

“Eustace Chisholm and the Works,” James Purdy

In my opinion, James Purdy is the most underrated writer in American literature, probably because he was gay. His books are heart-wrenching, brutal and sometimes flat-out meanspirited, but they are also incredibly beautiful and endlessly poetic. I’m not all that fond of books that make me cry, but in Purdy’s case, I don’t mind.


