


FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — The Jets’ draft philosophy, as explained by General Manager Mike Maccagnan, is not to let decisions be swayed by needs. If he were to factor them into his evaluations, it could skew the process, and so, Maccagnan has said, he adheres to his board and does not deviate.

As a chaotic first round unfolded Thursday night, careening toward the Jets’ selection at No. 20, and Maccagnan surveyed the players available, it would have been difficult for him not to address a deficiency. Given his pick of positions, Maccagnan went with a versatile linebacker, selecting Darron Lee from Ohio State.

The Jets could have chosen an offensive lineman, a quarterback or a cornerback, and it would have seemed reasonable. As it was, they bypassed two intriguing options — quarterback Paxton Lynch, of Memphis, and linebacker Myles Jack, of U.C.L.A. — to snag Lee, who Coach Todd Bowles said will play inside but has the potential to move outside as well.

Bowles said that Lee’s emergence as a three-down linebacker appealed to the Jets and that his strengths — speed, athleticism, agility — would be critical in a league featuring so many spread offenses.

The Jets’ linebacking corps has absorbed several departures this off-season, including Demario Davis (Cleveland) and Calvin Pace (unsigned) and has an aging stalwart, David Harris, up the middle. It also lacks an obvious choice to play outside linebacker opposite Lorenzo Mauldin, the team’s third-round pick last season.

Lee is expected to slot in behind Erin Henderson, but if he develops as the Jets hope, he will help the defense transition from Harris.

Lee, 20, who is 6 feet 2 inches and, according to Bowles, 232 pounds, recorded 12 sacks across his two seasons with the Buckeyes and 27 ½ tackles for loss.

Lee continues a trend that has spanned coaches and regimes: He is the seventh consecutive defensive player the Jets have taken with their first overall pick, a streak that began in 2010, the year after they traded up to choose Mark Sanchez.

They could still take a quarterback, perhaps as early as Friday, in the second or third round. Among the possibilities then will be Connor Cook of Michigan State, Christian Hackenberg of Penn State, Jacoby Brissett of North Carolina State and Dak Prescott of Mississippi State.


