


BANGKOK — Koh Tachai, one of Thailand’s most beautiful island destinations, will be closed to tourists indefinitely in an attempt to protect it from irreparable harm, the government has announced.

The island, in the Andaman Sea off the coast of Phang Nga Province, is famous for its white-sand beaches and its reefs popular with divers and snorkelers.

The Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation is closing the beaches, the reef and a tourist area on the island “to solve the environmental and natural resources impact which is caused by tourism,” according to an announcement on the department’s website. The order was issued on May 10.

The decision means that Koh Tachai, which stopped receiving visitors on Sunday, will not reopen as is customary in October.

During the tourist season, hundreds of visitors congregate daily on a beach that by government standards should accommodate only 70. Recent video of the island on Thai television showed the beach swarming with tourists, with the tour boats that brought them lined up along the shore. The island is designated as a “primitive zone,” not a park, according to the parks department’s announcement.

Koh Tachai is part of Mu Koh Similan National Park, about 45 miles off Thailand’s southwest coast. The park is normally closed to tourists from mid-May to mid-October because of safety concerns during the monsoon season.

Thanya Netithammakun, the department’s general director, said the park had become increasingly popular with Thai and foreign visitors as word of its beauty spread.

“People are visiting this island, and it’s too overcrowded,” he told Prachachat Turakij, a Thai-language newspaper. “It’s too much for the island to take. It has deteriorated, and it is necessary to close it down to allow the conditions around the island, both land and marine, to recover without interference from tourists’ activity. Otherwise, it may cause great damage.”

Thon Thamrongnawasawat, deputy dean of fisheries at Kasetsart University in Bangkok and a leading advocate of marine conservation, said the closing of the island was “a turning point” in Thai conservation efforts.

He said that rare blue coral had been damaged by tourists and that restaurants had begun operating on the beach to serve the crowds of visitors.

“We can conserve and resist improper tourism,” he wrote on Facebook. “This is a new hope for sustainability in our country.”

Mr. Thamrongnawasawat said the tourism industry had criticized him for speaking out about the need to protect the environment, but that the department’s move was a sign the government was prepared to resist tourist activities that harmed the country’s natural resources.

“The problem is that we have damaged our marine resources for a long time,” he said. “If we want it to recover, we must use strong medicine. I am not proposing to close all islands. But we have to start thinking about the plan to tackle the increasing number of tourists.”


