


Colby Lewis took a no-hit bid into the ninth inning for Texas before Max Muncy broke it up with a leadoff double that glanced off right fielder Nomar Mazara’s glove as the Rangers won at Oakland, 5-1, on Thursday.

Lewis was perfect until walking Yonder Alonso with two outs in the eighth.

Muncy began the ninth with a drive to deep right field. Mazara, a rookie who had made a running catch to rob Muncy of a hit in the third, ran hard toward the corner and tracked down the ball but could not hold on as he crashed into the padded wall.

Mazara looked at his glove as he retrieved the ball. David Feldman, the official scorer, immediately called the play a double, ending Lewis’s quest for Texas’ first no-hitter in 22 years.

Two batters later, Lewis (6-0) lost his shutout when left fielder Ryan Rua could not make a diving catch on a blooper by Coco Crisp that went for a run-scoring double.

Torre to Lead Team U.S.A. The former Yankees manager Joe Torre will serve as the general manager for Team U.S.A. in the 2017 World Baseball Classic.

Torre, now Major League Baseball’s chief baseball officer, managed Team U.S.A. in the 2013 World Baseball Classic, in which the team lost in the second round.

“I’m excited to be involved again,” Torre said in a statement. “I had a taste of international play in 2013 and was disappointed that we didn’t advance further.”

Torre led the Yankees to four World Series titles.

Jim Leyland was previously picked to manage Team U.S.A. in next year’s tournament.

Phillies Minor Leaguer Suspended The Phillies minor-league pitcher Alec Asher was suspended for 80 games by Major League Baseball after testing positive for a banned performance-enhancing substance.

Asher, 24, tested positive for an anabolic steroid used to increase speed and strength. He was on the disabled list at Class AAA Lehigh Valley.

The Phillies acquired Asher as part of the deal that sent Cole Hamels to the Rangers last July. He was 4-2 with a 2.30 E.R.A. in eight starts at AA and AAA this season.

The former Baylor coach Art Briles accused the school of wrongful termination and indicated no interest in settling a federal lawsuit filed against him and the university by a woman who was raped by a football player.

As part of a request for new legal representation separate from the university, Briles said Baylor had used him as a scapegoat for its failings in handling allegations of sexual assault.

“The conclusion is inescapable that the motive of Baylor and the Board of Regents was to use its head football coach and the Baylor athletic department as a camouflage to disguise and distract from its own institutional failure to comply” with federal civil rights protections, Briles’s personal lawyer, Ernest Cannon, wrote in a letter to the university’s lawyers that was included with the motion.

Baylor fired Briles and demoted its president, Ken Starr, to chancellor on May 26 after receiving the results of a university-commissioned investigation into Baylor’s response to sexual assault allegations in recent years. Starr later resigned.

Briles was named as a co-defendant with Baylor in a lawsuit filed in March by a former student who was raped in 2012 by Tevin Elliott, a football player who was later convicted and sent to prison. The lawsuit alleges that Baylor knew Elliott had a history of assaults, failed to protect the victim and others who were attacked, and ignored her when she sought help.

Panthers Extend Rivera’s Deal The Panthers signed Coach Ron Rivera to a contract extension that will keep him with the team through the 2018 season.

The Panthers went 17-2 last season before losing to Denver in the Super Bowl. Rivera, a two-time N.F.L. coach of the year, has led the Panthers to three straight N.F.C. South championships.

Sandusky Granted Hearing The former Penn State assistant football coach Jerry Sandusky was granted three days of hearings in August to develop more information about the claims and arguments he has made in seeking to have his child molestation conviction overturned.

A Pennsylvania judge said the proceeding would address whether prosecutors had improperly leaked information about the investigation and whether defense lawyers should have called Sandusky to testify.

Sandusky is serving a 30-to-60-year sentence.

Top-seeded Roger Federer overcame a 4-1 deficit in the second set to beat Malek Jaziri, 6-3, 7-5, in his bid for a ninth title at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany.

Federer caught up and broke serve for a 6-5 lead before serving out the match. He will play fifth-seeded David Goffin, who advanced when Sergiy Stakhovsky retired with a back injury, in the quarterfinals.

Third-seeded Dominic Thiem breezed past Teymuraz Gabashvili, 6-4, 6-1, to advance to the quarterfinals. He will play eighth-seeded Philipp Kohlschreiber, who beat Ivo Karlovic, 6-7 (7), 6-4, 7-5.

A Wimbledon Winner Falls in Tuneup Petra Kvitova, a two-time Wimbledon champion, joined a list of well-known names who have been beaten amid the rainstorms at the Aegon Classic in Birmingham, England.

Kvitova, who was preparing to seek a third Wimbledon title, lost to Jelena Ostapenko, 6-4, 4-6, 6-3.

Agnieszka Radwanska, the tournament’s top seed, and Belinda Bencic, the youngest player in the world top 10, had already been ousted from the tournament.

The defending champion Lexi Thompson shot a six-under-par 65 on Thursday for a share of the lead at the Meijer L.P.G.A. Classic in Belmont, Mich.

Thompson shot par on her first nine holes before an eagle on the par-5 first started a blistering run that tied her with Laura Davies, Sei Young Kim, Carlota Ciganda and Paula Reto.


