


HUDSON, N.Y. — Zak Pelaccio, the chef associated for years with the flavors of Malaysia at Fatty Crab, is returning to the food of Southeast Asia.

Mr. Pelaccio became known for cooking Southeast Asian food in downtown Manhattan in the early 2000s. But in 2011, he parted ways with the company behind Fatty Crab and its sibling restaurants and transplanted himself to this artists’ magnet in the Hudson Valley to open Fish & Game, a high-end tavern where his vigorously local work won a James Beard Award in May.

He seemed to have moved away from the Malaysian, Thai and Vietnamese accents that had once put him in the spotlight. “I always liked cooking that food,” he said. “But I thought it would be in poor taste for me to depart from the organization and then open up a shop that was somewhat similar.”

Now some time has passed. On Hudson’s main drag, Warren Street, Mr. Pelaccio and his partners recently took over BackBar, an open-air cocktail spot squeezed between an antique shop and a patio full of picnic tables.

At BackBar this month, Mr. Pelaccio and his co-chef at Fish & Game, Kevin Pomplun, plan to introduce a lunch and dinner menu they are calling Bakar at BackBar. Bakar is a reference to “ikan bakar” roadside spots throughout Malaysia where people can snack on grilled fish.

On the lineup are dishes like a spicy laab salad made with pork shoulder, a curried crab and fish chowder, asparagus folded into an omelet with homemade XO sauce and a sesame panna cotta made with palm sugar from Borneo. (Mr. Pelaccio’s wife, the chef and fermentation specialist Jori Jayne Emde, is responsible for many of the from-scratch condiments like fish sauce, red chile sauce, vinegar and sambal that bring an extra punch of heat and funk to the dishes.)

Mr. Pelaccio hopes to debut the new menu about June 21. He said he expects the restaurant to seat 76.

Change is also afoot at Fish & Game, where Mr. Pelaccio and Mr. Pomplun recently introduced a rustic à la carte menu that might feature (depending on the day) spit-roasted duck, beans cooked in a fireplace and a dry-aged rib-eye steak with béarnaise sauce. A meal at Fish & Game is expensive, but the chefs want Bakar at BackBar to be the opposite — nothing on the menu will cost more than $20.

“This is for locals,” Mr. Pelaccio said. “We need a place where people can come and eat lunch for a reasonable price. This has a vibe where it’s sort of easy. It’s not so buttoned up. This could be by the beach.”


