


Around 9 a.m. on June 15, 1904, an overheated horde of Sunday schoolers, most of them from the Lower East Side’s German-American community, piled onto a 13-year-old paddle-wheel boat, giddy at the thought of a scenic, church-sponsored day trip to Locust Grove Picnic Ground at Eatons Neck on Long Island. Of the 1,358 passengers (mostly women and children) who boarded the General Slocum on that summer morning, only 321 made it back alive.

The causes of the fire aboard the General Slocum (named after a Union Army general and New York congressman) remain murky, but contemporary accounts seem to agree that it began with a lit cigarette or a match igniting straw in a storage room. The enormous loss of life is attributed to passengers’ inability to swim; shoddy lifeboats; flotation vests filled with rotten cork (witnesses claimed that those who wore them sank quicker); an inept crew; and negligent actions by both the Knickerbocker Steamboat Company and the skipper. Indeed, the captain, William Henry Van Schaick, who did not go down with the ship, was eventually sentenced to 10 years’ hard labor at Sing Sing (a term reduced after a pardon by President William Howard Taft in 1911).

The New-York Historical Society currently houses more than 20 artifacts related to the event and its aftermath, including scrapbooks, the program for the outing, photographs and letters from survivors.

None are as quietly devastating as a pair of tiny black leather shoes worn by 3-year-old Anna C. Liebenow. Her family collected the shoes after her body was pulled from the East River several days after the fire; they were bequeathed to the Historical Society by Anna’s younger sister, Adella Liebenow Wotherspoon, who survived the event, upon her death in 2004.

“Just reading history about the fire lacks the visceral punch that her sister’s shoes provides,” Valerie Paley, the society’s chief historian and vice president, said. “She had another sibling, Helen, who also died, and her body was never recovered. But we have earrings, which were located in the hull, that the family believed belonged to her.”

The only remaining monuments to the General Slocum disaster are a little fountain at Tompkins Square Park and a slightly more prominent memorial (emblazoned with both an English and a German account of the event) at Lutheran-All Faiths Cemetery in Queens, where many of the unidentified Slocum victims were buried.

“Some have speculated that the anti-German sentiment of the World War I era clamped down on public desire to commemorate a disaster that killed mostly immigrants from that country,” said Greg Young, who along with Tom Meyers produces the popular Bowery Boys podcast, which is devoted to New York history. “I do think a more modern memorial should be considered, not just as a remembrance of the German presence on the Lower East Side but because these were New Yorkers.”

The General Slocum’s sinking was the single largest loss of life locally until Sept. 11, 2001. Mrs. Wotherspoon, who was the youngest passenger saved and became the disaster’s last survivor, was once asked, toward the end of her life, why this grim chapter in Manhattan history was mostly forgotten.

“The Titanic had a great many famous people on it,” she said. “This was just a family picnic.”


