


The producers of “Hamilton” are sharply increasing the cost of the best seats in the house, shattering Broadway’s top ticket price while also more than doubling the number of inexpensive seats available via same-day lotteries.

The paired moves — raising the price for premium seats to $849 while offering 46 seats per show at $10 each — are part of a broader effort to stanch the loss of tens of millions of dollars in potential revenue to scalpers, and to make the show available to people who can’t afford costly theater tickets.

The show is sold out through next January, but the producers have already begun selling tickets for the following four months to some American Express cardholders. They intend to begin selling tickets for that same period to the public after the Tony Awards, which will be broadcast on Sunday evening; “Hamilton” is favored to win multiple awards, including best new musical.

An $849 theater ticket, although less than some people are currently paying for seats to “Hamilton” on the secondary market, is a record for the price being charged directly by a Broadway show. “The Book of Mormon” has long had the most expensive premium ticket on Broadway — last week that show topped out at $477 — and until now “Hamilton” has been lagging slightly behind, at $475 last week.

In the new block of tickets, about 200 seats at every “Hamilton” performance — mostly in the center orchestra — will be sold for $849. The rest of the house — everything but the lottery tickets, or about 1,075 seats per show — will be sold for between $179 and $199 (currently, the regular seats are priced from $139 to $177).

The 46 $10 seats sold via lottery will be in the theater’s first two rows. Currently, 21 seats per show are made available by lottery.

Many corners of the entertainment industry, including concert and sporting event promoters, have been frustrated by the money they are losing to legal and illegal scalping. A New York Times analysis suggests that resellers are making $60 million per year on “Hamilton” tickets — money that does not go to the show’s producers, creators or employees.

“What has certainly been frustrating to me, as a business owner, is to see that my product is being resold at many times its face value and my team isn’t sharing in those profits,” the lead producer of “Hamilton,” Jeffrey Seller, said in an interview on Wednesday. “It’s not fair.”

Mr. Seller said that he believed he has a fiduciary responsibility to his investors to try to stem the profiteering by resellers, and to acknowledge that the market has made clear that tickets to the show are worth vastly more than the prices at which the producers have been selling them.

“How did I get to $849? By continually monitoring the secondary market and finding out where the average is,” Mr. Seller said. “If I’m at $849, I think we may succeed in taking the motivation out of the scalpers to buy those tickets.”

But, he said, he is also determined to get more tickets into the hands of people who are not wealthy. The show has teamed with the Rockefeller Foundation to allow 20,000 New York City public high school students each year to attend the show for $10 (The show gets $70 per seat, with the balance paid by the foundation).

The expanded lottery will allow 19,000 people per year to attend the show for $10 — anyone can enter the lottery (and more than 10,000 people do each day), but Mr. Seller said it is clear that digital lottery participants are younger and more diverse than the show’s general audience.

By raising prices, he said, “In some ways, we’re taking from the rich to give to the poor, because there’s no question those premiums are subsidizing those $10 tickets.”

The scarcity and high price of “Hamilton” tickets have called new attention to the role of so-called ticket bots, which resellers use — illegally, in New York — to purchase large numbers of tickets to hit shows via automated software.

Mr. Seller said Ticketmaster, which sells tickets to “Hamilton,” has taken measures to restrict such sales. The steps buyers must take online to demonstrate that they are not bots are now more elaborate, and tickets are mailed out closer to showtime to reduce the opportunity for reselling.

The show also last month canceled more than $10 million in bulk purchases in excess of stated limits, suspected to have been bought by bots, and plans again to screen the next round of sales for such purchases and scuttle them. No one will be allowed to buy more than six tickets in the next block made available.

Mr. Seller said that he believed the percentage of “Hamilton” seats purchased by bots had already dropped from 78 percent, early in the show’s selling period, to about 25 percent. And the show, working with the Broadway League, is urging lawmakers in Albany to criminalize the use of bots — now a civil violation — and this week its creator and star, Lin-Manuel Miranda, wrote an op-ed piece calling for legislative action.

The secondary market for “Hamilton” tickets has fluctuated over time. It has risen recently with anticipation that Mr. Miranda intends to leave the cast next month, and Mr. Seller said he believes the current average resale price is about $1,000. The Tony Awards could further drive up the resale value, but other factors might drive it down: the departure of some original cast members over the summer, and the opening of other productions, starting in Chicago this fall.


