


Donald J. Trump on Friday rejected an offer to debate Bernie Sanders before the June 7 California primary, saying, “It seems inappropriate that I would debate the second-place finisher” in the Democratic nominating contest.

The two men had been kicking around the idea of a debate since Wednesday, when Mr. Trump appeared on “Jimmy Kimmel Live” and Mr. Kimmel said that Mr. Sanders had passed along an invitation to debate. Mr. Trump, who secured the Republican Party’s nomination for president on Thursday, told Mr. Kimmel he was open to the idea.

But after Mr. Sanders pressed the issue on Friday, Mr. Trump released a statement batting away any debate with him.

“Based on the fact that the Democratic nominating process is totally rigged and crooked Hillary Clinton and Deborah Wasserman Schultz will not allow Bernie Sanders to win, and now that I am the presumptive Republican nominee, it seems inappropriate that I would debate the second-place finisher,” Mr. Trump said.

“Likewise, the networks want to make a killing on these events and are not proving to be too generous to charitable causes, in this case, women’s health issues,” he said in his statement. “Therefore, as much as I want to debate Bernie Sanders — and it would be an easy payday — I will wait to debate the first-place finisher in the Democratic Party, probably crooked Hillary Clinton, or whoever it may be.”

Mr. Sanders is trailing Mrs. Clinton by hundreds of delegates and has repeatedly said he would look forward to debating Mr. Trump. Mrs. Clinton declined an invitation from Fox News to debate Mr. Sanders before the California primary. Mr. Sanders is locked in a tight race with Mrs. Clinton in California and has been trying to generate free media in the state, where it is expensive to advertise.

At a news conference in North Dakota on Thursday, Mr. Trump suggested that he would debate on the condition that the networks donate $10 million to $15 million to charities that support women’s health causes.

Then Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, Jeff Weaver, pressed the issue on Friday, releasing a statement saying that the Sanders campaign had received offers from two networks wishing to host the debate and make “a major contribution to charity.”

Soon after Mr. Trump declined to debate him, Mr. Sanders told reporters in California that he hoped Mr. Trump would change his mind.

“Well, Mr. Trump, what are you afraid of?” Mr. Sanders said. “If you’re so tough, let’s sit down and have that debate.”


