


HONG KONG — When a book publisher disappeared off the streets of Hong Kong in December, only to show up in the custody of the police in China a few days later, residents from across the political spectrum voiced alarm that the safeguards protecting this city’s 7.2 million people from Beijing’s harsh and arbitrary legal system were under grave threat.

Months passed. The case of what eventually became five missing booksellers all affiliated with the same company, which specialized in publishing and selling rumor-filled tales of political intrigue among China’s leadership, faded from the headlines. Three of the men returned to Hong Kong, making implausible statements about having voluntarily cooperated with the police on the mainland. Only one remains in custody.

But on Thursday night, a dramatic news conference held by the fifth bookseller, Lam Wing-kee, brought the story front and center again in Hong Kong conversations.

Mr. Lam’s account of how he was grabbed at a border crossing, handcuffed, blindfolded, taken hundreds of miles away by train, put in solitary confinement and forced to confess to an act — selling books — that is not a crime in his native Hong Kong renewed fears that harsh Chinese justice, or lawlessness, is seeping into a metropolis steeped in the British legal tradition, right down to the white wigs worn by court officials.

Many of the political parties in Hong Kong that support more democracy and are wary of Beijing’s power strongly condemned China’s treatment of Mr. Lam.

The Civic Party, in a statement, called Mr. Lam’s experience “the most serious case of political abduction since the handover,” referring to the 1997 return of Hong Kong from British rule to Chinese sovereignty, in which the city’s robust protections of civil liberties were to be guaranteed for half a century. The youth-focused party Demosisto called for Hong Kong to stand up to the Chinese Communist Party’s “encroachment and unlawful interference.”

About 50 people held a protest in the searing midday sun on Friday outside the central government’s office, and political groups were organizing a march on Saturday.

“We are all Lam Wing-kee,” said one lawmaker, James To. Demonstrators shouted “Publishing is not a crime” and “Reading a book is not a crime.”

“Living in an environment where democracy and freedom is a given, it just shocks me that Hong Kong, a place seemingly free, can have something like this happen,” said Jeff Feng Lee, 18, a Canadian citizen interning for Hong Kong’s Democratic Party.

Even the city’s government, which has come under withering criticism because it is perceived as looking out too much for the interests of Beijing, felt the need to assure nervous residents. John Tsang, the financial secretary, told reporters that “it is unlawful for any law enforcement agencies from outside Hong Kong to take law enforcement action here.”

“That would be unacceptable,” he added.

Beyond the protests and official statements, many other people reacted to Mr. Lam’s story in their own ways on Friday.

On Thursday evening, Mr. Lam described how the Chinese police had zeroed in on the mailing lists of Causeway Bay Books, the shop where he worked and that is now closed. The police were interested in the bookstore’s customers in mainland China, he said, and so allowed him to return to Hong Kong on Tuesday after more than seven months in custody to retrieve a hard drive with customer information.

On Friday, employees at Hong Kong Reader Bookstore, one of the dwindling number of shops that sell volumes banned in the mainland, said they had separated records of people’s purchases from their personal information, including names, email addresses and telephone numbers.

“We’d like to stay low-profile to protect our customers and ourselves,” Timmy Wong, an employee at the store since 2007, said by phone. “We’re not as brave as Mr. Lam. We didn’t think we could be in any trouble until Mr. Lam came forward.”

Mr. Lam’s account of his apprehension and detention contradicted statements made by several of his colleagues, who maintained that they were voluntarily helping the Chinese with an investigation.

One colleague, Lee Bo, whose disappearance from Hong Kong on Dec. 30 brought international attention to the case, insisted that he had slipped into China of his own free will, avoiding border controls. That was hard for many people to believe, because it countered statements Mr. Lee had made before his disappearance, maintaining that he was safe because, unlike his associates, who had vanished weeks earlier, he had “avoided going to the mainland for many years,” he told The South China Morning Post.

But on Thursday night, Mr. Lam said that Mr. Lee had told him privately that he had indeed been taken into China against his will. Moreover, Mr. Lam said, Mr. Lee had given the Chinese police a list of the bookstore’s customers. Mr. Lee, on his Facebook page on Friday, said that he had never told Mr. Lam that he had gone to the mainland against his will and had not given a list of the bookstore’s customers to the mainland police.

Also rebutting Mr. Lam were his Chinese jailers.

On Friday, Sing Tao Daily, a newspaper in Hong Kong, reported that a mainland Chinese police officer in charge of the investigation had said that Mr. Lam was suspected of illegal activities for his work in cross-border book selling. The unidentified officer also claimed that Mr. Lam had “asked for the help of public security,” because he did not want to return to Hong Kong for family reasons.

“During this time, Lam put forward that because he was on poor terms with his wife and son, it was difficult for him to reside in Hong Kong, and he asked the public security organs for help,” the official said, according to Sing Tao. “Accordingly, the public security organs made appropriate arrangements.”

When asked several times about the episode at a routinely scheduled news conference on Friday, a spokeswoman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, Hua Chunying, said, “Lam Wing-kee is a Chinese citizen, and when he broke China’s law in the mainland of China, the authorities had the right to take actions in accordance with the law.”


