


Fallout continues over the controversial Stanford sexual assault case. Here are highlights of the latest developments:

■ In an unusual move, prosecutors on Tuesday had Judge Aaron Persky of the Santa Clara County Superior Court removed from hearing a case in which a male nurse was accused of sexually assaulting an anesthetized female patient.

Prosecutors filed a peremptory challenge to Judge Persky after he dismissed charges against a woman in an unrelated misdemeanor theft trial on Monday. That objection automatically prevented him from presiding over a preliminary hearing in the sexual assault case.

“We are disappointed and puzzled at Judge Persky’s unusual decision to unilaterally dismiss a case before the jury could deliberate,” the Santa Clara district attorney, Jeff Rosen, said in a statement. “After this and the recent turn of events, we lack confidence that Judge Persky can fairly participate in this upcoming hearing in which a male nurse sexually assaulted an anesthetized female patient.”

The nurse, Cecil Webb, is accused of touching the genitals and breasts of a sedated woman in 2014 at Kaiser Permanente’s Santa Clara Medical Center, according to The San Jose Mercury News. He was charged with a felony count of sexual battery.

The backlash has also grown over what critics have denounced as the judge’s too-lenient sentence this month for Brock Allen Turner, 20, a former Stanford student and champion swimmer convicted of sexually assaulting an intoxicated, unconscious woman behind a Dumpster in January 2015.

Judge Persky, 54, had been harshly criticized, and even threatened, for sentencing Mr. Turner to six months in jail and three years probation for three felony counts: intent to commit rape, sexual penetration with a foreign object of an intoxicated person and sexual penetration with a foreign object of an unconscious person.

■ On Monday, The Palo Alto Weekly published a scathing anonymous letter from a juror in the Stanford case who said he was “absolutely shocked and appalled” by the sentence. The publication said it had verified the letter writer’s identity by inspecting his court-issued attendance certificate.

“After the guilty verdict, I expected that this case would serve as a very strong deterrent to on-campus assaults, but with the ridiculously lenient sentence that Brock Turner received, I am afraid that it makes a mockery of the whole trial and the ability of the justice system to protect victims of assault and rape,” the juror wrote. “Clearly there are few to no consequences for a rapist even if they are caught in the act of assaulting a defenseless, unconscious person.”

■ At least 16 potential jurors have refused to work with Judge Persky in the theft trial because they said they were uneasy about his sentence in the Stanford sexual assault case.

“I can’t believe what you did,” one juror said to the judge.

The judge responded to each complaint with “I understand,” and dismissed the potential jurors.

■ Eighteen members of the House took turns on Wednesday night reading portions of the courtroom statement by the Stanford victim. Representative Jackie Speier, Democrat of California, organized the reading and is the sponsor of legislation that would require the Department of Education to provide a list of institutions under investigation over sexual assaults.


