


Scott Rudin, a prolific and powerful producer on Broadway and in Hollywood, has withdrawn from a much-anticipated project to adapt the popular movie “Groundhog Day” into a stage musical.

The development is abrupt and unexpected, occurring just weeks before the show is scheduled to begin performances at the Old Vic Theater in London. “Groundhog Day” is collaboration between the songwriter Tim Minchin and the director Matthew Warchus, following their success with “Matilda the Musical.” The new musical is scheduled to run there from July 15 to Sept. 17, and had been scheduled to begin performances on Broadway next January; it is not clear how Mr. Rudin’s withdrawal might affect the transfer.

In an emailed statement, Mr. Rudin suggested that he was not satisfied with his ability to influence the evolving show, and had opted to move on. He has plenty on his plate: He has already announced that he will be producing revivals of “The Front Page” and “Hello, Dolly!” on Broadway this season, and is expected to announce a revival of “The Glass Menagerie” as well.

“The production in New York is going to be a transfer of the London production, which is not how we had originally conceived the project when I joined it,” Mr. Rudin said of “Groundhog Day.” “The more it evolved, the more it felt that there was no way for me to do what I like to do, so I asked to withdraw. Not every ideal show happens in the ideal circumstances for everyone involved. I wish them well with it. It’s a great show, and I’m sure it will be a big hit.”

The withdrawal was confirmed by two other producers, Lia Vollack, of Sony Pictures, and André Ptaszynski, of Whistle Pig Productions.

“Scott came to us last week and said he didn’t feel this was something he wanted to continue with in its current configuration,” they said in a joint statement. “We met about it, we did our best to convince him otherwise as we are all close friends, but in the end we respect his decision. We are grateful for his work over the last two years, and we certainly wish we could have completed this journey together.”

Mr. Rudin announced the “Groundhog Day” project in April 2015. He has an ongoing relationship with the Old Vic, in the form of a right of first refusal to commercial transfers of the theater’s work. Mr. Warchus is the Old Vic’s artistic director.

A spokeswoman for the Old Vic did not immediately return a call seeking comment.


