


Despite a climate of financial insecurity and fluctuating global markets, one tier of the jewelry industry is thriving: haute joaillerie, the most expensive pieces available, many of which are one-of-a-kind and can cost millions.

To meet demand, luxury jewelers are increasing the number of high-priced pieces, often including extremely rare and valuable gemstones as distinctive features.

At Boodles, for example, sales of jewelry that retails for more than 50,000 pounds, or $72,000, have tripled in the last five years. Chanel Fine Jewelry has been steadily increasing its creation of pieces costing more than 500,000 euros, or $560,000, and this year, the average price of its high jewelry is rising to about €400,000 from €250,000.

Similarly, Piaget is raising the median value of the items in its high jewelry collection by 30 percent; in July, it will unveil new pieces including a €2 million emerald-and-diamond necklace. At Tiffany & Co., the average price of the items in the Blue Book, an annual catalog that spotlights the jeweler’s most expensive creations, has increased 78 percent from the previous year, to $805,000.

“These are tangible ways of holding wealth, which in an uncertain world, post-financial crisis, has been an attractive thing,” explained Liam Bailey, global head of research at the property consulting firm Knight Frank, whose annual Wealth Report tracks the spending behavior of individuals with more than $30 million worth of investable assets. “There seems to be a growing demand from the very wealthy for collectibles in the wider sense, and that includes jewelry, art and certain types of antiques. There is a desire from wealthy people to have more of their wealth sitting in those particular asset classes.”

Not all expensive jewelry, however, is created equal.

While the very top end of the market is growing — even in challenged regions like China, Brazil and the Middle East — sales of jewelry priced in the thousands has declined. Women’s luxury jewelry sales, including silver necklaces and gold bracelets, were down 4 percent between 2014 and 2015, according to the market research firm Euromonitor International. In the same period, men’s luxury jewelry sales were down 6.6 percent.

The market for luxury watches, traditionally considered a solid investment, also decreased, with sales down 4.5 percent last year, according to Euromonitor. Some of that downturn can be traced to China, where there has been a government crackdown on bribery, which often involved the gift of a luxury-brand watch. “Watches have taken a bad connotation, in that there’s been a significant amount of social media activity depicting this or that officer sporting a €10,000 or €20,000 or €50,000 watch,” explained Luca Solca, a luxury goods analyst at Exane BNP Paribas. “They have become a symbol of corruption.”

At the highest end of the jewelry market, colored diamonds and rare, deeply hued gemstones, like the 16.93-carat Colombian emerald at the center of a ring offered by Graff, are especially gaining in popularity.

At Boodles, colored diamonds accounted for £4.34 million in sales during its most recent fiscal year, which ended in February; in the previous 12 months, its sales in the category totaled £700,000. “What you get with blue diamonds, pink diamonds, green diamonds is a huge rare factor, and therefore an investment factor, when it comes to buying the stones,” said Jody Wainwright, Boodles’s director of precious gemstones. “For the top-end customer, you need something really special — just another diamond isn’t really going to do it.”

The gems’ scarcity is a key factor in their prices and their desirability. “The demand in these stones by collectors vastly exceeds the supply,” said Henri Barguirdjian, president and chief executive of Graff USA, which is selling a ring that showcases a 22.41-carat fancy intense yellow diamond, as well as a 5.09-carat fancy vivid blue diamond ring that retails for $20 million. “They’re very difficult to find — it’s one stone in a million of stones. For the blue diamond, it’s one stone in tens of millions of stones. I won’t see another one like this for maybe five or 10 years.”

Fflur Roberts, Euromonitor’s head of luxury goods, said: “Consumers that are buying this jewelry want something that’s completely exclusive. That’s a statement in itself, that I have this beautiful piece of jewelry that only I have.”

Among some affluent customers, such pieces have allure that goes beyond liquidity and intrinsic worth.

“The other advantage jewelry has is that it’s very portable, so as a store of value, it’s a very convenient way to transfer very significant amounts of wealth across borders with no questions asked,” Mr. Solca said. “In a world of higher transparency in banking practices, jewelry could also appeal potentially as a way to carry wealth around as you please.”


