


BELO HORIZONTE, Brazil — Around here, they don’t talk about that night a whole lot anymore.

It’s a Saturday in the Mineirão, and a smattering of fans wander into a poorly attended top-flight club match inside the stadium where, nearly two years ago, Germany thrashed Brazil, 7-1, in the World Cup semifinals. That moment — one of the most remarkable games of soccer ever played, given the score, the setting and the subplots — once left mouths hanging open. These days, it is more likely to produce only a shrug.

It is not about humiliation; it is merely indifference. One of the many myths about Brazilian fans is that they love soccer. The reality is that they love winning, and they revere winning beautifully. But as their national team drifts relentlessly away from its glorious past, they have rarely been further from both of those things.

“The sport being bad here isn’t anything new,” said Tostão, a member of the country’s 1970 World Cup championship team. A physician, Tostão made his own diagnosis. “This isn’t a sudden sickness, and that 7-1 semifinal wasn’t just a sudden problem,” he said. “The standard has been falling for 40 years, getting progressively worse, with no medicine to quickly cure it.”

For those who have not checked in on the patient since its World Cup implosion, the prognosis is no better. The coach who oversaw the World Cup disaster, Luiz Felipe Scolari, was fired after the tournament and replaced with the even more pragmatic Dunga. But the results have not improved.

At one stage during last year’s Copa América, Dunga’s Brazil had four central defenders on the field as it ran down the clock against lowly Venezuela. Brazil went out in the quarterfinals. Almost a year later, Brazil sits outside the qualification spots for the 2018 World Cup, with only two wins in its first six qualifying matches. As the Copa América Centenario kicks off this weekend and the Rio Olympics loom this summer, Brazil’s national team is, in many ways, a shadow of its famous past, fearful rather than feared.

“Maybe our game is the worst it’s ever been,” said Juca Kfouri, one of Brazil’s most respected soccer analysts. “They had so many problems in that moment in 2014, but what did they change? They replaced Felipão with Dunga as manager, and that was it, when the problems run so much deeper. But the issue with our football is more structural than technical. The huge corruption doesn’t allow it to get better, to be more professional, so we can actually tackle the problems.”

The joke used to go that when God created the world, he decided to give Brazil the best soccer players and the worst administrators. It drew laughs until recent times, when only the second part was actually true. One need look only at the three most recent presidents of the C.B.F., the national soccer association, to truly understand the levels of disarray: All three have been charged by the United States Department of Justice in its investigation of corruption in soccer. The incumbent, Marco Polo Del Nero, was recently restored to his post despite his indictment but has no plans to travel to the Copa América out of fear that he might be detained.

“There is a promiscuous relationship inside Brazilian football,” Tostão said. “You have C.B.F. administrators heading for jail, and this helped along and sped up the failure of Brazilian football. So much has to be changed to get better — the administration, the management of the football here, the players have to be created differently.”

Listening to other Brazilian greats does not inspire confidence that change is on the way. Zico, a star in the 1970s and ’80s, described those controlling the Brazilian game as “businessmen with powerful economic interests, not men who want to see the best football.” Romário, a World Cup winner in 1994 and now a member of Congress, has called the C.B.F. “a gang of thieves.” And Kaká, a former world player of the year, recently lamented that “there’s no organization, nobody dealing with the future.”

International results bear that out. Brazil, the only country to have played in every World Cup, last won the tournament in 2002. Back at the Mineirão, the club that calls the stadium home, Cruzeiro, is the perfect representation of the state of Brazilian domestic soccer.

In 2013 and 2014, Cruzeiro won the Brazilian title under Coach Marcelo Oliveira, and by the start of 2015, defender Paulo Andre attributed the team’s winning ways to the patience that had allowed the club to instill a clear philosophy. Yet four games into last season, Cruzeiro’s leadership abruptly fired Oliveira. Now on its fourth coach since, Cruzeiro sits near the bottom of the league.

That kind of turnover is not unusual; last season, across the 20-team Serie A, there were 31 managerial changes, a record probably unmatched worldwide. Critics say that type of obsession with short-term triumphs is what has stunted long-term growth. Teams continually changing strategy are more likely to cast off players who do not fit into a new coach’s plans, and those that lose games — and money — have even more incentive to sell young players rather than wait and hope that they develop into valuable assets.

It is little wonder, then, that a Chinese league willing to pay almost any price for imported players has overtaken Europe as the major export market for the Brazilian league’s best talent, or that the country’s national team has never been as reliant on one star as it is now on Neymar.

Unquestionably his country’s best player, Neymar is the fur coat covering a threadbare suit. But he will not play in the Copa América, left off the roster in the hopes that he could deliver an Olympic gold medal in Rio instead. Without him, the Brazil that has arrived in the United States this month is a mix of physical and functional, a hard-running side that reminds few Brazilians of the teams that once carried the best of Brazil’s culture into the world with creativity, passion, color and flair.

“We were blessed with many generations of incredible players,” said Kfouri, the analyst. “That was seen as a rule, and now people are realizing it was the exception. We aren’t creating those players, and part of the problem has been the property speculation — green spaces have been done away with, they are trying to bring in laws that limit beach football, so that doesn’t allow for street footballers. But then we don’t produce in academies, as there’s a total lack of management structure.

“The solutions are obvious, but those in suits think we were once No. 1, so they don’t have to do anything.”


