


PHILADELPHIA — The members of Modern Baseball, a budding four-piece rock band based here, laugh constantly at everything: how they managed to graduate from college while touring the country, Internet memes, one another’s romantic histories, even a near suicide that almost derailed the group’s biggest, most important release to date.

“I like how we’re at this point about it,” said Brendan Lukens, 23, after the giggles subsided as he detailed the lowest moments of his young life. “That feels good.”

Scruffy and laid-back in the distinct manner of 20-somethings without office jobs, Modern Baseball has led something of a charmed existence, despite its personal hurdles. By playing an outmoded style of music — somewhere in the much-derided space between pop-punk and emo — with zero pretense and almost too much heart, the band has created an intimate, largely D.I.Y. world (and gained an obsessive following) that feels fresh and vital, even within a genre that crested more than a decade ago and has largely resisted sonic evolution.

On Friday, Modern Baseball will release “Holy Ghost,” its third LP and first with any expectations attached to it after the unexpected success of its 2014 album, “You’re Gonna Miss It All,” a wry, half-hour tour de force for the Instagram generation.

The new album, divided into A and B sides, with Mr. Lukens and the band’s other songwriter, Jake Ewald, each taking a half, still clocks in under 30 minutes but builds on emo’s standard themes — fresh emotional wounds, imagined revenge and self-loathing — to confront more grown-up concerns, namely loss and mental illness.

“We had to really think for the first time to try to be more analytical in the songs,” said Mr. Ewald, 23, whose tracks detail the thrilling jitters of a new relationship (the charmingly specific “Mass”), as well as the death of his grandfather and the havoc it wreaked on his religious family (“Holy Ghost,” “Wedding Singer”).

Mr. Lukens added: “We were reworking our lives. That’s why it feels so new, like a rebirth of the band.”

In August 2015, after an intervention by his friends and parents, Mr. Lukens entered a five-week outpatient treatment program for his alcohol addiction and bipolar disorder. The week after he returned, Modern Baseball entered the studio to record “Holy Ghost.”

“I hadn’t written any of my half,” Mr. Lukens said with another big laugh. “I was in a very fragile state, but it was easy to write after treatment, because everything I was processing was still super-fresh.”

Unsurprisingly, the five songs he wrote over those three weeks — about “picking yourself up, and it being O.K. for others to pick you up” — are the band’s most raw and ferocious yet. “Even if you can’t see it now/We’re proud of what’s to come/and you,” Mr. Lukens sings, seemingly to himself, on the album closer, “Just Another Face.”

Modern Baseball began when the two singers met as high schoolers in suburban Maryland — Mr. Lukens briefly dated Mr. Ewald’s twin sister — and started writing songs while simultaneously discovering music that spoke directly to disaffected teenagers.

“Jake showed me all my favorite bands,” Mr. Lukens said.

Mr. Ewald chimed in, “I hadn’t found anybody who actually liked those bands yet.”

Mid-2000s emo groups from the Myspace era, including Motion City Soundtrack, Say Anything and Brand New, were early inflection points for the pair, to whom previous commercial pop-punk bands like Blink-182 and Green Day count as oldies. (Never mind the ’80s hardcore groups that helped create that lineage.)

“I got into that kind of music from the bands that got into it from Blink-182,” Mr. Ewald said.

By 2011, when the two moved to Philadelphia for college, such styles were largely out of vogue, as youth culture gravitated more toward rap and electronic music.

Zack Zarrillo, 23, who befriended Modern Baseball while running Property of Zack, a music blog, now defunct, dedicated to pop-punk, pointed to a fallow period for the genre after the Top 40 success of groups like Fall Out Boy and Panic! at the Disco.

“So much money got pumped into everything — bands would get signed to major labels before going on a tour,” Mr. Zarrillo said. “They weren’t playing house shows and developing from within.”

Modern Baseball went the old, do-it-yourself route, while altogether avoiding the genre’s more embarrassing affectations (like the swooping Pete Wentz haircuts and tight jeans of the early aughts). “Concrete was paved all over the entire scene,” Mr. Zarrillo said, “and it took a while for Modern Baseball to be the flower to push through it.”

At Drexel University, Mr. Ewald met the bassist Ian Farmer, 23, and the drummer Sean Huber, 25, who rounded out Modern Baseball in time for its self-recorded debut album, “Sports,” in 2012. Using the music platform Bandcamp and support from websites like Property of Zack and AbsolutePunk.net, the music spread via word of mouth, dovetailing with a so-called emo revival, led by bands including the Wonder Years, the Hotelier and Hop Along.

“When we got to California on our first full tour,” Mr. Ewald said, “people knew the songs.”

Run for Cover Records, a Boston label, took notice and signed the band for its follow-up. “As soon as we heard it, we just knew the music was super-relatable,” said Tom Chiari, the label’s manager. “You’re Gonna Miss It All” went on to become Run for Cover’s biggest release, selling nearly 30,000 copies in the United States.

“It’s completely disarming to see a band at all these days, or from any era, that’s just not trying to be cool,” Mr. Chiara said. “There’s really no cultivation of the image. They can only be that way.”

With success (and aging), however, came more stress, especially for Mr. Lukens, who had struggled for a long time with depression, anxiety and self-harm. “When I would go on tour, I would be great, and then I would come home ...,” he said, trailing off.

After returning from the band’s biggest tour to date — opening for its heroes, Say Anything — Mr. Lukens said he went up to the roof of the house that Modern Baseball’s members had shared for years with thoughts of taking his life. A coincidental text from Mr. Ewald snapped him out of it, Mr. Lukens said, and within days he entered treatment.

“Opening up about my mental illness to the public has definitely been the most challenging thing I’ve ever done in my life,” he said.

But Modern Baseball and its fans have kept him going. “It can get intense, the amount of people that trust us and want us to be a part of their personal lives,” Mr. Lukens said. “But I think we’re starting to understand how we can connect to everyone.”

During a music-video shoot last month at a local cemetery, the band was giddy, surrounded by friends and collaborators who had watched its rise from Philadelphia basements to national headlining tours. Memories and inside jokes were tossed around, adding to the casual, intimate vibe.

And before Mr. Lukens could finish explaining that he was starting to feel anxious, he was already getting a hug.


