


As the prosecution’s witnesses testify in a gang-assault case against nine Rikers Island correction officers, a band of their colleagues keeps watch in the Bronx County Hall of Justice, where the case is being tried.

Jurors have heard from a doctor who treated the inmate, Jahmal Lightfoot; investigators who looked into the use of force against him; a prisoner who said he heard Mr. Lightfoot groaning during the July 2012 attack that left him with orbital bone fractures; and Mr. Lightfoot himself.

The nine current and former officers are on trial in the beating of Mr. Lightfoot and an attempted cover-up at New York City’s jail complex. The most serious charge is attempted gang assault in the first degree, which carries a prison sentence of up to 15 years. Other charges include attempted assault, tampering with physical evidence, falsifying business records and official misconduct.

Along with the jury, up to three dozen current or retired correction officers and union representatives have been reviewing the evidence and scrutinizing, sometimes audibly, each ruling made by the judge, Steven Barrett.

The officers go to State Supreme Court to support the defendants, but they may also see their own fates hanging in the balance of what Justice Barrett described as “a simple, almost one-fact case” that could rest on whether Mr. Lightfoot had a weapon, or whether officers thought he did.

One former officer, Victor Rodman, regularly sits in the back row of the courtroom. He is trying to raise money to appeal a conviction of his own. Mr. Rodman was sentenced in January to 90 days in jail for punching an inmate who then lost the sight in one eye.

“It’s similar,” he said of the current trial.

Since colleagues helped him get through his ordeal, Mr. Rodman said, he wanted to show his solidarity.

He and others following the case share a widespread belief among officers that their profession has been targeted by the city and unfairly demonized by the public.

Despite the staunch support from some, Patrick Ferraiuolo, president of the Correction Captains’ Association, said he was disappointed by the small number that turned out in support from the defendants’ ranks.

He noted the seven officers, a chief and the two captains — including one who is being tried separately — who have been charged. “And you don’t have a packed courthouse?” Mr. Ferraiuolo said. Most people who come to sit and watch, he said, are retired. “And that is a sin and I’m not going to sugarcoat that.”

Even though the unions sent reminders to members to attend to show support, Mr. Ferraiuolo said some officers were unaware of the trial, including some who work on Rikers Island.

Of those who have shown up, some have expressed skepticism that the officers would be treated fairly.

Mr. Rodman, who is already upset with the court over his conviction, said the judge was derided in some circles as “A.D.A. Barrett,” as in assistant district attorney, for his tendency to side with the prosecution.

Justice Barrett seems firm, with a sense of humor, about order in the courtroom. At one point, he admonished defense lawyers for theatrics before the jury and at another time instructed supporters in the courtroom to “try not to make any outbursts or grunts” with the jury present. The judge also chastised a prosecutor for arriving late.

During the trial, events unfolding outside the courtroom have crept in.

Since the trial began in March, news has surfaced of a corruption inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation into Norman Seabrook, the head of the union that represents the city’s correction officers, who was in the courtroom for the first day of testimony.

Mr. Ferraiuolo was called away from the trial last month when a correction officer was arrested in the assault of a prisoner inside a holding cell at the courthouse. Mr. Ferraiuolo had just detailed in an interview six cases of urine being thrown at other correction officers in one week in March — the same provocation the officer said caused him to beat an inmate with his radio.

As news of assault charges against that officer broke, Judge Barrett, at the request of defense lawyers, instructed jurors to ignore news media reports of cases similar to the one before the court.

For a group of officers already feeling scrutinized, even their camaraderie can seem like a liability.

Defense lawyers have called for mistrials, once recently because of the prosecution’s handling of Sandy Arkhurst, an officer who was in the area working overtime when the beating took place but who says he heard nothing.

Pishoy Yacoub, an assistant district attorney, asked questions about his relationship with each defendant, eliciting responses about officers’ having each other’s backs “100 percent.”

“Even on the stand, right?” Mr. Yacoub asked.


