


Dee Gordon, the reigning National League batting champion and an All-Star second baseman for the Miami Marlins, was suspended for 80 games early Friday because he tested positive for performance-enhancing drugs. Major League Baseball announced the suspension after the Marlins’ victory in Los Angeles, saying that Gordon had tested positive for exogenous testosterone and clostebol.

The suspension was the second in eight days for a player coming off the best season of his career. On April 22, Chris Colabello, an undrafted former independent leaguer who hit .321 for the Toronto Blue Jays last season, was also suspended for 80 games.

Gordon has a different pedigree: His father, Tom, was a longtime major league pitcher, and he was a heralded prospect who had already made an All-Star team with the Dodgers before the Marlins traded for him in December 2014.

Last season, though, Gordon hit .333 — 61 points above his career average as a Dodger — and also led the league in stolen bases and hits while winning a Gold Glove. The Marlins rewarded him with a five-year, $50 million contract in January, although he was to make just $3 million this season. He will not be paid during the suspension.

Gordon, who dropped his appeal after Thursday’s game — in which he drove in the tying run as the Marlins completed a four-game sweep of the Dodgers — issued a statement through the Players’ Association Friday morning. He denied using banned drugs on purpose.

“Though I did not do so knowingly, I have been informed that test results showed I ingested something that contained prohibited substances,” the statement said. “The hardest part about this is feeling that I have let down my teammates, the organization, and the fans. I have been careful to avoid products that could contain something banned by M.L.B. and the 20+ tests that I have taken and passed throughout my career prove this. I made a mistake and I accept the consequences.”

Colabello had also said that he did not know how he could have tested positive, and had asked fans to “take a look at the man that I am” before judging him. Gordon, too, had a previously spotless reputation: He is humble, polite and well-liked, and the Marlins’ owner, Jeffrey Loria, praised his character when announcing the contract in January.

“It’s truly incredible and historic what he did in his first season with our ball club,” Loria said in a statement then.

After the positive test, of course, it is fair to question just how Gordon achieved that incredible season. After Thursday’s game, Miami’s team president, David Samson, told reporters in Los Angeles that the Marlins would welcome Gordon back. But he did not sound sympathetic to him.

“The Marlins completely support the Major League Baseball drug prevention program in every way,” Samson said, adding that the Marlins were informed on Thursday. “That said, it is a huge disappointment and a huge loss for our team. We love Dee Gordon, but we do not like what he did.”

Marlins Manager Don Mattingly, who also managed Gordon with the Dodgers, said he was “shocked and surprised” at the news, which deflated a team that should have been celebrating its sweep.

“As a team you would expect our guys to be in there all excited, then we get this news — not quite the feeling,” Mattingly said. “But from there, we’ll support Dee. These guys love Dee. I feel like he’s one of my kids, to be honest with you. I’ve known him so long. We’re going to love him and we’re going to move forward.”

Colabello was told on March 13 that he had tested positive for dehydrochlormethyltestosterone, but he was not suspended until April 22, after his appeal was denied. Gordon had also played, for an unspecified period of time, after his positive test and before he dropped his appeal.

That angered at least one prominent player, the Detroit Tigers’ Justin Verlander, who said on Twitter that news of performance-enhancing drugs was “killing me.”

“If u test positive u need to not play,” he continued. “You shouldn’t be allowed to effect games while appealing.”

Gordon is hitting .266, and though he has a low .289 on-base percentage, he was tied for the team lead in runs scored, with 13, and led the Marlins in steals, with six.


