


Matt Bomer, Kelsey Grammer, Lauren Ambrose, David Krumholtz, Jessica Paré, David Arquette and Zoë Kravitz will be among the stars included in the latest slate of Amazon pilots, debuting on June 17.

The company announced eight new shows on Thursday, including six for children, that it will consider turning into series for its streaming service, based in part on viewer feedback. The pilots are available for the public to watch at Amazon.com, typically for around 30 days, with any resulting series available only to the company’s Prime subscribers.

The Emmy-winning “Transparent” and Golden Globe-winning “Mozart in the Jungle” each began as Amazon pilots, as did “The Man in the High Castle,” the Amazon original series most streamed by Prime members globally.

“The Interestings,” adapted from the Meg Wolitzer best seller, follows a group of artistic teenagers from summer camp in 1974 through several decades of adulthood. Ms. Ambrose stars as an actress who uses her wit to compensate for what she’s lacking in glamour, money and talent. Mike Newell (“Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire,” “Four Weddings and a Funeral”) directed the pilot, which also features Mr. Krumholtz and Ms. Paré.

“The Last Tycoon,” written and directed by Billy Ray, the Oscar-nominated screenwriter of “Captain Phillips,” was adapted from the F. Scott Fitzgerald novel about a Hollywood golden boy (Mr. Bomer) battling his boss and father figure (Mr. Grammer) for the soul of a film studio during the Depression.

Four pilots are aimed at children ages 6 to 11, including “Sigmund and the Sea Monsters,” a live-action show based on Sid and Marty Krofft’s 1970s Saturday-morning series about two brothers who befriend a sea monster. Mr. Arquette plays Sigmund’s biggest threat, the hunter Captain Barnabas.

“Little Big Awesome,” animated by the studio Titmouse (“Motor City,” “Metalocalypse”), follows two friends through a world where sea turtles fly and flowers talk.

“Morris and the Cow,” about a 10-year-old determined to become a cowboy, features the voices of Jermaine Fowler (“CollegeHumor”) and Ms. Kravitz (“Divergent”).

In “Toasty Tales,” written by Merriwether Williams, a “SpongeBob SquarePants” alum, three best friends happen to be marshmallows.

Two pilots are intended for preschoolers: “The Curious Kitty and Friends,” about Komaneko, a cat who explores with video camera and knapsack in tow, and “Jazz Duck,” about a duck who sounds like a saxophone.


