


ALBANY — With little movement on state ethics laws, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced a late push in the legislative session on Wednesday to tighten restrictions on election laws governing money given to candidates through so-called independent expenditure committees.

In particular, the governor will suggest clarifying criteria — via a legal opinion and legislation to be introduced — for determining if a candidate is improperly coordinating with a committee, including whether the candidate and committee have overlapping donor bases, past staff members in common or the same consultants.

Shared office space or information would also be considered evidence of improper coordination under the governor’s plan, outlined in a speech given on Wednesday at Fordham Law School, as would similarities in campaign material produced by a candidate and a committee.

The plan — laid out in an opinion from his counsel, Alphonso David — would also set up a so-called safe harbor provision for independent committees to list their donors and other information so as to avoid the appearance of conflict between the committees and candidates. If made into law, such violations would be felonies, according to the governor’s office.

Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, framed his remarks as an attack on Citizens United, the 2010 Supreme Court decision that profoundly loosened limits on political contributions, saying that the decision created a “fiction” that independent expenditure committees “would actually, truly act independently” and mocking a campaign finance system in which “nobody knows who anybody is.”

“The collusion, the coordination, the subterfuge, the fraud in the current political system is rampant,” Mr. Cuomo said. He added that Congress, the Federal Election Commission “and even the states have done a poor job in policing — and I include our state in that as well.”

State election law says that candidates or their representatives cannot “authorize, request, suggest, foster or cooperate” with the delivery of an independent committee’s message. Mr. David said such terms were often too vague for investigators or regulators to interpret.

Though not an exact rebuttal, the governor’s speech seemed to touch on issues under examination by federal authorities and Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, who have been looking into whether Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, or those acting with him, exceeded donation limits by funneling money to Democratic candidates through county party committees during the 2014 election cycle. Emma Wolfe, the mayor’s director of intergovernmental affairs, has been subpoenaed in relation to the investigation.

Legislators in Albany have found little consensus in drafting new ethics laws despite the corruption convictions late last year of Sheldon Silver, the Democrat who had long led the State Assembly, and Dean G. Skelos, the former leader of the State Senate’s Republican majority. The single point of agreement seems to be a possible bill to strip convicted lawmakers of their pensions, though even that idea has not yet passed both houses of the Legislature.

Mr. Cuomo’s administration, now in its sixth year, has had a mixed record on ethics, though he says the blame lays primarily with the Legislature.

On Wednesday, government watchdog groups said that while changes to rules for independent expenditure groups were welcome, an even more pressing concern lay in the “L.L.C. loophole,” which allows for corporate interests to funnel almost unlimited funds through multiple limited liability companies, and which Mr. Cuomo himself has been a beneficiary of and has urged closing.

Dick Dadey, the executive director of one such group, Citizens Union, called the governor’s proposal “thoughtful,” but added that “what is needed most immediately is a comprehensive solution to corruption in the state capital.”

In a statement released shortly after the governor’s speech, John J. Flanagan, the Long Island Republican who succeeded Mr. Skelos as the Senate majority leader, said he welcomed Mr. Cuomo’s proposal and agreed that there was a need for more transparency. The independent expenditure groups “cannot be fronts for coordinated efforts of candidates,” Senator Flanagan said.

The Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, a Bronx Democrat, echoed that, saying “this is a priority that must be addressed before the close of the 2016 session.”

Time is short; the legislative session is scheduled to end next week.

On Wednesday, Mr. Cuomo challenged lawmakers to make changes in light of the scandals surrounding Mr. Skelos and Mr. Silver.

“This Legislature wants to say: ‘We can be trusted. We understand, that was an anomaly,’” he said. “There’s no better way to do it than to pass real reform that makes a real difference with ethics and takes on the No. 1 challenge in this nation, which is Citizens United.”


