


This article is part of our spring gallery guide.

THE Propeller Group is an artist collective that addresses the mingled destinies of the United States and Vietnam. Its three members — Phunam Thuc Ha, 41, and Tuan Andrew Nguyen, 40, both born in Saigon, and Matt Lucero, 40, born in Southern California — are children of the war that raged there until 1975.

Mr. Lucero’s father was a mechanic and helicopter gunman in the United States Army who found himself doing grisly cleanup in the aftermath of the 1968 Tet offensive. Mr. Ha’s father, a cameraman for the CBS News correspondent Morley Safer, got himself and his family out as the war was ending. Mr. Nguyen’s family left Vietnam in 1978 and settled in Oklahoma, sponsored by a church there.

The Propeller Group had its genesis not quite three decades later, when Mr. Nguyen and Mr. Ha, having both moved back to Vietnam, formed a video production partnership there. One of their first jobs was a collaboration with the artist Dinh Q. Le on a 2006 work, “The Farmers and the Helicopters,” which involved a farmer and a mechanic who had become so obsessed with helicopters after the war that they cobbled one together out of agricultural equipment parts. Mr. Lucero, who had attended the California Institute of the Arts with Mr. Nguyen, went to Ho Chi Minh City (the former Saigon) to work with them on a later project and decided to stay.

With backgrounds like these, it’s not entirely surprising that when the three were invited to contribute to the 2015 Venice Biennale, it was to show what would happen if you aimed a pair of assault rifles — one Soviet, the other American — at each other and fired them simultaneously into a gelatinous block between them that matches the texture of human flesh. Their inspiration was the story, perhaps apocryphal, that two bullets fired by opposite sides in the American Civil War had been found fused together on a battlefield. Given the odds against such a thing happening, Mr. Nguyen said, “we thought that was extremely magical.”

“We thought,” he continued, “what if we took this moment and applied it to the guns that came out of the Cold War — what would that look like and what would that mean?”

The result was “AK-47 vs. M16,” made with the support of Grand Arts in Kansas City, Mo., and currently on view in the back room of the James Cohan Gallery on the Lower East Side. A video shot at 20,000 frames per second shows the two bullets colliding in extreme slow motion, looking almost as if they were captured in an ultrasound. A sculpture in the center of the room consists of a gel block and the bullet fragments it encases. But because bullets travel so much faster today than they did in the 1860s, fusion proved difficult. Mostly they got splinters.

In the front room at Cohan is “The Living Need Light, the Dead Need Music,” a 21-minute film that takes as its point of departure the fantastical funeral rites of the Mekong Delta in Vietnam. These public observances, which go on for days, feature nattily uniformed brass bands and street performers — snake charmers, sword swallowers, fire breathers and transgender dancers — who are all represented in the film.

Lush, bizarre, hallucinatory and phantasmagorical, the video deals with issues of transition and fluidity: life and death, myth and reincarnation, spirits and demons, a struggle for the soul. The film itself transitions about midway through, from actual funeral celebrations shot on the streets of Ho Chi Minh City to a surreal dreamscape in which the marching band tromps through swamps, along a beach, and out into the water.

In place of the ordinary instruments they had before, the band members are sporting drums and horns that have mutated and multiplied in freakish ways. Sam, the transgender dancer, reappears in an allée of trees, her face hidden behind a water buffalo skull. The snake reappears as a carving mounted atop a canoe.

Created for Prospect New Orleans, that city’s biennial art festival, the film struck a nerve in a city known for watery landscapes, musical parades and extravagant rituals. It suggests an eerie consonance between life near the mouth of the Mississippi and life near the mouth of the Mekong, 9,500 miles away.

“We thought this would be a perfect piece to show in New Orleans,” Mr. Nguyen said. “We saw something there — I don’t know what it is, cultural overlap? — some very strange continuity that we wanted to explore. So we started to document some of these funerals, and it became this film.”


