


In recent years, the first day of the N.F.L. draft has turned into something of a fashion moment, with players (and their families) posing on the red carpet, often in tailored suiting, and “best and worst of the N.F.L. draft” fashion lists circulating online.

So it was little wonder that, just before everything kicked off in Chicago on Thursday, the designer Philipp Plein, a runway “king of bling” with big plans for the American market, announced that he had signed Braxton Miller, a wide receiver for Ohio State, to be a brand ambassador, and that Mr. Miller would wear Philipp Plein to the draft.

Unfortunately for Mr. Plein, Mr. Miller did not get selected on Day 1, so his Plein outfit was not displayed onstage. Instead, it was Ezekiel Elliott of Ohio State, chosen by the Dallas Cowboys with the fourth pick, who made the most fashion waves.

Mr. Elliott made his entrance in a custom Pantheon Limited powder-blue tux jacket with white lapels, white trousers, white pocket square, white bow tie — and a checked button-down crop top. The better to display some perfectly toned abs.

Twitter promptly got so overexcited that Mr. Elliott’s look became its own “Twitter moment.”

According to Ian Rapoport of the NFL Network, the shirt was not an attempt to promote a male version of Gigi Hadid and Kendall Jenner’s favorite look — nor one that Rihanna has been pushing via her Fenty x Puma line — but instead a political statement: a veiled reference to the N.C.A.A.’s decision in 2015 to bar college players from wearing crop-top jerseys (which are actually jerseys that have been rolled up and folded under the pads) during games. It was a look that was popular in the 1970s and again in the 1990s, courtesy of the 1995 Heisman Trophy winner Eddie George (who also played for Ohio State), and one that Mr. Elliott helped revive.

Apparently, the rolled-up jerseys had the dual advantages of giving opponents less fabric to grab when attempting a tackle, and of providing the player with some extra ventilation. And, you cannot ignore the personal branding possibilities.

Mr. Elliott certainly did not. He was such a proponent of the style that last year he applied to trademark the phrases “Hero in a half shirt” and “In crop top we trust.” His Twitter profile contains the identification line “The hero in a half shirt,” and his red-carpet tweet on draft day carried the hashtag: #savethehalfshirt.

He is clearly thinking ahead to the creation of Brand Zeke, pursuing a strategy in which fashion increasingly plays a part when it comes to athletes of all sports (see: David Beckham, LeBron James).

In any case, Mr. Elliott was not the only one who was dismayed by the N.C.A.A. decision last year: A petition created at the time on the website Change.org received 11,809 signatures. This suggests that if Mr. Elliott decided to take what he has identified as his signature garment to the next level, there might be a built-in consumer base.

Whether any man other than an athlete with extraordinary abs should wear a crop top, on the red carpet or off, is, of course, another question. One that, if the look continues to trend, we may all have to answer.


