


After a false heart attack scare, I was given a diagnosis of coronary artery disease with 80 percent arterial blockage. I am 53, in good shape, a nonsmoker, and gave up eating lard in my youth. (That is a joke. I never ate lard.) But I am genetically predisposed to high cholesterol. When sharing my news with family and friends, I have been taken aback by their mostly blaming and impolite questions: Do I drink too much or have too much stress, instead of offering kind words. How should I respond?

ROBIN, N. Y.

About three million years ago, in Philosophy 101, we were assigned a book called “The Denial of Death.” (And I read it.) Its thesis: All of human civilization is an elaborate ruse to deny our ultimate mortality — or in this case, to distinguish ourselves from an otherwise healthy-seeming young person with 80 percent arterial blockage. We hate reminders that we all die.

I’m sorry for your experience, though not surprised by it. The only route past hurt, that I see, is to sympathize with how your news (initially, anyway) may provoke reflexive anxiety in others. Divide these folks into two camps: those who love and truly care about you, and those whom you are telling because you (understandably) want to get this off your chest.

With the first group, respond to their blame game with: “No, it’s genetic. And you can imagine how frightened I am.” That should snap them back to their affection for you and a more humane interaction. With the second group, keep quiet about your condition. I get the fantasy of disclosure, like the lure of an escape valve. But it rarely works with the wrong crowd. When you want to talk about something personal, reach out to someone who loves you every time.

My boyfriend does not care for a good friend of mine. I believe she knows this, but we have not discussed it. When she got engaged, she wanted a small wedding, and many of her friends were disappointed not to be included. My invitation did not include my boyfriend. He is furious that I went without him. But I was not inclined to make two people do something that neither really wanted to do. Was there a better solution?

TIM, BROOKLYN

I believe there was, but I still sympathize with the ugly corner you were painted into. (“I hate her! How dare she not invite me?”) But if your boyfriend is a true partner, I think you might have said to him: “Sarah wants a tiny wedding. She’s only inviting close friends, not significant others. I want to go, but I also care about your feelings. So, you decide: May I accept the invitation, or should I send my regrets?”

Given your boyfriend’s dislike of the bride, it would be an act of pettiness to refuse you. But when it comes to romantic relationships, we deal supportively with all the colors on the palette, even the ugly ones (until we decide to discard the palette). The only road I would barricade is going to the bride to wheedle a plus-one out of her. That would be bad form.

I am organizing a lunch party for my 93-year-old mother. Most of the guests will be over 80, so it is a sit-down lunch with a fixed seating plan. A young relative responded that she would “try to come, but just for an hour.” It strikes me as rude that she expects the party to proceed on her schedule and that she would leave prematurely, creating a conversational hole at her end of the table. What should I do?

ANONYMOUS, N.J.

This may sound hokey, but my parties are much better when I surrender (a little) and give up my instinct to control everything. (Not easy.) Try to balance your mother’s pleasure at seeing her young relative against your desire to ride herd. Respond to the young woman: “It’s a sit-down lunch. So, maybe you could come for dessert around 3 p.m., but we’ll be delighted to see you whenever you get here.” Pulling a chair in or out is not the end of the world. And some young blood may add pep to the party.

The wife of my wealthy business partner brought a nice bottle of Champagne to my party as a hostess gift. Her husband added a Post-it note that he was sure it cost him a lot of money. He has since made several comments about its price. Obviously, I don’t give parties for the purpose of extracting gifts. How should I respond?

ANONYMOUS

It sounds as if your business partner is stuck in a conversational rut, not blaming you for the present his wife gave. Help him out of it. The next time he mentions the pricey gift, say: “This wine seems to be affecting your financial outlook. Would you like me to pass the hat for you?” It will become a running gag or you will never hear a peep about it again.


