


The curtain rises, but the actors onstage don’t know how the show begins. Nor do they know what the story is, which actor plays what role, or who those characters are, exactly. This is not a description of an actor’s nightmare, but of a very real, entirely improvised play, called “Stolen House,” that takes place on borrowed stage sets.

When it arrives for late-night performances in Manhattan this weekend, the cast members will make themselves at home on sets used for current productions at the Anne L. Bernstein Theater (the Victorian drawing room of “Perfect Crime”) and the Barrow Street Theater (the clinical environment of “The Effect”). From there, an unscripted two-act play will unfold.

It helps that the cast is made up of a supergroup of improv stars: the Chicago duo TJ Jagodowski and David Pasquesi (better known as TJ and Dave); the members of the Los Angeles team WeirDass, Stephnie Weir and Bob Dassie; and the New Yorkers Scott Adsit and John Lutz. All six are comedians with credits like “30 Rock” (Mr. Adsit and Mr. Lutz), “MadTV” (Ms. Weir) and “Veep” (Mr. Pasquesi), and each excels at the kind of long-form improv popularized in New York by the Upright Citizens Brigade. But the “Stolen House” crew specializes in a slower, more patient version grounded in everyday relationships.

The show is the brainchild of the stars, as well as of the director Stephen Ruddy and the Barrow Street Theater producer Scott Morfee. Mr. Ruddy has long sought to find overlap between scripted theater and spontaneous performance. He has produced “Gravid Water,” a show that matches improvisers with actors who have memorized lines from scripts, playing at the UCB Theater since 2004. When he saw the Broadway production of “August: Osage County” in 2008, Mr. Ruddy imagined what skilled improvisers could do on its elaborate, multilevel set. Years later, he proposed the “Stolen House” concept to the best and most theatrical improvisers he could think of — who all had worked in “Gravid Water.”

The performers knew one another from Second City and the iO Theater in Chicago, and fell in love with the idea. “It is really just an expansion of the natural work we already do, but it is given a kind of legitimacy,” Mr. Adsit said by phone.

Mr. Morfee and the Barrow Street name helped Mr. Ruddy start conversations with a number of theaters, many of which were surprisingly game to have the cast members pay a visit. “It’s a pretty good financial model,” Mr. Ruddy said. “We’re using their space at a time no one is using it. And I remind producers that they aren’t drunken 20-year-old kids. They respect theater.”

(In Chicago, the producers of Sideshow Theater Company’s “Stupid ____ Bird” allowed “Stolen House” to play on their suburban kitchen set, but Mr. Ruddy supplied foods and dishware. Players drank beer and ate baked goods when it felt appropriate.)

The cast started working on “Stolen House” in 2013, rehearsing in New York and Chicago. They read Aristotle’s “Poetics,” agreed on a loose definition of what made a play and determined a collective approach to theme and character. They experimented on empty sets with handfuls of props Mr. Ruddy had brought with him. Unlike improv performed in black box theaters, “Stolen House” adheres to the physical reality suggested by its set, and each show kicks off with basic scene-building techniques, informed partly by the surroundings.

But until opening night in Chicago at the Victory Gardens Theater last August, the cast members had not successfully completed a rehearsal of their two-act format. “We shrugged our shoulders and said, ‘Well, I don’t know what this is going to be,’” Mr. Adsit recalled. “We might be defeated here.”

The run was far from a defeat: All four shows sold out, and the breadth of subject matter and tone gave the performers a sense of what was possible. In one show, an oddball family debated whether to sell their dead parents’ home. Another night turned into a Mamet-esque sex comedy revolving around a lovable loser and his blind date.

The foundations of “Stolen House” can be seen most clearly in Mr. Jagodowski and Mr. Pasquesi, whose subtlety and dynamism have convinced many theatergoers of what improv can accomplish. In 2014 Jason Zinoman wrote in The New York Times, “In the most ephemeral art form, ‘TJ & Dave’ creates characters rich enough that you can almost believe they have a past and a future.”

When Mr. Morfee saw the duo in 2004, he said, their shows seemed like plays, and he booked them at the Barrow Street four times annually. While “Stolen House” is not meant to improve on what Mr. Pasquesi and Mr. Jagadowski do, it is, Mr. Morfee said, a “conceptual cousin” of ‘TJ & Dave.’

The backers of “Stolen House” say they hope to make it a continuing engagement, popping up in different theaters across the city several times a year, even though they don’t know what the content of the show will be each night. That includes Mr. Morfee, who is producing the show despite never having seen it live. He has been given videos but refuses to watch them. He said, “I’ll be sitting in the audience along with everybody else going, ‘Holy cow, I hope this works.’”


