


What in the World offers you glimpses of what our journalists are observing around the globe. Let us know what you think: whatintheworld@nytimes.com

Plop down in almost any West African capital, and settle in for a fashion show.

Along the sandy streets that double as a catwalk, you’ll spot men in flowing boubous, a loose-fitting tunic that reaches to the floor. Some styles are so elaborate that they approach the poufy, shiny tufts of 1950s American prom dresses.

But the real standouts are the women, with their colorful skirts and dresses made from wax print fabric, or more likely a digitally reproduced knockoff called fancy fabric. Stars, swirls, flowers and paisleys adorn the printed cotton material wrapped around their torsos and heads.

For the women, the designs can be very personal. Some are worn for special occasions, and others commemorate major events. Some have images of roller skates, drums or tubes of lipstick celebrating pop culture, or laptops in honor of computer literacy. A popular style includes images of a bag once carried by Michelle Obama.

One pattern called “The Family” shows a hen surrounded by eggs and chicks, alongside rooster heads. The most common interpretation for this pattern isn’t particularly flattering to the father figure: A woman may be married, but she’s the center of the home. Another pattern shows birds soaring from cages and is called “You Fly, I Fly.” Its message: If a man cheats on a woman, a woman will do the same.

Religious sayings and images also appear on the cloth. Baby Jesus is popular in market stalls that sell religious fabric. “A Savior is Born” is the caption above an image of Jesus in a manger, with Mary and Joseph hovering. Another says “Mother Mary Full of Grace” across the blue-dotted cloth. Other popular images include the pope’s face atop the Vatican, and St. Bernadette and St. Christopher, with the line “Pray for us.”

Outsiders may be surprised to see such Christian imagery in a country like Senegal, where more than 90 percent of the population is Muslim. Wearing the religious cloth is a bold expression of faith.

During election campaigns, the faces of leading politicians show up on the fabric. In Yaoundé, Cameroon, President Paul Biya’s face is printed on women’s dresses. Candidates hand out the fabric freely, the way American candidates might give away campaign buttons and T-shirts, according to Nina Sylvanus, an anthropology professor at Northeastern University who has studied the fabric and its connotations.

But in West Africa, wearing the fabric doesn’t necessarily signify support. Some women strategically tailor their political prints so a candidate’s face is across their derrière.


