


MAYER, Ariz. — Friday night at FORM Arcosanti, in the stunning concrete amphitheater, Skrillex dangled a cigarette from his mouth and played a headrush set of industrial dancehall, electronic hardcore and Drake remixes, bass pounding at the sturdy walls. Then, after 1 a.m. Saturday, he materialized on a colorful stage in the nearby desert basin, tag-teaming with Four Tet for a set that lasted until near sunup.

A couple of hours later, this festival’s second day began with — for those who were willing and able and awake — a guided meditation and yoga. When the music finally started, at noon, it was piano ruminations by Bing & Ruth, near the edge of a cliff overlooking the basin, followed by clean, contemplative techno tones by Christopher Willits in the amphitheater — palate cleansers after a raucous meal.

How do you take your communing: body-pummeling devotional or astral purification of the mind? Both and more were on offer at the third annual FORM Arcosanti, which took place here from Friday through Sunday, where performers who verged on the shamanic played to audience members looking for a sound to believe in.

They came to praise Bill Callahan, master of the parched country ballad, who performed an afternoon set full of casual gloom. They howled for Perfume Genius, who bounced between tender art-rock gems and cathartic vocal purges. They nodded their heads effusively with every tweak of Tyondai Braxton’s electronic improvisations. They gazed slack-jawed at Julianna Barwick, as she sheared her voice into soaring, sometimes grating bolts of sound.

What unites these artists isn’t style but mode: Each benefits from contemplative, unhurried listening. And total immersion was the norm here at this elegantly designed festival, with minimal overlap of performances and ample green space for guests to catch a midday nap. For three days, hardly anything happened in a rush, not least because almost all the attendees were camping on-site for the duration. (No single-day passes were offered.)

Often, a large-scale festival operates like an invasion, bringing tens of thousands of people to a remote tract of land that they abuse for a few days and then abandon. FORM was the opposite in nearly every way: The crowd was small and socially engaged. It felt more like a private gathering — an outsize house party — than like a festival.

That was partly because of the unique setting: Arcosanti, an experimental community that began construction in 1970 about 70 miles north of Phoenix, a mile or so down a dirt road from the nearest sign of civilization, which was designed to test theories about the intersection of architecture and ecology. Its concrete buildings jut out of the landscape with authority and grace, the modern commenting on the natural. “I was hoping there’d be a wandering C-3PO that we could take our photos with,” Mr. Callahan said, presumably because there was at least a passing resemblance between Arcosanti and Tatooine.

FORM was organized by the Florida band Hundred Waters, which headlined Saturday night with a set of soft-focus dance-pop much less meditative than what was on offer the rest of the time. Braids played deeply passionate, complex rock about emotional scars. Autre Ne Veut sang with vein-bulging sincerity. Thundercat led an electro-jazz jam that was almost romantic. Bonobo played an aquatically chill set of slow-moving dance music, followed by Four Tet, who kept his tempo but shifted to pinprick-precise, bucolic house.

Especially with the electronic musicians, it was hard not to listen in relationship to the architecture. Alessandro Cortini’s horror drones made sense in the apse, especially when heard while seated atop it; almost every inch of Arcosanti was available to explore, including the tops of buildings. Skrillex’s stentorian rumble felt like a complex handshake with the surroundings, bringing out the building’s authoritarian side. That said, it would have been equally invigorating to offer performances that related directly to the stunning natural surroundings.

There were some boundaries: FORM had essentially no hip-hop, leaning instead on genres where narcotic haze is the norm. And there were hiccups, from some inexplicably short sets to sound issues that plagued the opening-night headliners Four Tet and Skrillex.

The festival is free, paid for by a combination of patrons, who received preferential on-site camping, and minimally invasive corporate sponsorship. You were more likely to bump into an art installation — a wire cube filled with lasers, or flowers pressed between plexiglass — than into a brand logo. The result was a pervasive communal spirit: At one point, a staff member enlisted a festivalgoer to help him water the plants with abandoned water bottles, shouting, “Radical participation!”

This generative spirit spilled over into the commingling of performers and audience members. There were hardly any real V.I.P. sections, and musicians who performed were often spotted in the audience, watching others. You could also see most of the musicians playing the amphitheater casually sound-checking earlier in the day — no walls between preparation and performance.

The peak of artist-viewer overlap and interaction came during the set of the Baltimore electronic-music agitator Dan Deacon. He was an ideal artist for this festival’s values — part electronics experimenter, part communal- dance instructor, part elementary school teacher. He turned the amphitheater into a moving, evolving performing space, enlisting the crowd as part of the show. He urged them to dance, to hold hands, to think about police injustice against minorities. And at the end, he asked those in the crowd to help dispose of any loose trash they stumbled upon: turning up and cleaning up, all in one.

Established 2014

What it is Where nu-hippies meet to bliss out to electronic musicians and indie-rock progressives, and a splendid showcase of how music can be a living response to a space.

Attendance 800 people selected by application (which included questions about creativity and collaboration), mingling with a few hundred other musicians and assorted hangers-on and the several dozen people who call Arcosanti home.

Number of events About 30 musical acts, as well as art installations, industry-themed panels, late-night raves and a pool party-cum-live radio broadcast.

Landscape A set of daring, elegant concrete structures — including an amphitheater and an apse — sprouting out of the Arizona desert. And for the adventurous, cliffs across the basin available for hiking.

Typical festivalgoer Early- to mid-20s. Earnest. Loosefitting garments in colorful prints. Tevas & Chacos. Headlamps at night. Dancing with Christmas lights wrapped around the body. Los Angeles in spirit, if not location.

Rarely are there so many opportunities for relaxation at a festival — some attendees assembled a mini-community and served tea. Another set up a massage table in the middle of the festival. Yet another dragged an inflatable mattress into the amphitheater and lay on it to watch the show. Finally, the cats: Arcosanti residents can keep pets, but for the weekend, they belonged to everyone. Cats could be found wandering in the basin, lounging atop the amphitheater, taking in sun and sound or being petted by tender festivalgoers.

After midnight, the festival shifted focus to a colorful stage that had been built by the Florida record label and art collective Elestial Sound. It sat in the middle of a field, surrounded by cliffs on each side. There were headliners playing here, but even when they were great, they were little competition for the night sky, which made this monstrously big installation feel like just a tiny part of a much bigger constellation.


