


William Norwich, a former Vogue editor and New York Post society gossip columnist, has a sense of humor about his symbiotic relationship with the One Percent.

On a table in the living room of his one-bedroom apartment in the East 60s, he has a vintage manual typewriter that was a long-ago gift from Sandy Hill, then Sandy Hill Pittman, a fixture on the uptown social circuit in the 1980s who infamously climbed Mount Everest in 1996 during a blizzard that claimed eight lives. In the roller, he keeps the note she typed: “To Billy, Happy Birthday!!!!!! This year, give yourself a gift ... write something for LOVE ... not money ... on this.”

Mr. Norwich, who is now 61, was nonplused when he received it. “I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry,” he said. “Only rich people tell working stiffs like me to do something for love, not money. Bless her heart. She meant well.”

That benevolent nature permeates his novel “My Mrs. Brown,” a contemporary fairytale recently published by Simon & Schuster, about a genteel widow from a small town in rural New England who lives an unremarkable life, without excess or luxury. When she volunteers to inventory the estate of the local grande dame, Mrs. Brown becomes besotted with a simple black $7,000 suit dress by Oscar de la Renta. Though it’s beyond her means, she becomes determined to own the same dress, which she believes connotes authority, civility and respectability.

The book, inspired by the 1958 novel by Paul Gallico, “Mrs. ‘Arris Goes to Paris,” is intended as a gentle rebuke of today’s hyped-up fashion culture, which ignores the needs of ordinary women. “After all I’ve watched since the 1960s of the women’s movement, it bothered me that women are told that the ultimate expression of dressing is red-carpet worthy,” he said. “There is something powerful about a dress that is exquisitely tailored and perfectly correct.”

Mr. Norwich’s home is a testament to his role as a longtime fashion insider. In the bedroom, he keeps a photo and a handwritten “welcome to Paris” note from the Chanel designer Karl Lagerfeld. In an armoire in the living room is a Christmas card with a handwritten note from Isaac Mizrahi. He has framed photographs of style icons like Nan Kempner and C.Z. Guest, and an inscribed picture by Deborah Turbeville of Diana Vreeland’s shoes.

Mrs. Vreeland, as he deferentially calls the influential fashion editor, who died in 1989, is something of a muse. He shares her love of red and painted his foyer “the exact same color as a Cartier box. I brought one to Janovic,” he said, referring to the paint store, “and had them match it.”

A leopard-pattern armchair that once belonged to the over-the-top New York decorator David Barrett is another homage to Mrs. Vreeland, who famously said, “I’ve never met a leopard print I didn’t like.”

But there’s nothing precious or pretentious about Mr. Norwich’s home, which is furnished with secondhand pieces bought in consultation with the interior designer Jesse Carrier. “I am long acquainted with him, and he’s now quite fabulous and does zillion-dollar brownstones,” Mr. Norwich said. “He took me to thrift shops all over the city, where we got everything, with the exception of things that were bought at Tepper Galleries.”

Mr. Carrier also helped Mr. Norwich hang his artwork, including a painting of his mother at 7, with a bow in her hair. “It’s one of the few things I have from my childhood home,” said Mr. Norwich, who grew up in southeastern Connecticut and has lived on the Upper East Side since 1976.

“It was very clear from the get-go that it was not cool to live here,” Mr. Norwich said. He chose the neighborhood because several of his friends’ parents lived nearby and he needed surrogate families; both of his parents had died by the time he was 20.

“I would tell people I live on the Upper East Side because I am a runner and needed the park,” he said. “That’s how I covered myself.”

He chose his current apartment in a prewar building six years ago, he explained, because he wanted a quiet place to write and was willing to live without direct sunlight. His book-lined bedroom is the quintessential writer’s lair: Even the base of his custom-made bed frame holds books. “I like the idea of floating on words,” said Mr. Norwich, who is now a commissioning editor for fashion and interior design titles at the book publisher Phaidon.

And after decades on the party circuit, Mr. Norwich said, he’s lately become more domestic. “I’ve taught myself to cook,” he said. “I’m mostly into baking.”

Still, there’s room on a shelf in his minuscule kitchen for a vignette that has nothing to do with cooking: an assemblage of vintage tins of Society Snuff, C.Z. Guest’s bug spray and a framed Herb Ritts photograph of a muscled model named Vladimir smoking a cigarette.

Mr. Norwich remembers seeing the photo at the Staley-Wise Gallery, in the company of the larger-than-life fashion editor André Leon Talley, and wishing he could afford to buy it. Mr. Talley, he recalled, told him: “Why do you need to own it? Get the postcard! Put it in a frame!”

“Coming from him, it was the most brilliant invitation to liberate myself,” Mr. Norwich said. “I realized I didn’t have to be possessed by possessions.”


