


BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — Simon Cowell is back.

On Tuesday, Mr. Cowell — whose acid-tongued criticism during the first nine seasons of “American Idol” helped turn the program into a network TV phenomenon — will return as a judge on an American competition show for the first time in two and a half years when he replaces Howard Stern on NBC’s “America’s Got Talent.”

The “Got Talent” format, which Mr. Cowell created and has sold around the world, is a summer stalwart for the network, and is heading into its 11th season.

In a wide-ranging interview at Mr. Cowell’s home here, he reflected on why he gave up watching “American Idol,” how “The Voice” made him sick when it made its debut, and the mistakes that occurred during the brief, three-season run of “The X Factor” on Fox. He also touched on his new idea for a competition show now that “Idol” is off the air, and shared his thoughts on the rise of Donald J. Trump. These are edited and condensed excerpts from the conversation.

What’s it like being in the “Got Talent” chair versus “X Factor” or “Idol”?

I was really confident until I sat in the chair and you kind of go, “Oh God, this is a big show here.” I’m used to being on big shows, but I’m thinking, “I really hope this is going to work.” And for about 10 seconds, I felt nervous. And then this 83-year-old woman in a leotard came on and stood on her head and sang the national anthem and I said, “You know what, I’m home.” And I never looked back.

Why did you want to be on this show?

I used to watch these sort of variety shows as a kid. And as much as I like being on a music show, it does get a bit tedious when it’s just singer after singer after singer. On this show — and of course we get singers on there — it’s that surprise factor where literally a box will appear on the stage and you don’t know what’s inside the box or what the act’s going to be.

As far as viewers in the United States are concerned, this is Act III for Simon Cowell. Do you still have something left to prove?

Yeah, of course. Particularly this year with the end of “Idol,” I’ve been reminded about it a lot. It takes me back to when I first launched the show. Being on a show that big, it’s the best feeling in the world. I’m not going to lie. When we were doing big, big numbers it was incredible.

Did you watch ‘Idol’ over the last couple of years?

Shakes his head no.

Why?

I completely lost interest in it, to be honest with you.

In your final years on “Idol,” where were you? Where was your head?

I was just bored. I had done nine seasons. The first three or four years were genuinely probably the best three or four years of my life. It was so much fun, so unexpected, we didn’t know what was going to happen, the show just took off and became a huge hit and we were in the middle of something that we were making up every week. Then it all started to get a bit serious and Paula [Abdul] left and then it just wasn’t the same to me.

Did you learn any lessons from “X Factor”?

I read a book once about Coke and Pepsi and it was called “The Other Guy Blinked.” And we blinked. We thought 12 million [viewers] was bad. Now, I’m thinking, “Christ, if I could launch a show with 12 million today, I’d be a hero.” But we beat ourselves up so much about it and we changed so many things. The show became unrecognizable. I blame myself, but we made crazy decisions. We didn’t treat it like a hit. We treated it as a failure. I wasn’t aware the market had gone down to that level so quickly. I was in this La-La Land head space of 30 or 40 million and I thought 12 million feels terrible.

Do you watch “The Voice”?

Not a lot. But when I first saw it I got a pit in my stomach. No one took it that seriously and I watched the first episode and it was like being punched in the stomach. It was such a great idea. And those chairs! The panel is so good. You just go, “They beat us to it.”

What’s the state of competition shows these days?

I wouldn’t want to be launching anything with a gimmick right now. They tried that with “Rising Star.” Everyone thought, “O.K., to launch a new competition show now, we need to have either a spinning chair or a wall that goes up and down.” It’s not as simple as that. If you have brand recognition and a network that supports the show and reinvests in the show, you’ve got a real shot. But obviously with “Idol” going, it leaves a hole in the market for something new, I think. And we might have something.

Another show? Would it be a singing show?

I’m not going to give too much away. But the idea is unique. If we do make it, it’ll become clearer why it’s a good idea. It’s not a gimmick show.

But you said you found singing shows a little tedious, with that relentless parade of singers.

I think they’re too long. “Idol” was at, what, 47 hours? That’s four, five months on the air. That’s half the year, that’s too long. The shows have become too long. We were making one-hour shows and even that was a struggle. You’re making a movie twice a week. They’re just way too long. It’s an effort to watch them. If we go back to where we were — maybe 25, 30 hours maximum, one-hour shows. The audition shows are always going to be popular. People love auditions. And start it at the beginning of the year. Never go in the fall. Start January, February. “Got Talent” works because we’ve established ourselves as a summer show. It feels like summer when it’s on.

You basically created the role of the blunt-speaking judge on competition shows. A couple of years after you did it, Donald Trump did it on “The Apprentice” on NBC. When you see him campaigning, do you see a reality TV show judge?

People are always drawn to people who speak bluntly. Whether you agree or disagree, you listen. You see the same thing with Bernie Sanders. The guy’s in his early 70s and every teenage kid is listening to him. I think Donald Trump understood when you’re on TV you have a tremendous platform. We all recognized that years ago. We were all sitting there running record labels years ago, thinking sales are going down, it’s harder to break new artists, and then along comes this train. We all thought we better get on this quick. I always understood the significance — and still do now — the power of television. Nothing can compete with that.


