


The filmmaker Gayle Kirschenbaum, whose documentary “Look At Us Now, Mother!” will have a one-week run on Long Island starting May 6, grew up thinking she had been born into the wrong family. And she wasn’t thrilled about growing up in Long Island’s Five Towns either.

Her family moved to Woodmere when Gayle was 5. “My parents were very conscious of appearances, but exceedingly frugal,” she said. The family relocated to Lawrence during her high school years. As time went by and her workaholic father did well financially, the Kirschenbaums got rid of their Pontiac and bought a Cadillac. Gayle’s mother, Mildred, offered her adolescent daughter a nose job.

Gayle, a budding artist who hung around with an earthy-crunchy high school crowd, wasn’t interested. “I had no problem with my nose,” she says. “I’m probably the least vain person you’ll meet, but in the looks department, I think God has been good to me.”

Mildred, now 92, begs to differ. Her face has been lifted and her eyelids tattooed with liner so she never has to go without makeup. And her relentless campaign to persuade Gayle to get a nose job has lasted half a century and is still going strong.

“Look At Us Now, Mother!” takes the viewer along on a brave mother-daughter journey, in an effort to understand emotional abuse and whether it can ultimately be forgiven. During the film, home movies show Mildred not only badgering Gayle about her nose, but also telling her daughter she isn’t thin enough. Her breasts aren’t big enough. Her thick, curly hair is too “big.” As if this weren’t enough, Mildred is also disappointed that Gayle isn’t “Gary,” the third son she had been expecting. “I was the target in my family for a lot of anger,” Gayle says.

An Emmy Award-winning producer of television shows for TLC and Discovery Health, Gayle first turned the camera back on her own life in 2001, with a film about her Shih Tzu, Chelsea, called “A Dog’s Life: A Dogamentary.” Her next autobiographical project, “My Nose,” was a 13-minute tragicomedy that, you guessed it, tackled Mildred’s obsession with Gayle getting a nose job. The arrangement was this: Gayle would go for a consultation with a plastic surgeon if Mildred would come along and Gayle could make a documentary about it. Mildred agreed.

The outpouring of empathy from audiences, who shared stories of their own suffering at the hands of their highly critical parents, gave Gayle the idea of expanding her short into a full-length documentry, which would chronicle Gayle and her mother as they attended therapy together.

Think what you will about a mother who says to her daughter on camera, “Speak without a Jewish accent,” and “Look how washed-out your eyes look.” Not only did Mildred agree to be in the film, she has also spent the past year traveling the film festival circuit with Gayle, speaking with audiences about their much-improved relationship.

No matter how narcissistic and emotionally abusive Mildred was, what Gayle wanted was to understand why. “I used to wonder what happened to my mother when she was little,” she said. “I know today that if you want to know about why someone is the way they are, you have to go back to their childhood.”

“Look At Us Now, Mother!” delves into Mildred’s difficult past: a suicidal father, a baby sister who stopped breathing while in her stroller on Coney Island’s boardwalk, financial struggles and a mother who persevered and never talked about her grief. The result is a heart-wrenching — and, ultimately, heartwarming — story of acceptance and forgiveness.

The process was so painful for Gayle that she felt physically ill at times and developed a skin condition. Both of her brothers and her mother, she said, were glad to see her finished product and are emotionally supportive of her now (her father died during the making of the film).

After a screening in Delray Beach, Fla., Mildred told the crowd: “When you know you’re going to give birth, you go out and get furniture for the nursery and you get instructions on how to put the crib together. Gayle did not come with instructions. I told Gayle, I did the best I know how.”

A man in the audience said Mildred hadn’t changed and that it was clear she was a narcissist.

“This film was Gayle’s interpretation,” Mildred said. “Not mine.”

“She’s completely unaware of what she did,” Gayle said to the man. “Never expect anybody who’s done wrong by you, like a parent, to ever say they are sorry, because they are clueless. You do the work. You get yourself to the place where you forgive them.”


