


Thirteen Democrats appeared on the ballot Tuesday in Baltimore’s mayoral primary elections. When the smoke cleared, Catherine Pugh, a 66-year-old state senator, had emerged as the winner, with 36.8 percent of the vote. Given the overwhelming Democratic vote in Baltimore, she’s all but guaranteed to be the city’s next mayor.

A few weeks ago, I wrote a story for the magazine about the race, a pivotal moment for the future of Baltimore. In a city already suffering from rampant poverty, failing schools, hypersegregation and insufficient transportation, the past year has been particularly bad. Last April, a 25-year-old black man named Freddie Gray died of spinal injuries sustained while in police custody. His death sparked outrage, property-damaging protests and Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake’s decision not to stand for re-election. With 344 murders, 2015 was also the deadliest year per capita in the city’s history. The city is in such need of radical change that each mayoral candidate campaigned on being the only leader who could provide it. It’s worth stating here then that Pugh is almost certainly not that agent of change.

Pugh edged out her nearest competitor, the former Mayor Sheila Dixon, by 2.3 points. This happened, in part, because Pugh is not the former Mayor Sheila Dixon — who began her mayorship in 2007, as the first woman to hold the office, and ended it in 2010, after being convicted of embezzling funds intended for the city’s poor. Pugh lost the election that ensued, to Rawlings-Blake. This year, she spent $1.1 million over the course of her campaign, picking up votes from those who had resolved not to give Dixon a second chance. (She most likely picked up more over the past month, as Nick Mosby dropped out of the race and endorsed her, and a dozen Baltimore lawmakers later endorsed her en masse.) And although Pugh has been installed in the city’s political class since 1999, many of Baltimore’s young grass-roots activists cast votes for her instead of for DeRay Mckesson, a 30-year-old civil rights activist who has reached national fame over the last two years protesting police brutality. Mckesson has been the de facto face of the Black Lives Matter movement, but he has lived in the city only sporadically since leaving for nearby Catonsville, Md., in sixth grade, and boasts no legislative experience. He garnered 2.5 percent of the vote.

Pugh is firmly of the Baltimore establishment, and her platform was among the race’s least surprising. But Dixon already had her turn, and so this was Pugh’s. In this election, as in many local elections, that was enough.

My reporting focused on Mckesson, who, despite accruing over 340,000 Twitter followers, appearing on nightly talk shows and being featured in countless news stories around the globe, didn’t poll over 1 percent leading up to the election. Although he promised radical change and offered the most comprehensive platform, it was unclear to local voters if or how he would implement that change. In just 83 days, he collected over $265,000, from more donors than any other candidate, and from every state in the nation. He received maximum donations from tech tycoons, Election Day well wishes from celebrities and an absolutely legendary endorsement from the Baltimore filmmaker John Waters. But Mckesson didn’t have any connections inside city hall or in Annapolis. He was smart, charming, articulate, energetic and young, but his campaign looked and felt unserious from the start. He entered the race minutes before the Feb. 3 deadline and lacked any urgency until it was desperately late.

He lost, as he was supposed to. Mckesson was offering hope, potential and little more, which is why he failed to catch on in Baltimore despite electrifying, nationwide support. He was the idealistic candidate, but idealism is largely a function of privilege, expressed by people who can afford it. The famous protester was ultimately little more than a protest candidate, the mayoral hopeful of choice for people who didn’t actually live in Baltimore. It’s possible that a real opportunity was squandered with Pugh’s win. But if nothing else, at least she knows the governor.

Nearly a quarter of Baltimore’s citizens live below the poverty line; 7 percent are unemployed. Leading up to Election Day, Pugh’s campaign offered free food to people working her campaign. It was denounced as a vote-buying scheme — if not quite corruption, then still something symptomatic of Baltimore’s political problems. On Election Day, before the polls opened, about 100 citizens gathered outside Pugh’s campaign headquarters, saying they had been promised work, but were turned away by Pugh’s campaign, which said there were no jobs left. Furious, some citizens slashed the tires and broke the windows of her campaign vans. Only then did Pugh’s team pay them and put them to work. The whole thing, they said, had been a misunderstanding.


