


Michelle Slatalla, the editor in chief of the blog Gardenista, has called it “the houseplant equivalent of a newborn.”

Brad Sherman, an interior designer in New York, thinks they have a “prehistoric, Dr. Seuss feel.”

Summer Thornton, a designer in Chicago who often uses them in projects to make a space feel younger and fresher, said they are “not your mother’s ficus.”

And Daniel Kanter, who writes the blog Manhattan Nest, said, “They read as a statement plant.”

What are they talking about? Ficus lyrata, a species native to western Africa, where it grows in lowland rainforests. But more commonly, it’s known as the fiddle-leaf fig — the “it” potted plant of the moment.

Every era has its trendy houseplant. In the 1950s and ’60s, it was the African violet. In the ’70s, it was spider plants trailing out of macramé hangers. In the ’80s and early ’90s, it was the potted ficus. The aughts gave rise to mossy plants in terrariums and glass jars.

This decade belongs, undeniably, to the fiddle-leaf fig.

Open the latest issue of Elle Decor or Architectural Digest and you will likely spot a fiddle-leaf fig, often potted in white lacquer boxes in minimally furnished white-walled rooms. Go into any Céline boutique and you will find one there, too, for the fiddle-leaf has become the unofficial-official plant of the French luxury brand.

Marimekko installed huge fiddle-leafs, which can grow to 10 feet tall, in its headquarters in Finland. So did the online mattress retailer Casper when the company furnished its first office.

Mr. Sherman, who designed the Casper offices, said he first noticed the fiddle-leaf fig five years ago on interior design blogs. He was struck by its sculptural quality: thin trunk; big, lush leaves; the perfect balance of volume and negative space, structure and whimsy. He began using the plants for every project.

“Sourcing good-looking plants for interiors was always challenging,” Mr. Sherman said. “Some of them are too waxy, there’s not a lot of character. The fiddle-leaf broke the mold.”

Indeed, designers love them because they have scale, work with a range of styles from modern to granny chic and seem to magically transform any room.

“You can plop it in a dead corner and suddenly everything comes to life,” said Miles Redd, who dressed up the solarium of a California home he designed that was featured in Architectural Digest with six-foot-tall flanking fiddle-leafs.

Said Ms. Thornton: “I think that sets them apart from a palm or a ficus. Those plants don’t have the same pop or dramatic impact as a fiddle-leaf fig.”

Fiddle-leaf figs have been around for years. But the plant’s current stardom may best be explained by something Mr. Kanter discovered. After seeing them online and in social media, he took to his blog in 2012 to proclaim, “I wanted desperately to get in on the Fiddle club.”

Mr. Kanter did buy a fiddle-leaf fig, spending $100 for a five-foot-tall plant at a high-end nursery in Brooklyn. He brought it to his home in Kingston, N.Y. He soon realized why bloggers and Instagrammers and Pinterest users are so enamored with fiddle-leafs: They are organic matter ideally suited for digital sharing.

“They look really good in a picture,” Mr. Kanter said, adding that he encounters fiddle-leafs way more on the Internet than in real life.

For Ms. Slatalla, the gardening editor, the appeal of a fiddle-leaf fig is more primal. The large, glossy leaves, as she once wrote in a post on Gardenista, are similar to the big round eyes of a baby.

“It makes you want to take care of it,” Ms. Slatalla said. “People tend to anthropomorphize this plant in ways they don’t with others.”

And just like a newborn, the fiddle-leaf fig is a finicky, delicate organism. While some would have you believe they are hardy and easy to care for, many owners, including Ms. Slatalla, have found the opposite to be true.

“It’s funny that a plant that is so hard to keep alive has become so popular,” she said, explaining that her fiddle-leaf fig never found the right spot in her home and “died of neglect.”

At the Casper offices, the fiddle-leaf Mr. Sherman installed died within weeks, replaced by 11 more before a winning care regimen was found (indirect light, away from the radiators).

“If you move them, they don’t respond well,” Mr. Sherman said. “If they’re in direct sunlight, the leaves will burn and shed. They’re very emotional plants.”

Hadley Peterson, a landscape designer, has kept the fiddle-leaf fig in her New Jersey home alive for 10 years and has seen it grow lush and tall. But she almost lost it after a move, and she knows avid gardeners who couldn’t keep them alive.

“I think it has a lot to do with the air in the room,” Ms. Peterson said. “I keep my house at 68 degrees. But also it’s the light. It gets indirect covered light coming from a sun porch.”

She added, as if describing a temperamental child: “It doesn’t do well if you let it sit in water. You’ve got to let it drain.”

Ms. Thornton tells her clients that, even if their fiddle-leaf lasts a year or less, it’s still cheaper and more dynamic than having weekly floral arrangements brought in. And with its newfound popularity, prices in many areas have gone down while availability has increased.

So much so that Mr. Kanter has noticed fiddle-leaf figs being sold at a grocery-store chain near his upstate New York home for $30. It’s evidence that the plant may have hit peak popularity, and be in for a backlash.

Mr. Kanter doesn’t care: “I still love them. I think they’re really versatile style-wise.”

He has since bought two more.


