


The list of players who have been suspended by Major League Baseball since 2005 for taking banned substances is 42 pages long, and it includes pharmacological quick fixes like boldenone, clenbuterol, formestane and stanozolol.

But recently, three players — the major leaguers Daniel Stumpf of the Phillies and Chris Colabello of the Blue Jays and the minor leaguer Kameron Loe — were suspended for taking Turinabol, an anabolic steroid straight out of a doping time machine.

Developed in the 1960s by Jenapharm, an East German drug company, Turinabol became a foundation of the East German sports machine that rivaled the United States and the Soviet Union for medal supremacy at the Olympics in the 1970s and 1980s.

After the collapse of the Soviet bloc, Turinabol largely disappeared, and antidoping experts do not know any major pharmaceutical company that produces the drug, whose chemical compound is dehydrochlormethyltestosterone.

Yet athletes have found a way to obtain Turinabol, which can help muscles retain protein to build or repair them, and more player suspensions for the drug may be announced in the coming weeks, according to a person with knowledge of baseball’s antidoping program.

Baseball has only just started to catch players using Turinabol, but officials monitoring wrestling, weight lifting and other sports have been catching athletes using the drug in recent years. Last year, 11 of the 17 athletes suspended at the world weight lifting championships in Houston were found to have taken Turinabol, and they came from Azerbaijan, Belarus, Greece, Kazakhstan, Moldova and Russia.

“It is a relative epidemic, and this is not only North America,” said Dr. Christiane Ayotte, the director of the Montreal Doping Control Laboratory. “It might have started in the former Eastern bloc countries.”

Antidoping experts believe that unscrupulous chemists in the United States may be creating the drug or, more likely, that it is being imported. Dr. Don Catlin, an antidoping pioneer in the United States who ran the drug testing lab at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, said Turinabol was easily obtainable online. He added that it was contained as a labeled ingredient in at least one supplement that can be bought off-the-shelf. It is also possible the steroid is contained as an unlabeled product in a supplement, he said.

“I suspect somebody got a big supply of it somewhere and has been distributing it among friends and neighbors,” Catlin said. “One guy gets it and feels it’s working and tells all his buddies. Next thing you know, you’ve got a miniepidemic.”

That Turinabol has shown up in supplements sold in the United States means some athletes may have unwittingly taken the drug. To be safe, Canadian authorities have warned their Olympic athletes to stay away from supplements sold in the United States, said Dr. Bob McCormack, the chief medical officer of the Canadian Olympic team.

“A high percentage of the raw materials for supplements come from China, where there is poor quality control, and there is a powerful lobby in the U.S. to combat oversight, so we tell athletes in Canada not to take U.S. supplements,” he said.

Although Turinabol proved infamously effective as an East German steroid, Catlin said, it does not clear the body quickly and is easily detectable. For years, it did not appear to be in widespread international use. An average of four to six positive tests were recorded annually by the 35 labs of the World Anti-Doping Agency, Catlin said. The number spiked to 73 in 2013, before lowering to 17 in 2014 and 14 in 2015, he said, citing WADA statistics.

“These things come and go,” Catlin said. But he added, “To think just because it’s old means you can’t detect it is nonsense.”

In fact, one reason for the recent suspensions is that, like a cat-and-mouse game, antidoping authorities have found more sophisticated ways of testing for the drug. In 2012, Tim Sobolevsky and Grigory Rodchenkov published a paper in The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology that outlined a more effective test for Turinabol.

Since then, antidoping groups and sports leagues have updated their tests to better detect the drug. Turinabol has been on Major League Baseball’s banned list for years, but the league updated its techniques to look for the drug in 2014 as part of an annual review of its drug testing protocol.

Ayotte, the director of the Montreal Doping Control Laboratory, said the number of positive tests for Turinabol would start to drop as athletes realizef that leagues and associations were doing a better job of looking for the drug.

But it will take time for word to get around. The baseball players recently caught using Turinabol may not have been aware of its East German provenance, Catlin said, or they didn’t care. “The side effects are horrendous, particularly to women,” he said. “But male baseball players probably don’t give a damn.”

Few players, if any, may know that the state-sponsored doping system in East Germany was known by the euphemism Supporting Means, and involved as many as 10,000 athletes. Oral-Turinabol was often given to unsuspecting athletes, including teenagers and children, who were told that the blue pills were vitamins.

A number of former East German athletes have said they developed chronic health problems, believed to be related to taking massive amounts of Turinabol. In 2006, Jenapharm agreed to pay 184 former East German athletes about $12,000 each, while the German Olympic Committee agreed to pay 170 athletes the same amount.

Perhaps the most extreme case involving Turinabol use was that of Heidi Krieger, who won the women’s shot put at the 1986 European track and field championships. In a 2004 interview with The New York Times, Krieger said that taking the steroids created virile features and heightened confusion about an already uncertain gender identity. In 1997, Krieger had sexual-reassignment surgery and is now known as Andreas Krieger.

The fact that the drug is now so easily detected is the reason Victor Conte Jr., who ran the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative in Northern California that figured in a widespread doping scandal a decade ago, wrote on his Twitter account that the knowing use of Turinabol was “dumber than dumb.”

Steven Ungerleider, the author of “Faust’s Gold,” a book about the East German doping system, said the emergence of Turinabol in baseball was “a little odd.”

“There’s a zillion other ways more sophisticated” to use banned substances and avoid detection, said Ungerleider, a sports psychologist in Eugene, Ore. “Why would anyone go back to using that?” he asked. “But people do crazy things.”


