


In his first two home starts, Chris Parmelee was already beginning to assume folk hero status among Yankees fans.

Parmelee, who was brought up Saturday from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, hit two home runs Wednesday at Yankee Stadium. On Thursday, Parmelee drove in the first run of the Yankees’ 6-3 win over the Angels, igniting a five-run fifth inning, as the club moved back to .500 at 30-30 with their four-game sweep of Los Angeles.

But Parmelee may disappear as quickly as he endeared himself, a two-game stopgap in a carousel of Yankees first basemen this season.

With two outs in the seventh, Parmelee split his legs while catching a throw at first base, and tumbled backward, grabbing his right hamstring. He could not put weight on his right leg as he was helped off the field by Manager Joe Girardi, who said that he would be “completely shocked” if Parmelee did not go on the disabled list.

“I don’t know if I’ve ever seen that happen before,” Girardi said.

Parmelee signed with the Yankees after Greg Bird injured his shoulder in the off-season. Bird was expected to be the backup at first base to Mark Teixeira, who is currently on the disabled list with torn cartilage in his right knee. Last month, Dustin Ackley, another first baseman, dislocated his right shoulder and is out for the year.

In his brief résumé of games at Yankee Stadium, Parmelee already had a special place in Yankees lore. His first game came on Sept. 19, 2011, the day Mariano Rivera collected his 602nd save, setting the major league record.

Parmelee, then a rookie with the Twins, made the final out.

After the Yankees’ made the final out of the eighth inning, holding a 6-4 lead, Parmelee peeked at the lineup card. His stomach sank when he realized he was due up third.

“I was hoping that one of the guys in front of me got a knock,” Parmelee said earlier Thursday.

They did not. Trevor Plouffe grounded to second for the first out and Michael Cuddyer flew out to right field.

Rivera struck out Parmelee on three pitches, the last a backdoor cutter. The second pitch crept in on Parmelee and broke his bat as the ball dribbled foul.

During that series, which occurred in Rivera’s final season, the Twins presented Rivera with a rocking chair made of broken bats. Parmelee’s lumber from save 602 was not included. Instead, he kept the memento and asked Rivera to sign the bat, which now rests on Parmelee’s mantel at home.

INSIDE PITCH

The Yankees selected outfielder Blake Rutherford, 19, from Chaminade College Prep in California with the 18th selection in the first round of the Major League Baseball draft. Rutherford was ranked as a top-10 prospect by MLB.com and Baseball America.


