


In 2009, Bill de Blasio and Mark Green, both Democrats running for public advocate, were asked to name the most interesting New Yorker they knew.

Mr. Green paused a moment, then singled out John Sexton, the erudite Jesuit-trained magna cum laude graduate of Harvard Law School, former chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, best-selling author and president of New York University at the time.

Mr. de Blasio responded with the name of another, if lesser-known, native: Mary Sansone.

Mrs. Sansone, a 4-foot-11 daughter of Italian immigrants, celebrated her 100th birthday this week, still dispensing political wisdom and homemade meatballs from the home she and her husband bought in 1956 in Borough Park, Brooklyn, her headquarters as godmother to liberal candidates she deems deserving.

“I took part in every movement for justice, whether it was union rights, civil rights, human rights, women’s rights or gay rights,” she said.

In 2014, when he last feted her, Mayor de Blasio said of Mrs. Sansone: “No matter how much the times change, she is relevant to the times, because of the way she lives. There are some great people whose time passed them by. Mary is urgent and vibrant to this day.”

As hundreds of her fans prepared to personally congratulate her on Tuesday night at the Dyker Beach Golf Course in Brooklyn, Mrs. Sansone complained that the world had become more hypocritical and that people were afraid to tell each other the truth.

Still, she said, “Let me tell you, it’s not bad to be 100.”

“My biggest accomplishment was that I had the strength to do what I wanted to do and stand up for what I believed,” she added, “As my father said, when you die, you can’t take your money with you. You can only take your integrity.”

At the celebration, Mr. de Blasio proclaimed Mary Sansone Day in New York, and former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg presented Mrs. Sansone with a T-shirt emblazoned with “Bloomberg/Sansone 2016” and the slogan “A Meatball in Every Pot.”

Born Mary Crisalli on June 12, 1916, in what was then South Brooklyn and is now called Carroll Gardens, she began her lifelong commitment to social activism as an 8-year-old, when her father perched her on a soapbox in Union Square as he addressed potential recruits to the Industrial Workers of the World, a prominent union. She recalled the moment in a 1976 book, “Nobody Speaks for Me!: Self-Portraits of American Working Class Women.”

When she was 12, she joined the Junior Wobblies, the youth contingent of the socialist-inspired labor organization. (Still, she said she had voted for Hillary Clinton over Bernie Sanders, who identifies as a democratic socialist, in the New York Democratic presidential primary.)

She later organized workers in grime-filled sweatshops, served with the Red Cross and directed American relief to Italy after World War II.

In 1964, Mrs. Sansone and her husband, Zack, founded the Congress of Italian-American Organizations, a statewide social-service federation known by the acronym CIAO.

Mrs. Sansone rose from Borough Park folk hero to greater fame through a flurry of introductions to the powerful, from Detective Sgt. Ralph Salerno, an authority on organized crime, to Nicholas Pileggi, the journalist and author who wrote “Wiseguys,” to Mayor John V. Lindsay, who in the late 1960s had been accused of favoring minority groups and was trying to woo whites.

A visit by the black civil rights leader Bayard Rustin in 1971 heralded an ambitious effort to unite the city’s black, Hispanic and so-called white ethnic communities in a common agenda, working with the New York Urban Coalition.

Mrs. Sansone invited Mr. Rustin and other black and Hispanic leaders to her home, and publicly confronted challenges her community often did not make public. “Many Italian groups did not like us becoming involved with other ethnic groups,” she recalled.

Her biggest run-in was with Joseph Colombo, the organized crime leader who had formed the Italian-American Civil Rights League. He proposed that they join forces. Mrs. Sansone refused.

At its height CIAO ran two dozen programs with a multimillion-dollar budget, provided scholarships and operated a day care center and a senior center. It suffered a setback in the 1977 mayoral race, when Mrs. Sansone supported Mario M. Cuomo while the Brooklyn Democratic organization backed Edward I. Koch, who won.

And she was fired by the board after it accused her of nepotism, which she freely admitted. “During the early days, when some undesirable Italian-American organizations wanted to take us over, they were the only ones I knew I could trust,” she said.


