


Margaret Walker Lind, a daughter of Judy A. Lind and Edward W. Lind of Granville Ferry, Nova Scotia, was married June 11 to Mark Donald Newey, the son of Mary S. Newey and Donald A. Newey Jr. of Glastonbury, Conn. The Rev. Lisa Soshin Dufour, a Zen Buddhist priest, performed the ceremony at the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College in Northampton, Mass.

The bride, 35, who is taking her husband’s name, is the associate director for academic programs and public education at the Smith College Museum of Art in Northampton. She graduated from Dartmouth and received master’s degrees in art history from the Courtauld Institute of Art in London and in teaching from George Washington.

The groom, 40, is the building science specialist at the Center for EcoTechnology in Northampton, where he advises builders and architects on making homes more energy efficient. He graduated from Penn State.

They were introduced in August 2012 through Mass Match, a western Massachusetts matchmaking service.

“We hit it off pretty well right from the beginning,” Mr. Newey said. But after seven months together, he started to feel uneasy. “I started to question, ‘What am I looking for?’” he said. He had met someone else at a conference and wanted to give that relationship a try. So Mr. Newey broke it off with Ms. Lind.

“I was pretty heartbroken and confused,” she said.

After a month apart, they met to discuss the breakup. “I came back to Maggie and said I screwed up and that we should never have broken up,” he said. But she pushed back, telling him that he wasn’t ready for a relationship.

“I was kind of devastated,” he said. “For a while I felt mad — mad at the whole situation, mad at life.” So he set out to better himself and started taking karate lessons, thinking it would help him become more assertive and aggressive. He also started going to a psychologist.

After a few months, he had a breakthrough, noticing that he had to stop trying to make himself someone else, and find acceptance in himself. “I realized that’s often how I felt when I was with Maggie,” he said. “Not only did she accept me, but she helped me accept myself.”

Mr. Newey set out to get Ms. Lind back. He planned to write her a letter on fancy stationery. As he left the store with the last sliver of hope tucked under his arm, he looked up and saw her walking down a Northampton street.

“It was an awkward moment for me,” Mr. Newey said.

They hugged and talked briefly. “It was nice to be in each other’s presence again,” she said.

As Ms. Lind walked away, Mr. Newey had a twinge of regret that he had not used this opportunity to confess his feelings. “I remembered standing there, trying to put my thoughts together,” he said. But he also thought it would be odd to chase after her on the street.

Instead, he went home and started writing the letter, but as he neared its completion, he put down his pen and decided there was a better way. “I thought, ‘Who wants a letter when you can just talk in person?’” he said.

He called Ms. Lind and invited her to meet at a teahouse in Northampton, where Mr. Newey let everything tumble out that he had started to put down on paper — about his struggles to understand himself and his eventual realization of what he wanted in life. He reflected on his mistakes and said that he now knew he had needed the time apart to work on himself. Ms. Lind listened intently, recognizing that he had truly grown.

“He said all the right things,” she said.

The note never sent is now stored in a box that holds trinkets and other keepsakes from their relationship. “Every so often, she asks me to take out the letter and read it to her,” he said.


