


MILAN — On Sunday night in Milan, Thom Browne staged his latest collection for Moncler Gamme Bleu, a campsite fantasy complete with tents, a carpet of grass and sod, and a pair of helpful costumed bears. In the audience, alongside the Giants football player Victor Cruz, the Oklahoma City Thunder basketball player Serge Ibaka and the actor Édgar Ramírez, was the Grammy-nominated rapper and Kanye West protégé Big Sean, there to take in his first Milan Fashion Week show.

Big Sean, whose full name is Sean Anderson, was on a brief break from his European stadium tour with Rihanna, which began in Amsterdam this month.

Despite jet lag — “On the way to the show just now, I kept falling asleep,” he said — he perked up near the crackling campfire to discuss the new experience.

This is your first Milan Fashion Week. What do you think so far?

I think it’s live; I think it’s cool. I get to see a couple people — my homie Victor Cruz just texted me, like, “Yo, I’m here!”

Do you have a connection with Moncler?

I’ve been wearing Moncler. I remember the first time I saw Moncler, I was with Ye — Kanye — it was after I got my deal, he took me to the Moncler store and bought me my first Moncler vest.

He was like, you need to have a Moncler vest if you’re going to be a big star?

He bought himself one, and then he bought me one. It was real inspiring.

Do you still have it?

Yeah, I’m sure I still have it in the closet somewhere — deep in there.

Does Moncler have cachet in the hip-hop community? Would you use it in a verse?

I haven’t, but I would. I like it. Some clothing lines I don’t really mess with like that, I don’t really care for, but I like Moncler.

When you’re on tour, do you have time to do anything but work? See the cities?

In Amsterdam, we were there rehearsing, too, so we were there for five days. I had a chance to see the town, hit some coffee shops.

I bet Rihanna goes hard in Amsterdam.

Yeah, we partied a little bit. It’s fun, it’s family. Nothing too crazy.


