


Memorial Day falls neatly between Mother’s Day and Father’s Day, which makes it fitting to consider two new books — one revolving chiefly around a mother, the other around a father — whose authors pay tribute to exemplary men and women of the Greatest Generation.

When Betsy Lerner, a writer and literary agent, was a rebellious pot-smoking adolescent in the 1970s, she did not appreciate the buttoned-lip conventionality of her Eisenhower-era mother; nor did her parents’ emotional reticence ease communication.

In her frank and deeply personal memoir, “The Bridge Ladies,” Ms. Lerner admits that even when she entered her 50s, her vision of her mother and the well-coiffed women she played bridge with every Monday for 50 years remained clouded. She “clumped them all together like the presidents carved into Mount Rushmore, indistinguishable one from another,” she writes.

These ladies, prosperous, cautious Jewish matrons from Connecticut, veterans of the Depression and wives (in several cases) of veterans of war, were “just a little too old or insulated to embrace ‘The Feminine Mystique.’” To a moody teenager who preferred black T-shirts and tinted glasses to twin sets and pearls, they seemed square.

Nonetheless, Ms. Lerner craved their approval and read criticism into their most benign comments. “When they said I looked good, I wondered if they really thought I was fat,” she writes; any remark from her mother felt like a crushing blow.

Even recently, she admits, her combative mind-set persisted. When her mother asked why she didn’t buy fat-free cottage cheese instead of low-fat, it “nearly set off a world war between us.”

But in 2013, as her mother, Roz, was recovering from an operation, the author resolved to make peace. She began her campaign by infiltrating the bridge circle, intending to break through the ladies’ polished surfaces and gain a deeper understanding of their inner lives, and, she hoped, her mother’s.

Sitting with Roz, Bette, Bea, Jackie and Rhoda (the club had five members, in case one had a conflict), she eavesdropped as they bid, passed and took tricks. For years, she had imagined that during card play, the women let down their guards, spilled secrets, groused about their spouses and worried about their children.

Instead, she found, to her disappointment, they did not ever “trash anyone” or “share a deep feeling.” Their commandments were: “Thou shalt not pry. Thou shalt not reveal. Thou shalt not share.”

To uncover their “private language,” she decided, she would have to learn their game. With trepidation, she signed up for classes; and though it took her ages to master the rudiments of bidding, soon bridge had her “in its thrall.”

When, two years in, she finally won a hand, she downplayed her triumph. “A monkey could have won the hand,” she writes. But she continued (and you can practically see her blush on the page): “I head home a few inches off the ground. And then I proudly call my mother.”

The book intermingles Ms. Lerner’s progress at the game with the hard-won revelations she scored from the Rushmore set as she began to see them as individuals, and know them as bridge partners.

With Bette, she brought up a tragedy that her mother had always refused to discuss: the death of Ms. Lerner’s baby sister, Barbara, in 1964, from pneumonia.

Had the ladies known about it? the author asked. “Everyone knew,” Bette replies. Had her mother spoken of it, during all those bridge Mondays? “Not once,” Bette says.

Ms. Lerner found such reticence callous. Yet, gradually, grudgingly, she came to accept that TLC did in fact exist in the pre-TMI world. Just because a bridge luncheon didn’t operate like a therapy session didn’t mean it wasn’t therapeutic, she saw. For the ladies, it was a safe, neutral zone where they went to recharge as they weathered life’s blows, keeping up appearances and their spirits as they trumped, finessed and ate kugel from china plates.

She writes, “I never thought I would say this, but I think the Bridge Ladies are brave.”

Another kind of bravery colored the childhood of an American boy named Thad Carhart, who was whisked away from suburban Washington in 1954, along with his baby sister and three older siblings, to a towering, “claptrap” mansion in France, in the quiet castle town of Fontainebleau, an hour from Paris.

In 1954, World War II was a recent memory and NATO was barely five years old. Mr. Carhart’s father, an Air Force pilot, had been appointed a staff officer at NATO’s fledgling command in Europe, headquartered in Fontainebleau’s fairy-tale chateau.

In “Finding Fontainebleau,” Mr. Carhart explains that the castle was built as a hunting lodge in the 12th century, then gussied up to palatial proportions over the next 700 years by French rulers.

While his father plied his statecraft at the chateau (or indulged his hobbies — fencing, riding, shooting and flying planes), his mother toiled at the rental mansion, cooking dinner on a “wounded behemoth” of a wood-fired cast-iron stove, and wrangling old-world domestic staff: coal men, gardeners, maids and a floor polisher who bound brushes to his feet and skated across the parquet. For three years, the American family would make this history-drenched hamlet their home.

While bringing alive this redolent Gallic chapter of his boyhood (baguettes from the boulangerie; inkwells and laborious handwriting exercises at school), Mr. Carhart also resurrects the mood and mores of a particular window in time: the 1950s of Ike and Elvis’s America, and postwar France.

Along the way, he acquaints the reader with the regal architectural history of the chateau that dominated his adopted town. Like the castle, his memoir imaginatively and smoothly integrates multiple influences, styles and whims.

When Mr. Carhart moved back to France as an adult in the 1980s, he revisited the chateau, finding it “oddly comforting” that it had been preserved as he remembered.

Even better, artisans were hard at work restoring its grandeur, paying meticulous attention to detail. This meant, the author writes, that the chateau would continue to “teach history’s lessons with its distinctive bricks, mortar, and slate” after he was gone, perpetuating “my idea of France.”

And why not, asked the chief architect of the project, as he guided Mr. Carhart through the reconstruction: “How can we know the past if we don’t save some of it?”

“The Bridge Ladies: A Memoir,” by Betsy Lerner. Harper Wave, $25.99, 272 pp.

“Finding Fontainebleau: An American Boy in France,” by Thad Carhart. Viking, $27, 304 pp.


