


Camille O. Cosby gave deposition testimony a second time on Tuesday in a civil case filed against her husband, Bill Cosby, by seven women in Massachusetts who say he defamed them after they came forward with accusations of sexual assault.

Mrs. Cosby, who has been married to the entertainer for 52 years, was questioned for five and a half hours at the offices of her lawyers in Boston.

Mrs. Cosby had already answered questions under oath in February. Her lawyers had tried to cancel, or at the very least limit, the second session of her deposition, contending that a lawyer for the seven women, Joseph Cammarata, had asked “a litany of improper and offensive questions” during her first day of testimony.

Magistrate Judge David H. Hennessy denied Mrs. Cosby’s request earlier this month but told Mr. Cammarata not to ask Mrs. Cosby questions about her opinions.

In a statement released after the testimony was completed on Tuesday, lawyers for Mrs. Cosby said: “Despite the improper purpose of the deposition and because of the court’s limiting of the worst abuses by plaintiffs’ counsel, Mrs. Cosby was able to persevere and cooperate in today’s proceedings to the best of her abilities.”

Mr. Cammarata said in an interview: “The questioning of Mrs. Cosby was consistent with the rules and orders of the court and permitted us to obtain information probative of the liability and damages issues in the case.”

None of the substance of what Mrs. Cosby spoke about during her testimony was discussed by either side. The court in the Massachusetts case has ruled that, while lawyers for the women could ask Mrs. Cosby some questions, they were not allowed to seek information that she only learned through private conversations with her husband.

Mr. Cosby, 78, has denied the allegations against him and has countersued the seven women. He also faces several other civil cases, including another defamation case in Massachusetts. Separately, he faces criminal sexual assault charges in Pennsylvania, where he has also denied any wrongdoing.


