


My friend Herb and I went to a glorious wedding a while back: Pre-ceremony champagne in the gardens of a four-star hotel; a beautiful exchange of vows; magnificent food and music. A happier, more heartwarming event you could not imagine, and as Herb and I and the other guests tottered out to our cars, a single thought bubble hovered over our heads, inconspicuous as the Goodyear blimp:

Whaddaya think that cost?

It was major money, but as the screenwriters say, was it car money or house money? Sure, I could have called the hotel on Monday, pretended I was planning a wedding and gotten an estimate, but who wants to stoop to such coarse and vulgar behavior to satisfy coarse and vulgar curiosity?

Wait, here’s an idea: The Monday after a wedding or any other big, showy party, the guests get an email:

Delighted you could be with us for the Reaffirmation of Our Vows. The evening cost $30,000. Myrna could easily afford it, as she is the founding partner of the First Letem Catchus investment firm and makes $700,000 a year. Her husband, Frank, makes $25,000 a year as a life coach. They pay $250 an hour for twice weekly couples counseling, for much as he fights it, Frank is threatened by his wife’s superior earning skills. Yes, the marriage is a sham.

I know what you’re thinking: It’s never going to happen. Money is the only taboo subject left. People will tell you what they do in bed before they tell you their salary.

You’ll never know the cost of those splashy parties, like those weddings we’ll all be attending in the coming weeks. The best you can hope for, going home, is to get a ride with one of those women who can scan an event and spit out a figure like a Whole Foods register:

“That was a $250,000 wedding we just went to.”

“You’re kidding. How do you know?”

“Room and caterer: $300 a head; flowers: $30,000; videographer: $7,500; gown: $14,000; cake: $2,500.”

“For a cake? No!”

“Yes, those were real Swarovski crystals spelling out: ‘Martha, Philip. Hope it lasts.’ Wedding planner: $10,000. Orchestra: $20,000 — my cousin Jean in Larchmont used them for her son’s wedding. You should have hooked up with the trombone player. The maid of honor said he was really something. Penicillin: $23. Would you like plastic or paper for that slice of commemorative wedding cake?”

But how often are any of us lucky enough to find someone like that? More often guests are left guessing about costs, wasting precious time that could be spent cultivating people with summer houses. It’s time for big-bash transparency.

The place to start, of course, is the invitation:

“Saul Goodman and Kim Wexler invite you to the $125,000 wedding of their daughter Emma to Charles Smith. The ceremony will take place at 5 p.m. at the Youlpas Country Club in Albuquerque.”

And, on the R.S.V.P. cards:

“We regret we cannot accommodate plus-ones, children or emotional support pets. We had to liquidate an $8,000 IRA to pay the videographer. The truth is we’ve been living on credit for the last two years.”

You see, it’s already nicer. And now nobody will have to wonder about the signs at the buffet saying, “Take all you want, but eat what you take.”

At the wedding itself, there would be no need for whispered questions about what the bride and groom were worth. Those concerns would be addressed during the ceremony.

“Do you, Emma, take Charles, for richer and richer, as his biodegradable shroud company, whose shrouds are embedded with mushroom spawn, has been sold to Campbell Soup for $40 million? And do you, Charles, take Emma despite her air yoga income of $25,000 and no help from her parents, whose steel gray Gran Turismo is being repossessed now? For as it is written in Matthew, Chapter 1: Never lease. For verily, you are but throwing money away.”

But what of all those other wedding expenses — flowers, band, wedding planner, photographer? Never fear, all will be revealed as the proud parents of the bride go table to table.

“Beautiful wedding,” you will of course say to the mother of the bride. “But as someone has just thrown a brick through the window with a menacing note about the vig — it landed on our table and we took the liberty of reading it — how on earth were you able to afford this fabulous dance band?”

“Easy-peasy,” the M.O.B. will say. “They were brought up on charges of cocaine trafficking after returning from a swank affair in Colombia, and my husband got the charges dismissed. They owe us big time. Would you like to meet the trombone player, Joyce? I hear he’s really something. ”


