


The massacre in Orlando, Fla., has inspired tearful vigils and neighborly charity. But an act of giving announced on Monday by one Florida lawmaker has spurred denunciations.

Greg Evers, a Republican state senator who is running for United States Congress, said he would hold a drawing whose prize would be an AR-15, a gun similar to the one used by Omar Mateen to kill 49 people at a gay nightclub in Orlando on June 12.

Mr. Evers said that he was considering the giveaway since before the mass shooting, intending to burnish his pro-gun credentials in Florida’s conservative western Panhandle, where he is running to fill the seat being vacated by Representative Jeff Miller.

“With the terrorist attacks that we have seen on our country, we are under a constant threat, and it’s not going away,” Mr. Evers said on Tuesday. “And we can no longer, I feel, count on our own government to protect us.”

But the timing of the announcement, even as funerals for the shooting victims continued, led many commenters on Mr. Evers’s campaign site and his Twitter account to express disgust.

Mr. Evers, who has served in the State Legislature since 2001, has had an A+ rating from the National Rifle Association for 14 years, according to his campaign website. He said he himself owns an AR-15.

Asked whether the giveaway risked offending even strong Second Amendment supporters, Mr. Evers said that when he heard about the Orlando shooting, he said a prayer for the victims, and donated money.

“But you know, there’s not a bad time to protect yourself,” he added. “And even though my heart goes out to the victims and their family and friends in Orlando, I don’t believe in offering just political platitudes. I believe in taking action.”

AR-15-style rifles have become a focal point of the national debate over gun control. Known for their ease of operation, they have been used to mow down dozens of people by mass shooters in Newtown, Conn.; Aurora, Colo.; San Bernardino, Calif.; and Roseburg, Ore.

Despite being banned under federal law from 1994 to 2004, along with other so-called assault weapons, it is the best-selling style of long gun in the United States. The National Rifle Association calls it “America’s rifle.”

Brian Burgess, a spokesman for Mr. Evers, said Tuesday that the AR-15 giveaway was devised in part as a response to what he described as President Obama’s refusal to talk openly about radical Islam.

“When President Obama went down to Orlando, he made that event about a firearm,” Mr. Burgess said. “It’s clear to folks in our district, and it’s clear to Greg, that we can’t depend on the federal government to identify the cause and root it out.”

Speaking two days after the mass shooting, Mr. Obama rejected criticism from Donald J. Trump and other Republicans over his refusal to use the label “radical Islam” when talking about the Islamic State group, to which the Orlando attacker had claimed allegiance.

“There’s no magic to the phrase ‘radical Islam.’ It’s a political talking point. It’s not a strategy,” Mr. Obama said.

Despite calls for stricter gun control after the massacre, the Senate on Monday failed to advance four separate measures aimed at curbing firearm sales. On the same day, the Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge to Connecticut’s ban on semiautomatic rifles, introduced after the Newtown massacre.

Mr. Evers’s campaign said the winner of the rifle giveaway will be selected on July Fourth, and will be chosen from among people who “liked” or shared his Facebook page.


