


“The Photographer’s Cookbook” seems an especially timely tome, given our hunger-inducing Instagram feeds and voyeuristic appetites. Yet curiously enough, its contents — 50 or so recipes, including Ansel Adams’s breakfast eggs poached in beer, Richard Avedon’s Royal Pot Roast and Stephen Shore’s Key Lime Pie Supreme — originate from a late-1970s cookbook project that never resulted in publication, until now. The recipes were first collected by an assistant registrar at what is now the George Eastman Museum, drawn from an array of contributions by over 120 notable photographers of that era, most of whom included photographs or imagery with their submissions. As telling as they are of trends and cultural backgrounds — like Arnold Newman’s dieter’s choice of cottage cheese salad, or Betty Hahn’s kolacky (an Eastern European cookie) — the dishes offer a unique snapshot of the artists’ personalities. Some, like Joseph Jachna’s potato chip cookies — which predated Momofuku Milk Bar’s famous compost cookies by about 40 years — could even be considered visionary.

Like Robert Rauschenberg who kept preprinted copies of his signature key lime pie recipe on hand for any inquiries (and which we previously shared online here), Stephen Shore loves a good key lime pie. His recipe, however, eschews the conventional use of sweetened condensed milk in favor of a water-based filling.

1 box graham cracker crust (plus ingredients on the box) 1 cup sugar ¼ cup flour 3 tablespoons cornstarch ¼ teaspoon salt 2 cups water 3 egg yolks, beaten 1 tablespoon butter Juice of 2 large limes (approximately ⅓ to ½ cup) Grated rind of 2 limes One container of heavy whipping cream, plus sugar to sweeten

1. Make the graham cracker crust following instructions on box, but increasing all the quantities by 50 percent. Be sure to use brown sugar.

2. Combine the sugar, flour, cornstarch and salt in a saucepan, and stir in water gradually. Cook on medium heat until thickened. Add the beaten egg yolks gradually and return to a low heat. Cook for 2 minutes stirring constantly.

3. Stir in the butter, lime juice and rind, and allow them to cool slightly. Pour into the baked pastry shell and cool.

4. Make whipped cream with 1 container of heavy whipping cream and sweeten with sugar. Top the pie and serve.


