


ALBANY — Democrats awoke on Wednesday tantalizingly close to having a numerical majority in the State Senate, claiming victory in the Long Island district vacated by Dean G. Skelos, the former Republican majority leader convicted of federal corruption charges in December.

But because nothing is ever simple in New York State politics, the coronation of a new ruling party in the Senate was delayed, as election officials on Long Island had not yet certified the results.

Even if the Democrat, Todd D. Kaminsky, is declared the winner of the special election to succeed Mr. Skelos, officials on both sides of the aisle in Albany said little, if anything, would change between now and November, when the full Senate will be in play.

The margin in favor of Mr. Kaminsky, an assemblyman and former federal prosecutor, over Republican Christopher T. McGrath, a personal injury lawyer, stood at 780 votes out of some 68,000 cast by Nassau County residents on the South Shore.

But there were still votes outstanding: As of Wednesday, the county had received 2,917 absentee ballots; 1,568 more had been requested but not returned. (The final deadline for such ballots is April 26.) Almost half of the absentee ballots submitted were from Democrats, 1,225 were from Republicans, and the rest were from independent voters or those belonging to other parties.

There were signs that Republicans were girding for a loss. Newsday reported Wednesday that the Nassau County party chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, had conceded that Mr. Kaminsky had probably won.

Mr. Kaminsky was confident enough in the results Tuesday night to declare victory. He vowed to “reform Albany and finally end the corrupt status quo,” having run a race that put Mr. Skelos’s misdeeds front and center while attacking Mr. McGrath’s apparent unwillingness to discredit the shamed former senator. (Late Tuesday, Mr. McGrath’s campaign had put out a statement saying the race was too close to call.)

If Mr. Kaminsky’s victory holds up, the basic math in the 63-seat Senate would be clear: 32 Democrats, 31 Republicans. But Democrats are effectively split into three groups: about two dozen traditional members led by Andrea Stewart-Cousins of Westchester County; five Independent Democrats led by Jeffrey D. Klein of the Bronx and Westchester; and Simcha Felder of Brooklyn, who caucuses with Republicans to help form their slim majority.

Mr. Felder said Wednesday that he would continue to caucus with Republicans, and expected to do so for the foreseeable future.

“I don’t have party loyalty or allegiance to any of the parties,” he said in a phone interview. He said he wanted to “try to get the best services and resources for my constituents,” including a large bloc who, like him, are Orthodox Jews. “The political parties are not a religion,” he added.

Mr. Felder said he disagreed with Republicans on some social issues, but agreed with them on economic policy. “If I really hated everything, I wouldn’t be with them,” he said, adding that he did not expect them to lose enough seats in the fall to alter his stance.

Then there is Mr. Klein’s group, which has pushed for liberal policies like paid family leave and the $15 minimum wage, but has worked with Republicans for several years. Mr. Klein has repeatedly defended the alliance, saying the Independent Democratic Conference is unified and productive, and born out of past dysfunction and infighting among Democrats.

On Wednesday, Mr. Klein congratulated Mr. Kaminsky in a brief statement that did not refer to the Senate’s balance of power, saying merely that his group “looks forward to working with him to build on our outstanding victories.”

Senate Republicans noted that under the chamber’s rules, the current majority leader, John J. Flanagan, a Long Island Republican, would keep that role. Any action to replace him would require a suspension of the rules, approved by 60 percent of members — a virtual impossibility. Despite Mr. McGrath’s apparent loss, Republicans continued to sound bullish about their chances in the fall.

“We strongly believe we are going to maintain the majority in November,” said Scott Reif, a spokesman for Senate Republicans.

The so-called traditional Democrats also seemed ready to wait for the fall elections, though Senator Michael Gianaris, their political guru, said a win for Mr. Kaminsky would be significant, even if it did not give Democrats clear control. “In the bigger picture,” he said, “it means the Republican grip in the Senate continues to slip away.”


