


The sign welcoming patients at the main entrance of Mount Sinai Beth Israel on First Avenue is translated into Spanish, Russian, Chinese and Hebrew, a powerful testament to its immigrant heritage on the East Side of Manhattan.

This was a hospital founded by immigrants, for immigrants, and today it is staffed by many immigrants.

After moving across six locations over 127 years, it is facing change again. On Wednesday, the Mount Sinai Health System, which runs Beth Israel and six other hospital campuses in the New York City area, announced that it would be closing the hospital’s current building and reopening a smaller one several blocks away.

In 1889, 40 Orthodox Jews who fled persecution in Russia and its surrounding countries collected 25 cents each to start a dispensary in a Lower East Side loft, according to hospital and New York Times archives. Beth Israel became a clinic on Henry Street, an inpatient hospital on East Broadway and then, three moves later, a bustling hospital off Stuyvesant Square where its employees speak languages as diverse as Thai and Twi (from Ghana).

On Thursday, as hospital officials offered reassurances, employees and community members worried about the impact of the change on their lives.

“I tell them, ‘You should definitely not panic so much,’” said Michael Bimpeh, a technician responsible for sanitizing the hospital’s equipment. An immigrant from Ghana with master’s degrees in business and science, he is an unofficial liaison between other Ghanaians and union and hospital officials.

On Mr. Bimpeh’s night shift, there are five Ghanaians, he said, but also technicians from Jamaica, Latin America and India. “We see each other as one family,” Mr. Bimpeh said. “Because we come from different countries, we have to protect ourselves.”

All of the approximately 4,000 members of the 1199 S.E.I.U. union will keep their jobs or be trained for other roles throughout the system, hospital officials said. Senior staff members spoke with employees on Wednesday, Mr. Bimpeh said, and on Thursday they held a series of meetings for community members, elected officials and employees.

“I want to keep an open mind, but I’m not feeling in a great place of comfort,” said City Councilwoman Rosie Mendez, who represents the East Village and attended one of the meetings on Thursday. She said when she was growing up in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn, her family would take the L train to Beth Israel whenever necessary.

Mount Sinai officials said there would be 70 beds in the new building, down from 825 beds (of which only half are in use). But Ms. Mendez learned, and the hospital confirmed on Thursday, that 153 existing beds for mental health patients would remain in the new hospital.

“As long as they can show me that the services that are needed will still be there, and even if it may look a little different, then I will get more comfortable,” Ms. Mendez said.

But as throngs of employees arrived for meetings in the stifling sun on Thursday, there was an air of unease. They said they were told by hospital officials not to speak publicly about the situation.

One man, an electrician who asked not to be identified by name for fear of endangering his employment, said that during Hurricane Sandy, he spent his 60th birthday at Beth Israel and did not leave for five days after that. With much of Lower Manhattan flooded, he was making sure the generators were operating.

He is a native of Panama, he said, and he had been at St. Vincent’s Hospital Manhattan for 20 years when it was shut down to make way for condominiums. He started working at Beth Israel five years ago.

“You get that sense of helping the less fortunate,” he said, but added, “There’s no more charity; it’s more about the dollar.”

According to Times archives, when Beth Israel was founded, other hospitals would not accept immigrants who had been in the city for less than a year. Beth Israel took every immigrant.

Because of its Jewish roots, it kept kosher until December 2015. The neighborhood has changed significantly, however.

Many Jewish patients are no longer from a neighborhood that has become less Jewish, but from the Hasidic community in Williamsburg, said David Goldberg, who was born at the hospital and still comes frequently to pray in the synagogue there.

His rabbi left the synagogue at the end of last year. “Maybe he knew something,” Mr. Goldberg said on Thursday, on the way to pray.

As for the hospital’s downsizing, Mr. Goldberg shook his head. “It’s a big loss,” he said. “Thank God I’m in good health.”


