


Among this country’s enduring myths is that success is virtuous, while the wealth by which we measure success is incidental. We tell ourselves that money cannot buy happiness, but what is incontrovertible is that money buys stuff, and if stuff makes you happy, well, complete the syllogism. To my mind, no book better encapsulates this spirit than “More Than I Dreamed: A Lifetime of Collecting,” by Malcolm Forbes, whose deliriously materialistic account of his own life gives the lie to the notion that success is its own end. It’s quite clear that stuff, more than anything else, made Malcolm Forbes happy.

Forbes’s book is an oddity. It was published in 1989, and though it’s nominally an autobiography, it looks more a coffee-­table book than the collected wisdom of a captain of industry — and it’s certainly more suitable for the aesthete than for the M.B.A. in your life. Forbes does sketch out a biography, but his possessions always elbow their way to the center. A native Brooklynite, Malcolm was born to the financial journalist B.C. Forbes in 1919. It was B.C. who laid the groundwork for what became a publishing empire. He celebrated his 50th birthday by handing each of his sons a $1,000 bond. Malcolm, then 10, itched to use the money on a bike. “Bonds are not for cashing in,” his father said. With the benefit of hindsight, Malcolm points out that this was just before the Great Depression would render the bond worthless anyway.

That he never got the bike might explain everything. Though Forbes tries (feebly) to reconcile with the family legacy of common-­sense thrift — pointing out that he saves the paper clips from papers he’s throwing away — even a man rich enough to have it all can’t have it both ways. “For a Scotsman, it’s not a comforting thought to be breaking auction records,” Forbes writes, informing us that he had done just that in pursuit of a $21,000 toy boat. Frankly, he doesn’t sound uncomfortable. He sounds like a 10-year-old with that new bike instead of a useless bond: utterly vindicated.

It soon becomes clear that the point of this book, the titular “more,” is Forbes’s stuff; we’re given page after page of photographs of that stuff — so much so that the book grimly resembles an auction catalog. Indeed, Forbes died the year after its publication. This book is Forbes’s opportunity to tell everyone all about his things: Fabergé Imperial eggs (Forbes then owned more than the Kremlin), a hundred thousand or so toy soldiers, a helicopter, yachts, cars, a 727 (which he named Capitalist Tool), a Renoir, a Gilbert Stuart, the opera glasses President Abraham Lincoln was using at Ford’s Theater, a fleet of hot-air balloons modeled after other objects of beauty — Lahore’s Minar-­e-­Pakistan, a Fabergé egg, a 17th-­century chateau. (He also owned the 17th-­century chateau the balloon was modeled after.)

Gay men are adept at recognizing one another, and I can’t help seeing Forbes’s particular sort of connoisseurship as a tell. Forbes was born during Woodrow Wilson’s administration; men and women of that generation had yet to evolve to the “not that there’s anything wrong with that” attitude. After Forbes’s death, Michelangelo Signorile reported on his closeted life in the now-­shuttered Out­Week magazine. Leaving aside the question of what he was or would have called himself, Forbes’s discriminating eye, his exacting and exhausting taste, strikes me as distinctively gay.

Men like Forbes — history’s bachelor uncles/best pals/trusted advisers — were for centuries on the cutting edge of taste. They were always the ones who cared about bias cuts, cloisonné, Murano glass — whatever. They lived lives circumscribed by social convention and exerted influence mostly in determining the absolute standard of high style. Cold comfort, for the love of stuff can’t replace love itself.

Today, this “gay” taste no longer has so much to do with actual gayness. Whether speaking of actual gay men like Yves Saint Laurent or urbane straight men like Michael Bloomberg — who bankrolls brilliant interior designers — calling the pursuit of aesthetic purity “gay” is an act of reclamation. Lots of rich men and women like fast cars, but it’s a gay sensibility that appreciates the car as an object of beauty as well as a marvel of engineering — I think of the noted (straight) collector Ralph Lauren. Gayness should have never been cause for shame, and now, in the culture’s more rarefied corners, it can be cause for celebration. Many tastemakers (in fashion, art, interior design) are still gay men — but their gayness is not a secret and may even burnish their credentials. I’m unable to think of a more suitable adjective to describe the sensibility that would invest, as Forbes did, in Eugene Kupjack’s exquisite miniature of Thomas Jefferson’s bedroom at Monticello (scale: one inch to one foot).

Which is why I find “More Than I Dreamed,” for all its intended boastfulness, somewhat tragic. It’s impossible to look at all the stuff Malcolm Forbes accrued — an 1847 townhouse on West 12th Street, a London manse attributed to Christopher Wren, the aforementioned chateau, the glorious Palais Mendoub in Tangier — without thinking of what the man never got to enjoy, at least not openly. I don’t have a Winslow Homer or a Renoir, but I do have the liberty to live as I like.


