


Daniel Murphy finished a triple shy of the cycle, the slumping slugger Bryce Harper hit his 10th homer of the season, and the Washington Nationals routed the floundering Royals, 13-2, at Kansas City on Wednesday.

Stephen Strasburg merely had to show up to push his career-best start to 5-0. In six innings.

Kris Medlen (1-3) allowed nine runs, six of them earned, and six hits in two-plus innings for Kansas City.

CUBS 6, PIRATES 2 Ben Zobrist hit a three-run homer, and Anthony Rizzo also connected as Chicago completed a three-game sweep at Pittsburgh.

The Cubs’ Jon Lester (3-1) scattered eight hits in five and two-thirds innings, struck out five and walked two.

With their seventh win in eight games, the Cubs improved to a major-league-leading 20-6.

ANGELS 7, BREWERS 3 Mike Trout had a run-scoring triple and ignited a four-run eighth inning with a solo homer, and Los Angeles avoided a three-game sweep at Milwaukee.

After a slow start, Trout has 18 R.B.I. in his last 13 games.

BLUE JAYS 4, RANGERS 3 Russell Martin singled home the winning run with the bases loaded in the bottom of the ninth, and host Toronto picked up its second straight last-at-bat victory over Texas.

INDIANS 4, TIGERS 0 Corey Kluber pitched a five-hit shutout, and host Cleveland used a four-run fourth inning to defeat Detroit for the fifth straight time this season. Kluber (2-3) beat Detroit for the second time in two weeks, striking out seven and walking two in his second career shutout and eighth complete game.

MARLINS 4, DIAMONDBACKS 3 Giancarlo Stanton hit his ninth homer, a two-run shot in the third, as Miami grabbed a 4-0 lead and held on to edge visiting Arizona.

Jose Fernandez (3-2) allowed three runs in five innings while striking out seven for the Marlins, who have won nine of 10.

ROCKIES 2, PADRES 0 Tyler Chatwood pitched three-hit ball for eight innings to lead Colorado over host San Diego. It was the Padres’ eighth shutout loss in 28 games this season.

Chatwood (4-2) struck out seven and walked one. The Rockies won for just the seventh time in their last 27 games at Petco Park and avoided a three-game sweep.

REDS 7, GIANTS 4 Brandon Phillips, Eugenio Suarez and Zack Cozart homered in a five-run first inning, and Cincinnati beat Jake Peavy for the first time, winning at home against San Francisco.

Adam Duvall added a solo shot for the Reds, and Dan Straily (1-1) overcame solo homers by Brandon Belt and Conor Gillaspie for his first major league win since April 2014, with Oakland. Cincinnati avoided a three-game sweep.

RAYS 8, DODGERS 5 Steve Pearce hit one of four Tampa Bay homers, a go-ahead three-run shot in the sixth inning, and Tampa Bay topped visiting Los Angeles.

Brandon Guyer, Steven Souza Jr. and Curt Casali added solo homers for the Rays. Pearce chased Alex Wood (1-3) by putting Tampa Bay ahead, 5-2.

MARINERS 9, ATHLETICS 8 Dae-Ho Lee hit a go-ahead two-run homer in the seventh after an earlier solo shot, giving him his first career multihomer game, and Seattle rallied to win a back-and-forth game at Oakland.

The Mariners’ Nelson Cruz also homered, a rare shot into the second deck of seats in center field. The Mariners claimed their first sweep of the season.

RED SOX 5, WHITE SOX 2 David Ortiz hit his 509th home run to put visiting Boston ahead to stay at Chicago.

Ortiz’s two-run shot to right field off Carlos Rodon in the fifth inning tied him with Gary Sheffield for 25th on the career list. It was the sixth homer of his farewell season and his 451st with Boston, one off Carl Yastrzemski’s club mark.


