


Rafael Nadal announced Thursday that he would not play Wimbledon as he continues to recover from a left wrist injury, which also forced him to withdraw from the French Open.

“As you can all imagine, it’s a very tough decision, but the injury I suffered at Roland Garros needs time to heal,” Nadal said in a post on his Facebook page.

Nadal, ranked No. 4, is a two-time Wimbledon champion, but he has not advanced past the fourth round since losing the final in 2011. This year’s tournament begins June 27.

After losing in the first round of the Australian Open in January, Nadal had been having a resurgent spring on clay, winning in Monte Carlo and Barcelona and reaching the semifinals in Madrid.

But he stunned the French Open last month when, before his third-round match, he pulled out of the tournament with an inflamed tendon sheath in his left wrist. He said he could no longer hit a topspin forehand, his signature shot, without major pain.

Nadal, who turned 30 last week, has struggled with injuries, particularly in his knees, throughout his career. He withdrew from the 2014 United States Open with a right wrist injury.

Nadal said the pain in his left wrist began at the Madrid tournament in early May and continued at the Rome event the next week. At the time, he treated it with anti-inflammatories. But the injury grew worse when he arrived in Paris.

He played his second-round match after receiving a painkilling injection, and on May 27, the day he withdrew, he said he “could not move much the wrist.”

He said his doctor told him he risked a tear if he continued playing.

“If I continue to play, it will break, and that will mean months off the tour,” Nadal said.

Nadal’s spokesman, Benito Perez-Barbadillo, said in a statement that Nadal’s wrist would remain in a cast for two more weeks, and then he would begin anti-inflammatory treatments and physical therapy.

The first major United States Open tuneup event on hardcourts is the Rogers Cup in Toronto in late July. The Olympic tennis tournament in Rio de Janeiro begins Aug. 6, and Nadal was chosen as Spain’s flag bearer for the opening ceremony. During the French Open, Nadal called the Olympics “the most important event in the world of sport” and spoke of his disappointment in missing the 2012 London Games with a knee injury.

Nadal’s longtime rival, Roger Federer, who missed the French Open because of injuries, returned to action Thursday with a 6-4, 5-7, 6-4 win over the American teenager Taylor Fritz at the Mercedes Cup grass-court event in Stuttgart, Germany. The match started on Wednesday, but was suspended in the first set because of rain.

Federer had surgery on his left knee in February and withdrew from the Madrid tournament because of back problems in May. He had not played on tour since a round of 16 loss to Dominic Thiem in Rome on May 12.

“I was a little bit cautious, unsure of how to move and questioning my defense,” Federer said on the ATP Tour website. “These are the things I will need to iron out.

“I can take a lot of confidence out of this match. I need to improve a few things, but I served big and I was able to handle three sets over two days, and find some energy at the end of the match. I know I have an extra gear.”


