


You’ve been hosting a hip-hop radio show for about two decades. It seems that other music genres don’t have the same relationship to radio that hip-hop does. Do you think there’s a reason for that difference? People who are fans of hip-hop are fans of the overall culture. It’s the clothing, it’s the lifestyle, it’s the music, it’s the TV shows we watch. It’s really a full culture as opposed to just the music. Radio can deliver all the parts of that as well.

In your memoirs, “My Voice,” you write a little bit about the deadly East Coast/West Coast feud of the ’90s. A few times you attribute it to youth. Was there no older generation of rap stars to look up to? There were older rappers, but I don’t think anyone had experienced this type of conflict on a national level. When you’re a grown-up, you learn ways how to cope, you evolve into a person who can deal with conflict better. When you’re young, it can go bad fast.

Radio used to be the singular place to find new music, but with the democratization brought on by the Internet, you guys aren’t the only tastemakers any more. So how do you find new music today? Through anybody and everybody. You have to just find somebody who speaks to you. I can get it from my Uber driver.

Have you actually gotten a good recommendation from an Uber driver? Let me see, ’cause I’m in an Uber right now. He’s listening to Future, but I’m already up on Future. The driver says he wants me to listen to more bachata.

In the book, you write a bit about a boyfriend who felt threatened by your success. Yeah, I need to call him and let him know that I wrote that.

But you don’t really talk explicitly about sexism or gender in your career. I was a tomboy, so I was used to being around a lot of boys. When I got into the music business and hip-hop, I didn’t really give it much attention. I really just kept going and kept working. It was almost like blinders. But now I do see it. I was 19, making sure I had baggy clothes on, trying to blend in, trying to make sure I knew all my stuff, to be sitting at a table full of guys talking about hip-hop. I wasn’t consciously thinking: ’Cause I’m a woman, I have to know more. But I wanted to know more. I wanted to sit at the table with them.

You had a very short-lived gig on “American Idol.” Four shows, is that correct? It might have been three.

One reason you left is you said you didn’t like crushing the hopes of the people who auditioned. Were you able to watch that show at all? I love that show, but I wasn’t a singer. I didn’t feel secure enough to be able to take an opportunity away from somebody.

But you released two albums yourself, which gives you some credibility. Why haven’t you done any more? I can hear some of the songs and be like, “Oh, it’s kind of good.” But I think any artist, even probably a seasoned artist, probably looks back on the first couple of things that they did and is like, “Oh, I could have done better than that.” It’s like looking at a high-school photo.

One thing you did with your show was that you offered a sympathetic ear to people who may not be getting sympathy in other places. You gave a pretty friendly interview to Chris Brown in 2009. I treated him like a human being who made a mistake — not a monster.

So let’s say Donald Trump wanted to come on your show. Yeesh. The difference is that Chris was still pretty much a kid at that point. With Trump, I think he knows what he’s doing. Contrary to what a lot of people say, he is not a dumb guy. I keep hoping that maybe it’s a like some big facade, and maybe he doesn’t believe some of the things he’s saying, he’s just trying to get in the position, and once he’s there he’ll do the right thing.

You really do try to see the best in people. I try! That’s a really hard one, though.


