


The dark gray clouds that canvassed the sky at Yankee Stadium on Friday night, residual effects from an afternoon storm, provided a fitting setting for Luis Severino’s start against the Chicago White Sox.

Severino departed in the third inning after being bombarded in his shortest outing of the season. But that may not have been the gloomiest news for Severino, the 22-year-old starter who fell to 0-6 with a 7.46 E.R.A. in the Yankees’ 7-1 loss.

After allowing a two-run homer to Jimmy Rollins, Severino threw one pitch to Jose Abreu before Manager Joe Girardi and the trainer Steve Donohue came out of the dugout. Donohue walked off the mound with Severino as disgruntled fans jeered his effort — two and two-thirds innings, seven runs with seven hits, four walks and one hit batter.

The Yankees later announced that Severino experienced soreness on the back of his right elbow. Severino had a magnetic resonance imaging scan after the game, and he was found to have a mild right triceps strain. He will not pick up a baseball for five to seven days and be placed on the 15-day disabled list.

Ivan Nova will most likely remain in the rotation. C. C. Sabathia, who has been on the D.L. since May 5 with a left groin strain, was scheduled to throw a side session Friday and is expected to rejoin the team next week.

“You worry about it,” Girardi said of Severino’s elbow, adding, “Obviously it’s a big concern.”

Severino’s latest rough outing began ominously. His second pitch caught the leadoff hitter Adam Eaton in the right arm.

After walking Todd Frazier with two outs, Severino escaped the inning unscathed, thanks to a diving stop up the middle by shortstop Ronald Torreyes that prevented a run-scoring single by Melky Cabrera.

In the second, Severino’s inability to close out at-bats led to three runs. Alex Avila hit an R.B.I. double with two strikes for the game’s first run, and Eaton later picked up a key infield single on an 0-2 pitch that loaded the bases and set up Jose Abreu for a two-R.B.I. single.

Severino picked up two quick outs in the third, before his start derailed. A single and a walk set up Eaton for a two-run double on a misjudged fly ball by center fielder Aaron Hicks.

Throughout the opening innings, catcher Austin Romine frequently called for time to meet with Severino, including the pitch before Rollins’s home run.

Spotted a 7-1 lead by the time of Severino’s exit, the White Sox coasted behind Chris Sale.

The Yankees had reestablished their offense in taking five of their first seven games this homestand, but were no match for Sale, who improved to 8-0 and has been possibly the best pitcher in the American League.

At 6-foot-6, toeing the third base side of the rubber and swinging his left arm across almost the entirety of the rest of the mound, Sale, with his wingspan reminiscent of Randy Johnson, pitched a complete game.

After his call-up in August, the Yankees hoped that Severino carried similar potential. But this season, he has rarely exhibited the talent that had him pegged as a future anchor of the staff.

Severino’s injury shadowed the first major league start for another prized graduate of the Yankees’ farm system, catcher Gary Sanchez, who was recalled from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.

Sanchez, who went hitless in two at-bats last season, and 0 for 4 Friday, entered spring training as a candidate to become the backup to Brian McCann, but faltered.

Sanchez, speaking through an interpreter Friday afternoon, said he refocused by shortening his swing over the first month in the minors.

Sanchez has played in the Yankees organization since 2010, when he was 17. At times, he caught Severino, and last season the duo were named the Yankees’ minor league player and pitcher of the year.


