


The bloodletting has begun.

Next week is the beginning of television networks’ annual upfront presentations, where they wine, dine and charm advertisers in hopes of enticing them to buy time for their fall offerings. For the rest of us, the events give a first look at which new and returning series the networks and cable channels will show this fall.

Which also means learning which shows won’t be back.

So it went on Thursday, when networks took the ax to a dozen series, from newcomers both acclaimed (“The Grinder”) and unloved (“Bordertown”) by critics, to fan favorites like “Castle, “Agent Carter” and “Nashville.” Another popular new show, “Supergirl,” will move from CBS to CW, and, after more than 15 years, the “CSI” era was officially closed after the demise of “CSI: Cyber,” the show’s remaining spinoff.

On Friday, NBC added five more shows to the reject pile, including the drama “Game of Silence,” which only debuted last month, and “Telenovela,” a soap spoof starring Eva Longoria.

Here’s a look at the canceled shows by network.

ABC led with six shows shuttered, most notably the comic crime drama “Castle,” which had originally secured a ninth season. Its surprise cancellation came after the contract of one of its stars, Stana Katic, wasn’t renewed. (Tamala Jones also left.) “Your devotion to our show carried us for these unforgettable eight seasons,” Ms. Katic posted in a note to fans on Twitter on Friday morning.

Also done is “Nashville,” the country music drama starring Connie Britton. The series, which debuted in 2012, was low-rated but had its advocates, though it had become more soapy recently.

“The Muppets,” one of ABC’s most-promoted new shows last fall, will not return. Neither will the series “Agent Carter,” based on a Marvel Comics character and set during World War II. ABC also ended the musical comedy “Galavant” and the missing-child drama “The Family,” which join the midseason cancellations of “Blood and Oil,” “Wicked City” and “Of Kings and Prophets.”

One bright spot: John Ridley’s low-rated but widely acclaimed “American Crime” will return for a third season.

CBS’s only cancellation was symbolic: “CSI: Cyber,” a low-rated spinoff that was the last active series in a franchise that debuted in October 2000. CBS also moved “Supergirl” to CW. That network, home of other hero series like “The Flash,” “Arrow” and “Legends of Tomorrow,” is jointly owned by CBS and Warner Bros., which produces “Supergirl.”

CW will not bring back the thriller “Containment,” about an epidemic.

Fox canceled “The Grinder,” with Rob Lowe, and “Grandfathered,” with John Stamos, two new sitcoms starring TV heavyweights. “The Grinder” was popular among critics, but its ratings remained low throughout its first season. “I’m thrilled to have 22 episodes that were as acclaimed as they were,” Mr. Lowe said on Twitter on Thursday night.

Fox also killed “Cooper Barrett’s Guide to Surviving Life” and “Bordertown,” an animated series whose executive producer was Seth MacFarlane.

On Friday, NBC canceled two new dramas: “Heartbeat,” which debuted in March, and “Game of Silence,” which had its premiere in April. Also ending are the new comedies “Telenovela” and “Crowded,” a sitcom about empty nesters played by Patrick Warburton and Carrie Preston. NBC also canceled “Undateable,” a sitcom created by Bill Lawrence (“Scrubs”) that debuted in 2014. Mr. Lawrence wrote on Twitter that he planned to try to keep the show going on another outlet — “Cougar Town,” his previous sitcom, began on ABC but finished its run on TBS.

Earlier this season, NBC canceled “Best Time Ever With Neil Patrick Harris,” “Heroes Reborn,” “The Player” and “Truth Be Told.”


