


The Islanders came into Game 4 with a chance to go up by three games to one on the Florida Panthers, a postseason situation the franchise has not experienced since 1993.

The score was tied, 1-1, in a taut game at the end of two periods, and the fans at Barclays Center tried their best to coax a second straight home win for the Islanders in the second Stanley Cup playoff game ever contested in Brooklyn.

But Florida defenseman Alex Petrovic scored the only goal of the final period, and the Panthers held on to win, 2-1, and tie the best-of-seven series at two games apiece.

Game 5 will be Friday night in Sunrise, Fla.

Petrovic’s goal at 9 minutes 25 seconds came on a slap shot from the right circle that went through a maze of bodies to elude Islanders goaltender Thomas Greiss.

“I saw it too late, and it just went in,” said Greiss, who made 27 saves but could not block Petrovic’s first playoff goal.

Petrovic, 24, had only two goals in his career, both this season.

“I’m not used to scoring those kinds of goals,” he said. “Or scoring a lot of goals.”

The Islanders had a power-play opportunity when Florida’s Jonathan Huberdeau was sent off for hooking at 16:27 of the third period. But they could not muster enough against Roberto Luongo, the former Islander who finished with 26 saves for the victory.

“You’re not going to win many games scoring one goal,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We need secondary scoring. If not, it will be tough. We have to create more.”

Coming off their overtime victory in Game 3, the Islanders spoke before the game about the importance of scoring first, which they have yet to do in this series. But once again, they came out without enough resolve to break through against Luongo. 

For the third straight playoff series, the Islanders will be on the road for a Game 5 with the series tied. They encountered the same situation against Washington last year and against Pittsburgh in 2013. They lost both times.

“We lose this one, but we get right back at it,” Islanders defenseman Travis Hamonic said. “We’re really confident in our group.”

After both teams had goals disallowed in the second, Florida forward Teddy Purcell broke through at 15:18 with a power-play goal set up by the 44-year-old Jaromir Jagr, who notched his first point of the series and the 200th of a playoff career dating to 1991.

John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain, continued his torrid play, scoring his third goal of the series on the power play at 19:44 of the second to ignite an outburst from the capacity crowd of 15,795.

Greiss, who made 36 saves in Sunday’s 4-3 win in Game 3, was solid against many quality opportunities from a Panthers team that seemed focused on getting the series back home tied.

 “I thought our desperation was real good from the puck drop,” Panthers Coach Gerard Gallant said. “We talked about making it hard for them to score.”

Greiss turned away 10 shots in the first, denying Purcell point-blank after a giveaway in front of the net. In the second, Greiss denied Nick Bjugstad with a pad stop and stopped Reilly Smith with a kick save.

Luongo was tested rarely in the early going, facing only five shots in the opening period. His best stop came on Kyle Okposo early in the second after Shane Prince forced a turnover and Luongo made a pad stop.

Then controversy stirred. Panthers forward Jonathan Huberdeau appeared to score at 10:45 of the second. Greiss made the initial save before Huberdeau pushed him across the goal line together with the puck. Huberdeau was also tangled with Islanders defenseman Ryan Pulock on the play.

After the review, the goal was waved off. Gallant had a lengthy and animated conversation with the officials, but the no-goal ruling stayed.

Less than two minutes later, the Islanders appeared to score after a scrum in front of Luongo, but the officials ruled that they had whistled the play dead before the puck crossed the goal line.

 The chances kept coming for the Islanders. Luongo gave up a rebound on a Thomas Hickey slap shot, but Okposo could not handle the puck for a clean shot.

Then Matt Martin was whistled for tripping at 14:03, and Purcell broke through with his second goal of the series.

The Islanders had their best opportunity with less than a minute left in the second period after Florida’s Aleksander Barkov was penalized at 17:43 and Dmitri Kulikov was assessed another at 19:04.

Tavares scored a second after the penalty to Barkov expired with a high shot that eluded Luongo. Ryan Pulock and Brock Nelson assisted on the tying goal.

But that was all the Islanders could manage against Luongo and the Panthers, who head back to the Florida with home-ice advantage back on their side.

“Give Florida credit, they played a good, smart road game,” Capuano added. “They grind you down and wear you down. We just have to respond, go down to Florida and play better than we did tonight.”


