


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

Let the spring TV breakups start. Sorry, “Quantico,” I just don’t think we’re gonna make it to the end of the season. “Blindspot,” I really tried, but every time you laboriously explained phony-baloney technology, I wanted to flee to the woods and lead a more deliberate life. “New Girl,” I miss what we used to have. I’m turning my TV eyes to steady joys this week instead, and I hope you are, too.

A programming note: If you are enjoying this email, or if you think there are things we can do to improve, please take our brief survey and let us know how you feel. It should take you less than five minutes. Thanks for the help. Have a terrific week and happy watching.

I recently learned that not everyone has yet watched this perfect series. This is heartbreaking.

If you are among those who have not enjoyed the reality contest show, I encourage you to drop everything and do so right now. Unlike its crasser competitive-cooking counterparts, “The Great British Baking Show,” known in Britain as “The Great British Bake-Off,” is upbeat. It lacks the sadism of “Chopped,” thank goodness, and there aren’t those conniving “Top Chef” antics. (There is one baked alaska controversy; I don’t want to spoil it.)

Season 1 is available on Netflix, and Season 2 aired on PBS last year, but six seasons have aired in Britain. England, share your bounty with us! (Netflix; PBS, available with a subscription if you are a member)

Oh, hadn’t you heard? One of TV’s biggest shows returned this weekend and so much happened. As Jeremy Egner put it, there were “about 13,000 subplots (a rough estimate) that got serviced in the season premiere, a terrifically busy episode that at times, with its quick glimpses of exposition and rapid cutting from scene to scene to scene, reminded me a bit of the old ‘Batman’ show.”

Some other good “Thrones” pieces: Vox cleverly breaks down the episode into winners and losers. (Naturally, given the show’s rough world, there are many more losers.) And Vanity Fair goes deep into the question of how old Melisandre actually is.

“Lemonade” Of Beyoncé’s Saturday night hourlong visual experience, which preceded the release of a new album, Wesley Morris writes, “I watched this thing in a state of exhilarated shock. At first, I thought: How is this not a work of pretentious self-pity? How isn’t this the mistake of the year?”

“Outlander” Angelica Jade Bastién thinks the increasingly sumptuous series is undercutting itself with its portrayal of the French. Every stereotype is indulged, she writes. “They’re overtly sexual, lecherous, cunning, frivolous and not much else.”

“Silicon Valley” The tech world comedy made its Season 3 debut Sunday night and Scott Tobias writes, “There are many reasons Mike Judge’s show found its groove in Season 2,” adding that the “real secret sauce in the ‘Silicon Valley’ formula is conflict.”

“Veep” Jen Chaney writes of the Washington satire, “If laughing at fictional political chaos makes it easier to cope with actual political chaos, then this HBO series is the best therapy available to the primary-season-fatigued public.”

“Fear the Walking Dead” The spinoff zombie series finally justified the “Flight 462” webisodes that spun out during Season 1. E.A Hanks writes that it’s a further sign of Hollywood’s obsession with expanded universes.

Even amid the constant stream of new, excellent television, I still find myself going back to — and obsessing over — old favorites. High atop that list is “The West Wing,” one of my all-time most beloved shows. That’s why I’ve been so delighted listening to the new podcast “The West Wing Weekly,” hosted by Hrishikesh Hirway and “West Wing” cast member Joshua Malina. The podcast is an episode-by-episode analysis, with other “West Wing” actors and writers sitting in and providing behind-the-scenes details.

• Watch all seven seasons of “The West Wing” on Netflix

Don’t write it off because it’s a teen-centered show on Freeform (née ABC Family): “The Fosters” is one of the most emotionally effective dramas on TV. The first two and a half seasons are currently on Netflix, and the second half of Season 3 — which aired this winter — arrives Wednesday. Issues tackled include: maintaining a sexual identity while enduring cancer treatments, the pitfalls of a for-profit foster-care model, how restraining orders work and the challenges of writing one’s own musical. (Watch on Netflix)

“The Bachelorette” 29 days (May 23)

“Ray Donovan” 63 days (June 26)

“Ballers” 84 days (July 17)


