


Jake Arrieta dominated the Pittsburgh Pirates yet again, scattering two hits in seven shutout innings Tuesday night as the Chicago Cubs defeated the Pirates, 7-1, in Pittsburgh.

Seven months after shutting down the Pirates in the National League wild-card game, Arrieta allowed only singles to Sean Rodriguez in the second inning and Francisco Cervelli in the seventh. Arrieta (6-0) struck out five and walked two while lowering his E.R.A. to 0.84. He became the second six-game winner in the major leagues, after Chris Sale of the Chicago White Sox.

Kris Bryant had three hits for the visiting Cubs, who have won seven of eight and moved to five games ahead of Pittsburgh in the N.L. Central.

Jon Niese (3-1) gave up six runs and nine hits over five innings.

The Cubs have won each of Arrieta’s last 19 starts. He became the first Chicago pitcher to win each of his first six starts in a season since Mordecai Brown won his first 11 in 1908, which is also the last time the Cubs won the World Series.

PHILLIES 1, CARDINALS 0 Aaron Nola threw seven innings, and Ryan Howard homered to lead visiting Philadelphia, which has won seven of eight while St. Louis has lost five of six. Jeanmar Gomez recorded his ninth save in nine opportunities.

GIANTS 3, REDS 1 Jeff Samardzija went eight innings to win his third straight start, and San Francisco rallied on the road for two runs in the eighth inning. Cincinnati’s bullpen gave up at least one run for the 21st consecutive game, surpassing the 2013 Rockies for the major league record, according to information provided by the Reds from the Elias Sports Bureau.

MARLINS 7, DIAMONDBACKS 4 A two-run pinch-hit single by Ichiro Suzuki put Miami ahead in the sixth inning as it rallied past visiting Arizona.

WHITE SOX 4, RED SOX 1 Jose Quintana pitched eight crisp innings for his third straight win, and Chicago cooled off visiting Boston. Jose Abreu had two hits and three R.B.I. as Chicago ran its record to 19-8 with its third straight win. It has won nine of 11 over all.

BLUE JAYS 3, RANGERS 1 Justin Smoak’s first two home runs of the season, a tying drive in the ninth inning and two-run shot in the 10th, powered host Toronto past Texas.

INDIANS 7, TIGERS 3 Francisco Lindor hit a three-run homer, scored three times and fell a triple short of the cycle, leading host Cleveland over Detroit.

DODGERS 10, RAYS 5 Trayce Thompson, Joc Pederson and Yasiel Puig homered as Los Angeles pulled out of an offensive funk with a win on the road.

BREWERS 5, ANGELS 4 Chris Carter hit two long home runs and drove in three runs, Junior Guerra won his first career major league start, and Milwaukee rallied from an early four-run deficit at home.

RED SOX LOSE SANDOVAL Pablo Sandoval’s rocky second season with the Boston Red Sox was cut short by shoulder surgery. Sandoval had a torn labrum repaired by Dr. James Andrews in Florida, and the estimated recovery time is six months.

WHITE SOX TO CUT DANKS The Chicago White Sox plan to cut the left-hander John Danks on Thursday, ending his 10-year run with the team.

ZIKA SEMINAR FOR MARLINS The Miami Marlins’ player representative, Tom Koehler, said the team attended a seminar on the Zika virus that heightened concerns about playing two games in Puerto Rico against the Pirates on May 30 and 31. A decision is expected by the end of the week regarding whether the games will be played as scheduled or moved, Koehler said.


