


A CONTEMPORARY APARTMENT IN MEXICO CITY FACING CHAPULTEPEC PARK

$2.875 MILLION

This five-bedroom four-and-a-half-bath apartment, in a high-rise 1997 development named Del Bosque designed by Cesar Pelli, is in Polanco, one of Mexico City’s most exclusive neighborhoods. It sits across from Chapultepec Park and two blocks from Avenida Presidente Masaryk, known as Mexico City’s Rodeo Drive, said Vivian Bardavid, a Mexico City-based agent with Guadalajara Sotheby’s International Realty, which has the listing. Between five and 20 minutes’ walking distance are museums and other cultural sites, restaurants, hotels and embassies. The international airport is about 10 miles away.

The apartment, which is about 5,480 square feet, is one of two on the fourth floor. Past the front door and a small foyer, a hallway leads to three bedrooms with en-suite bathrooms, an office and a half-bath. The master suite, in the left corner, has a large bathroom with a glass-enclosed shower and a double sink, and a deep walk-in closet.

Down the main hallway in the opposite direction from the bedrooms, the living room, family room and dining room are in the center of the apartment. Most of the flooring is hardwood imported from Norway, Ms. Bardavid said. The custom-designed furniture throughout the apartment is available through separate negotiation, she said. The art is not for sale. The family room, tucked next to the living room, can be separated with sliding doors from the rest of the home.

On the right side of the apartment are the kitchen, two staff bedrooms, a staff bathroom and laundry facilities. The kitchen appliances are by Wolf. The apartment has air-conditioning and ample storage, in the form of multiple closets in the main hallway.

The building’s amenities, including a tennis court, an indoor pool, a children’s play area, valet parking and a gym, are included in the monthly fee. The fee also covers security, concierge service and maintenance. Residents can use a heliport and party and meeting rooms for a fee.

MARKET OVERVIEW

Mexico City’s real estate market is performing very strongly this year, agents said. There are many new developments, and prices across the board have increased. This is partly because of a strengthening Mexican economy, and partly because sellers have adjusted to a new tax on capital gains that temporarily made them hesitant to put their homes on the market, agents said.

Carmella Peters Romero, an owner and broker at Peters & Romero Bienes Raices, an agency in Mexico City, said owners typically will not sell unless they get an offer very close to their asking price. Homes tend to stay on the market around six months, she said.

The volatility of the peso, which has lost about 35 percent against the dollar since 2011 and around 16 percent against the dollar since last June, had an effect on the real estate market last year, with lowered rents and more negotiation on sales, Ms. Peters Romero said. But prices are now rising, as they have yearly for the last six years, since she began working in this market, she said.

Prices in Polanco are around $5,000 per square meter, or around $465 a square foot, compared with around $4,000 a square meter, or around $372 a square foot, last year, Ms. Peters Romero said. For the most expensive properties in the city, prices can reach $11,000 per square meter, or around $1,023 a square foot.

Karen Boda, an owner of URP Properties, a boutique real estate brokerage in Mexico City, estimated that prices have risen at least 10 percent for both residential properties and offices since January.

In Polanco, luxury apartments cost $2.5 million to $10 million, she said. In nearby Lomas de Chapultepec, an area with older, traditional homes, the better luxury properties begin at $3 million, she said. People there tend to tear down homes and rebuild. Less expensive luxury homes are available at Bosque de las Lomas, just to the west, where quality homes are available for $800,000 and the top prices run around $3 million.

The city’s most expensive homes are priced at $10 million to $15 million, Ms. Boda said. They tend to be in Lomas de Chapultepec in the north and in El Pedregal and Coyoacán in the south. Location, finishes, whether or not a property has a garden, and whether or not it’s on a more desirable gated or restricted street affect prices, she added.

Ms. Boda also noted two trends. One is that people are increasingly choosing to live near their jobs because of the city’s traffic. Second, because there’s no room to develop in certain desirable neighborhoods, new areas are becoming trendy, including Colonia Roma, west of the city center, and New Polanco, next to Polanco.

Transactions can be done in dollars or pesos, but the deed must be recorded in pesos, she added.

WHO BUYS IN MEXICO CITY

Ms. Boda said most buyers of luxury properties are Mexican. Foreigners who move to the city for work tend to stay in rentals. But Ms. Boda has worked with buyers from the United States, France, Italy and Spain.

Both in Mexico City and throughout the country, it is becoming more common for people to buy homes as investments or as vacation properties, Ms. Peters Romero said. Usually, those people purchase smaller condos, starting at 150 square meters, or about 1,600 square feet, in high-end areas of the city, she said.

BUYING BASICS

Only Mexican citizens can buy land without restriction in Mexico, said Jonathan Pikoff, the founder of Pikoff Attorneys, which specializes in real estate and has offices in Mexico and the United States. If a foreigner buys residential property within 50 kilometers, or 31 miles, from the coastline or 100 kilometers, or about 62 miles, from the border, it must be done by using an existing trust through a Mexican bank or creating one, he said.

Transactions are handled by notaries. Mr. Pikoff recommended that foreign buyers also hire a lawyer.

Closing costs, which are paid exclusively by the seller, include the notary fee, a 16 percent value-added tax on the notary fee, an appraisal, a zoning certificate and a land transfer tax. For a $1 million property, those taxes and fees add up to approximately $57,000.

Mexico City cultural portal: mexicoescultura.com/en

Chapultepec Castle: mnh.inah.gob.mx

Museum of Modern Art: museoartemoderno.com

LANGUAGES AND CURRENCY

Spanish: Mexican peso (1 peso = $0.054)

TAXES AND FEES

Monthly maintenance is 21,300 pesos, or about $1,135. Annual property taxes are 37,000 pesos, or approximately $2,000.

CONTACT

Graciela Zamudio, Guadalajara Sotheby’s International Realty, (011-52) 33 3627 6437; sirguadalajara.com


