


WASHINGTON — Chinese aircraft flew within 50 feet of an American surveillance plane flying over the South China Sea, Pentagon officials said Wednesday, the latest sign of the increasing tensions between the countries over China’s territorial claims and tactics in the strategic waterway.

The encounter occurred Tuesday in international airspace while the American plane was on “a routine” patrol, the Pentagon said.

“Initial reports characterized the incident as unsafe,” the Pentagon said, adding that it was still investigating.

The Chinese have constructed islands in contested waters, installing military radar and airstrips. That buildup has raised fears among American allies like the Philippines about Chinese intentions in the region.

Last month, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter visited an American aircraft carrier in the South China Sea with his Filipino counterpart as part of an effort to reassure the Philippines that the United States will use its military power to protect it.

That move angered the Chinese, who accused the United States of using “Cold War” tactics to try to contain them. Two weeks later, the Chinese declined to allow the aircraft carrier Mr. Carter visited, the U.S.S. John C. Stennis, to make a scheduled port call in Hong Kong.

But Pentagon officials said Wednesday that it had “made progress reducing risk between our operational forces and those of the People’s Republic of China by improved dialogue at multiple levels.”

“Over the past year, D.O.D. has seen improvements in P.R.C. actions, flying in a safe and professional manner,” it said, using the abbreviation for the People’s Republic of China.

“D.O.D. is addressing the issue through the appropriate diplomatic and military channels.”

China’s Defense Ministry said Thursday that it had noted reports of the incident and would investigate it. “This may be related to an American military aircraft engaging in close-proximity surveillance of China,” the ministry said in a faxed statement. “We will look into the matter and make an assessment.”


