


LIMA, Peru — An economist who served as Peru’s prime minister held a razor-thin lead in the presidential contest on Sunday against the daughter of an imprisoned former president who was seeking to return her family to power.

A partial count released by the government on Sunday night put Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, 77, with about a 1 percent advantage over Keiko Fujimori, 41, whose father, Alberto, ran the country in the 1990s. Officials said the result amounted to a technical tie and said they would keep counting throughout the night.

While both candidates campaigned on similar free-market platforms, many in the region saw the election as a referendum on the legacy of Mr. Fujimori, whose rule turned authoritarian as he suspended the country’s Constitution in a conflict with the Shining Path, a Marxist rebel group.

Years later, while trying to return to power, he was convicted of corruption and human rights abuses and sentenced to 25 years in prison.

Still, many Peruvians initially seemed to favor Ms. Fujimori — who pledged not to give her father a pardon — giving her the most votes in the first round of the presidential contest in April and handing her Popular Force party a majority in Congress.

After the first round of voting, polls showed her widening a lead over Mr. Kuczynski with populist appeals to working-class voters and a law-and-order message.

Yet the Sunday result revealed a country more evenly divided between the two candidates, with a slight advantage for Mr. Kuczynski, a mild-mannered former World Bank official who appealed to voters as a technocrat.

On Sunday night before supporters, a jubilant Mr. Kuczynski, who was prime minister from 2005 to 2006, stopped short of claiming a win, but said he believed that victory would be his soon. “I am sure that the election commission will come out tomorrow with a favorable verdict for us,” he said. “We abhor dictatorship and love democracy.”

Ms. Fujimori said she would also wait for the final result. “We’re proud to know that we came out with the backing of 50 percent of the population,” she said.

Cires Palomares Vicuña, 55, a nurse, said she had voted for Mr. Kuczynski. “I identify with him, and we need to make a positive change and have someone experienced to correctly steer us,” she said.

Jesús Ayala, 53, a construction worker, said he was fearful that crime was on the rise in his country, something he thought Ms. Fujimori was better equipped to handle.

“I believed in Fujimori’s fight against terrorism back in the ’90s,” he said. “He was the only one able to end that war. Like now, delinquency has grown, and I think she’s best to combat it.”

While her father’s legacy cut both ways, Ms. Fujimori found herself on the defensive against a number of corruption allegations. Critics repeatedly accused her campaign of giving money to voters, and one of her running mates was disqualified by the country’s electoral commission for handing out food and water at an election event.

Ms. Fujimori’s campaign manager, Joaquín Ramírez, was forced to step down after news media reports claimed that he was being investigated by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration for money laundering. Jesús F. Vásquez, a pilot who now lives in Central Florida, claims that he heard Mr. Ramírez boast of money laundering.

By Mr. Vásquez’s telling, Mr. Ramírez said that during Ms. Fujimori’s 2011 campaign for president, “la china” as she is known, gave him $15 million to launder. Mr. Vásquez recalled Mr. Ramírez saying that he did so using a chain of gas stations he owns.

“I even repeated it: ‘La china Keiko Fujimori gave you $15 million to launder?’” Mr. Vásquez said in an interview.

Mr. Vásquez, who has offered testimony to Peruvian prosecutors, said he had also worked as an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration. A spokesman for the agency would not confirm any relationship, but said Ms. Fujimori was not being investigated.

Both Mr. Ramírez and Ms. Fujimori have denied any wrongdoing.

The allegations were a factor for Alexander de Feudis, 45, a graphic designer.

“At first, I thought Keiko would be great because her party leads the Congress and this allows her to make changes faster,” he said. “Now I changed my mind because I see too many signs of corruption within her party and the people who surround her.”


