


LONDON — The oldest cup competition of them all, England’s F.A. Cup, still can beguile audiences from across the world.

The former Brazilian star Ronaldo was in the stands at Wembley Stadium on Saturday, an honored guest caught in the drama of a cup semifinal that was in doubt until the final seconds of stoppage time.

That winning goal by Anthony Martial combined the same thrilling combination of quickness and decisive shooting that made Ronaldo the world’s outstanding striker during his playing days.

Now 39, the Brazilian witnessed a player half his age conjure up the final act in Manchester United’s 2-1 win against Everton. The Manchester United legends Bobby Charlton (78) and Alex Ferguson (74) were also in the crowd, looking animated by a full swing of emotions as their team reached yet another cup final.

“It is fantastic when you see the joy in the eyes of the players, also the fans,” said Louis van Gaal, the current United manager.

Standing just a few yards away, Roberto Martínez, the defeated manager of Everton, told reporters, “The feeling we share is that this is as cruel as football can be. After the incredible tempo and intensity of our second half, we deserved so much more. The end of the story becomes heartbreaking.”

Elation and heartbreak are basic to knockout soccer, not only in the F.A. Cup but also in World Cups, where Brazil’s Ronaldo and England’s Charlton have tasted the ultimate elixir of winning.

What separates the cups from leagues was amply demonstrated over the past week. Barcelona has scored 14 goals and conceded none in two games, during which Luis Suárez has scored four goals in back-to-back matches. Yet those count for nothing extra because points — not goals — determine league standings, and both Atlético and Real Madrid also won their games Saturday to keep the Liga race tight, though in Atlético’s case it was a trademark 1-0 victory.

So the cups, and the element that anyone can win or lose on a given day, really are different. Journalists looking for a different story grilled both managers at Wembley, asking as they ask every week whether van Gaal expects or wants to keep his job, and in effect telling Martínez that Everton’s failure to win a trophy will inevitably result in him being replaced.

Van Gaal shrugs off the insinuations that José Mourinho (a former protégé) is a shoo-in to replace him after this season, rumors that have been prevalent ever since Mourinho was fired by Chelsea earlier this season. Martínez is at the stage of pleading to stay in his job, saying that he is building with much fewer resources at Everton.

Who really knows if boards of directors follow the media or make their own hire-and-fire agendas? And after so thrilling and fluctuating a game that United and Everton provided at Wembley, who really cares for the speculation?

This, from beginning to end, was as open and as enthralling as any semifinal can be. It was won in the end by the energy of youth in a final fling in the 93rd minute.

Martial, 20, is burdened by having arrived in England as the world’s costliest teenager, having cost $83 million to acquire from Monaco once all the fees are added up.

Martial has that laissez-faire attitude of the modern player who can do no more than his best with the ball at his feet. But he has electrifying speed and knows how to use it. In the first half, it was Martial’s burst of quickness and his knowing cutback from the left flank that created the first goal, scored on the volley by Marouane Fellaini.

The finish looked easy, but Fellaini, a big, angular and often awkward looking Belgian, mastered the technique of that finish with aplomb. He kept to himself any emotional turmoil he might have felt in playing against Everton, his club for five seasons until he headed to Manchester in 2013.

Fellaini hasn’t always looked like a real United player, but more like a willing soldier who has been pressed into duty on the whims of a manager who inherited but never chose to buy him.

Wayne Rooney, on the other hand, is another former Evertonian, but these days is very much a Red Devil and is now the captain of United. The thing about Rooney is that he was a top-class player for United from the beginning, after Manchester acquired him 12 years ago.

Play Rooney anywhere on the team and he will give it his all. He has 244 goals for the club in 514 games, lining up in a variety of roles, and now is only five behind Charlton, the club’s all-time leader.

On Saturday, Rooney anchored the midfield, creating for others with passes that were reminiscent at times of the retired Paul Scholes. Rooney, 30, and recently returned from injury, kept United level early on when he dashed back to head away a shot bound for the goal by Everton’s Romelu Lukaku.

It was a shot that could have changed the final outcome, as was a later penalty shot by Lukaku that was saved by David de Gea, United’s goalkeeper.

Everton threw impressive spirit into the second half and tied the score in a capricious manner when Manchester defender Chris Smalling mis-hit a low cross into his own goal.

Then, approaching extra time, Martial twice passed the ball and twice ran forward, demanding it back. And when the second return pass came, his extraordinary speed and cool finish stole victory from the stalemate.

Martínez sagged. Van Gaal breathed relief. And Brazil’s Ronaldo cheered like a fan.


