


When some people buy furniture, they consider only functionality and comfort. Others focus wholly on period charm or how well the prospective acquisition goes with everything else in the room.

For Christopher Jackson, 40, a Tony nominee for his portrayal of George Washington in the musical “Hamilton,” the issue is much more fundamental: Does the couch, the recliner, the dining table feel like home?

“Home is a word we use a lot,” said Mr. Jackson’s wife, Veronica Vazquez-Jackson, 41, an actress and singer who had several dance hits in the ’90s and is releasing a new single in June. “If something feels like home, we get it, right?” she said, turning to Mr. Jackson for confirmation.

That it felt like home was why, six years ago, they chose their apartment: a three-bedroom rental on the second floor of a four-family house in the Country Club section of the Bronx.

The couple had been living in Riverdale, in the northwest part of the borough, but because the elder of their two children, C.J., 11, has autism and attends a school in Glen Cove, N.Y., on Long Island, they moved east and south. “We wanted to be closer to the Throgs Neck Bridge to make the drive easier,” Ms. Vazquez-Jackson said.

She found the apartment on Craigslist; Mr. Jackson liked what he saw on the video tour, and everything fell effortlessly into place. “That’s how we know something is right — when it’s easy,” said Ms. Vazquez-Jackson, who these days is a real estate saleswoman for the NY Casa Group.

The couple met in 2003 at an early reading of Lin-Manuel Miranda’s “In the Heights” and — it was easy and it was right — married in 2004. Mr. Jackson had a principal role in the subsequent Broadway production, reuniting with Mr. Miranda in “Hamilton,” the playwright’s next venture.

What with the chirps and trills of cardinals and blue jays, the couple can forget they’re in the city. There’s a backyard with lots of rolling-around room for C.J. and his 6-year-old sister, Jadelyn, and for Sam, an inordinately affectionate Labradoodle. For Mr. Jackson, there’s a patio off the kitchen for his much-loved grill.

“I use it all year long,” he said. “I’ve been known to put on my parka and cook a chicken breast outside in the winter. When spring and summer come, I’m watching the Food Network. I’m all about Bobby Flay.”

Two blocks away is Pelham Bay Park, with a playground for C.J. and Jadelyn and bike paths for Mr. Jackson. On occasion, he’s pedaled to the theater. And after the show, he returns to an enclave where there’s space to breathe.

“If I can live where I can look directly up and see sky, that’s a selling point for me,” he said. And how about that neighbor who taped a poster reading “Way to Go, Chris!” on Mr. Jackson’s garage door the day after “Hamilton” won a Grammy?

Ms. Vazquez-Jackson is Bronx born and bred, and her parents are a seven-minute drive away. “As soon as I met that lady there,” he said, “I was like, ‘O.K., let’s go to the Bronx.’

“I can’t imagine our lives without Veronica’s parents, I really can’t. Family is imperative for us,” Mr. Jackson said. “ I’m a bit of an immigrant, since I come from Southern Illinois. So to be pulled in right away with her huge family and extended family gave me a sense of always being at home.”

This particular piece of the Bronx looks like a toy workshop. Jadelyn’s Barbie doll accessories are stashed on the bookshelves in the living room. The spillover lines the floor. C.J.’s Legos — his supply is vast — obscure the top of the dining table, which, when cleared, can comfortably seat eight, but has accommodated 11 or 12 at holiday gatherings.

Paper, colored pencils, crayons and paints are abundant. “We encourage our kids to be as artistic as possible and to explore as much as they can,” said Mr. Jackson, who does his own artistic exploration down the hall in the music studio with the help of nine guitars and a keyboard.

“Luckily, in this age of technology you don’t need as much space as you used to to have a viable recording space,” said Mr. Jackson, who with the composer Bill Sherman won an Emmy in 2011 for a song they wrote for “Sesame Street.” “If I’ve got 15 minutes before I head out, I’ll pick up a guitar and play for a minute. That’s a real comfort.”

He sets similar store by his books. “My Bible I’ve had since I was a teenager,” Mr. Jackson said. “My James Baldwin books — I’m going to read them all again this summer. They mark a time in my life when I completely shifted my thinking on who I am as a black man, as a father, a husband, a person in the public eye.”

A particular treasure is a copy of “Dreams From My Father” by Barack Obama. Mr. Miranda brought it back from the White House, where, in the spring of 2009, he performed a number from an embryonic show about the first secretary of the United States Treasury.

“The president had just been elected, and I really wanted to be at the White House, too, and instead I was on stage doing ‘In the Heights,’ ” Mr. Jackson recalled. “It’s the only time I’ve ever been jealous of Lin Miranda. He walks into my dressing room with the book, and I’m like, ‘Oh, great.’ And he says, ‘Open the book, dummy.’ ”

And there it was, with an all but illegible signature: “To Chris — Dream big dreams! Barack Obama.”

Mr. Jackson just shot a pilot for “Bull,” a TV drama about a jury selection consultancy created by Dr. Phil McGraw, the television personality, and Paul Attanasio, the screenwriter. Decorating has long taken a back seat to career-building and child-rearing, although once in a while something new for his home does cross his mind.

But the chocolate-brown corduroy sectional stays in the picture. “I think the couch is the most important thing here, because everyone falls asleep on it,” Ms. Vazquez-Jackson said.

Everyone, it seems, except Mr. Jackson. “Sleeping is not something I do well,” he said. Unsurprisingly, the Cuisinart coffee maker on the kitchen counter is his very first stop of the day. Mr. Jackson bought a Keurig coffee maker and a supply of its coffee-filled pods for his theater dressing room, believing that “it would solve all my issues,” he said. “But after the first cup, I was like, ‘Can’t do it.’ The idea is fantastic, but you can’t beat a brewed cup of coffee.”

“At some point,” Mr. Jackson added, hoisting a mug, “I’ll get away from it and practice yoga first thing in the morning. But right now, it’s coffee.”


