


Rio de Janeiro’s governor declared a state of financial emergency Friday and requested federal funds to help fulfill obligations for public services during the Olympics, which start Aug. 5.

Emergency measures are needed to avoid “a total collapse in public security, health, education, transport and environmental management,” a decree in the state’s Official Gazette said.

The state’s revenue, largely tied to the petroleum industry, slumped in the last two years as global oil prices collapsed. Rio State’s debt has been downgraded several times, and since late last year, the state has been forced to delay pension and salary payments and close some schools and hospitals.

The mayor of Rio, the local organizing committee and the interim president of Brazil have all said the conduct of the Games will not be affected by the financial crisis of the state, which is responsible for most day-to-day security and health services in Rio. REUTERS

The defending champion Lexi Thompson fought through back pain to take the second-round lead in the Meijer L.P.G.A. Classic.

“It just came on last weekend and it was really bad today,” Thompson said. “I’m not really one to complain about pain because I just fight through it, but yeah, it’s hurting. I’m going to go and get a rubdown and see if it goes away.”

Thompson, 21, shot a four-under-par 67, rebounding from bogeys on 15 and 16 with birdies on the final two holes to reach 10-under 132 at Blythefield in Belmont, Mich.

Alena Sharp of Canada bogeyed her final hole to drop into a tie for second at nine-under with the South Korean players In Gee Chun, So Yeon Ryu and Q Baek. They all shot 67. The top-ranked Lydia Ko and the No. 2 Brooke Henderson, coming off a playoff victory over Ko in the KPMG Women’s P.G.A., were together at seven-under after matching rounds of 68.

The Calgary Flames hired Glen Gulutzan, an assistant coach for the Vancouver Canucks for the past three seasons, as their new head coach. Gulutzan, 44, was head coach of Dallas from 2011 to 2013. The Stars went 64-57-9 under Gulutzan and missed the playoffs both seasons. He replaces Bob Hartley, who was fired May 3 after the Flames finished 35-40-7.

Tom Benson, owner of the New Orleans Saints and the Pelicans, has reached a settlement in a lawsuit involving his effort to remove shares of his pro teams from trusts for his estranged daughter and her two children.

An announcement by the two teams said terms of the settlement would not be public. A federal trial over the matter was scheduled to open Monday. Benson, 88, was expected to be compelled to testify at trial.

In January 2015, Benson announced that he no longer wanted Renee Benson, his daughter, and Rita and Ryan LeBlanc, her children, to inherit shares of his professional teams. Benson said at the time that he intended to leave the teams fully in the hand of his third wife, Gayle, whom he married in 2004. Benson fired his daughter and her children from executive positions with the clubs.

OHER GETS NEW DEAL The Carolina Panthers signed left tackle Michael Oher to a three-year contract extension. Oher, whose story was the basis of “The Blind Side,” a book by Michael Lewis and a 2009 movie starring Sandra Bullock, played for the Baltimore Ravens and the Tennessee Titans before joining the Panthers last year.

The semiretired wrestler Jerry Lawler, known as the King, and his girlfriend, Lauryn McBride, were arrested at Lawler’s home Thursday night in East Memphis, Tenn., on charges of domestic violence, the police said. Lawler, 66, was released, and McBride, 27, was about to be, records showed.

World Wrestling Entertainment said it had suspended Lawler, who is a color commentator and a member of the organization’s hall of fame. Known for wrestling the comedian Andy Kaufman in the 1980s, Lawler is a prominent figure in Memphis, where he ran for mayor in 1999.

New York Red Bulls Coach Jesse Marsch has received a multiyear contract extension from the Major League Soccer team. Marsch took charge in 2015 and then was voted Coach of the Year. This year, the Red Bulls are in second place in the M.L.S. East with a 6-7-1 record.

Delvin Perez, a 17-year-old Puerto Rican shortstop who fell to the 23rd pick in the draft after testing positive for performance-enhancing substances, signed with the St. Louis Cardinals. Perez played at the International Baseball Academy in Ceiba, Puerto Rico.

The Cardinals also recalled second baseman Kolten Wong from Class AAA Memphis after a brief demotion, during which he played center field to add to his versatility. When he was demoted, Wong was batting .222 with one homer and five R.B.I. in 49 games and had lost his starting spot. He hit .429 with four homers and 11 R.B.I. in seven games in the minors.


