


A group of health experts said the World Health Organization should consider recommending the delay or relocation of the Rio de Janeiro Olympics because of the Zika outbreak.

The 150 experts issued an open letter to the United Nations health agency on Friday, urging action “in the name of public health.”

The authors noted that the number of infections in Rio had gone up despite increased efforts to wipe out the mosquitoes that spread Zika, which can cause severe birth defects, most notably abnormally small heads.

Public health experts have previously warned that the hundreds of thousands of visitors who will travel to the Games in August would speed the virus’s global spread.

“The fire is already burning, but that is not a rationale not to do anything about the Olympics,” said the University of Ottawa professor Amir Attaran, one of the letter’s authors. “It is not the time now to throw more gasoline onto the fire.”

Rangers second baseman Rougned Odor began serving a seven-game suspension for punching Toronto’s Jose Bautista by sitting out Texas’ 9-1 home loss to Pittsburgh.

Odor was initially suspended for eight games over a bench-clearing melee in Arlington, Tex., on May 15, but the penalty was reduced upon appeal.

Odor punched Bautista in the jaw after Bautista’s hard takeout slide in the top of the eighth inning, prompting both dugouts to empty.

Bautista, who was suspended for one game, sat out a 7-5 win over Boston on Friday. Josh Donaldson homered twice as the Blue Jays ended a five-game home skid.

Cubs Club PhilliesChicago mashed three monster homers to beat visiting Philadelphia, 6-2. Jorge Soler homered off the video board in left in the fourth, and David Ross followed with a blast off a sign beyond the bleachers. Kris Bryant had a towering shot that landed on Waveland Avenue beyond the left-field bleachers in the fifth.

Around the Majors Stephen Piscotty hit a grand slam off Max Scherzer, and St. Louis won at Washington, 6-2. Jaime Garcia held the Nationals to two runs and seven hits over seven innings. Chris Davis had a tiebreaking double, and Mark Trumbo mashed his 15th homer of the season as visiting Baltimore beat Cleveland, 6-4, to end a four-game losing streak. Nick Markakis hit a two-run single with two outs and the bases loaded in the eighth inning, and the Atlanta Braves beat the Miami Marlins, 4-2, for a rare home win. Aaron Hill hit two solo homers as Milwaukee outslugged visiting Cincinnati, 9-5, giving the Reds their 11th straight loss.

The University of Mississippi imposed scholarship reductions on itself because of academic and recruiting violations linked to its football program, but the university said it was still investigating the statements of left tackle Laremy Tunsil at the N.F.L. draft.

The voluntary sanctions include three years of probation and 11 fewer total scholarships over four years. The penalties — which the N.C.A.A. can accept or add to — did not include a postseason ban.

The violations acknowledged by the university include Tunsil’s use of three loaner cars over a six-month period.

Tunsil’s draft stock fell after posts on his social media account appeared to show him smoking through a bong attached to a gas mask and asking a football staff member by text message to arrange bill payments.

Tunsil said both accounts had been hacked but acknowledged that he had accepted money from a coach.

The two-time Olympic forward Phil Kessel failed to make the final cut for the United States’ World Cup of Hockey roster a day after helping the Pittsburgh Penguins reach the Stanley Cup finals.

Jaromir Jagr was left off the Czech Republic roster, but his omission was less surprising. Jagr, 44, retired from the national team after last year’s world championship.

The Russian team added the former Los Angeles Kings defenseman Slava Voynov to its roster, prompting questions from the N.H.L. about his eligibility. Voynov pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor charge of domestic violence and returned to Russia last summer.

Auston Matthews, a teenager expected to be picked first in next month’s N.H.L. draft, was selected for Team North America, which is composed of American- and Canadian-born players ages 23 and younger.

Croatia has been ordered to play two World Cup qualifying matches in empty stadiums for repeated cases of fans chanting fascist slogans.

FIFA ordered the stadium bans for home matches against Turkey on Sept. 5 and Finland on Oct. 9. Croatia fans had chanted discriminatory slogans during exhibitions against Israel and Hungary in March, FIFA said.

Chile was also ordered to play one qualifier away from its national stadium over fans’ chants of anti-gay insults, FIFA said. Five Latin American soccer federations were also fined for “discriminatory and unsporting conduct by fans,” including anti-gay insults, at World Cup qualifiers.

Danny Willett, the reigning Masters champion, made six birdies in a tournament-record 29 on the front nine at the BMW PGA Championship in Virginia Water, England, to seize a share of the second-round lead. Willet finished with a four-under-par 68 and was tied with Y. E. Yang and Scott Hend, who eagled his last hole, at 10-under 134.

Around Golf Coming off back-to-back wins, Ariya Jutanugarn shot a four-under 68 to take the lead at the Volvik Championship in Ann Arbor, Mich. Jutanugarn had four back-nine birdies and was at 11-under 133, two shots ahead of Yeon Ryu, Marina Alex and Christina Kim. Rocco Mediate birdied the final two holes and stretched his lead to four strokes at the Senior P.G.A. Championship in Benton Harbor, Mich. Gene Sauers was second after shooting a 69.


