


When the phrase “prominent family” turns up in the synopsis of a television series these days, you can bet that “dark secrets” isn’t far behind. The latest entry in this P.F.D.S. genre — yes, I intend to copyright that abbreviation — arrives Wednesday night on CBS bearing a particularly portentous title: “American Gothic.”

It’s well cast and gets off to an intriguing start, though that doesn’t guarantee a loyal audience. Just ask the ex-employees of “The Family,” a decent ABC series that had a lot in common with this one and was canceled in May after a single season.

“American Gothic” involves a wealthy Boston family, the Hawthornes, headed by Mitchell (Jamey Sheridan) and Madeline (Virginia Madsen), that within the first 15 minutes finds itself entangled in a serial-killer case that went cold 14 years earlier.

You can almost recite the plot elements in these shows at this point. Someone in the family (just as in “The Family”) is running for public office and has a lot to lose from a scandal; in this case it’s a daughter, Alison (Juliet Rylance). Antony Starr plays the obligatory prodigal, Garrett, who materializes after an absence of — there’s that time span again — 14 years.

The Hawthorne children also include Tessa (Megan Ketch), who happens to be married to a police detective, Brady (Elliot Knight), who is investigating newly discovered evidence in that old serial-murder case. A few grandchildren are also floating around, most noticeably Jack (Gabriel Bateman), a ghoulish boy who has been watching too many medical-examiner TV shows. He’s an unappetizing character and feels like a desperate attempt by the writers to live up to the show’s title.

After a convincing opening episode, “American Gothic” turns soapier and more florid in Episode 2, an effect, perhaps, of the long shadow of “Revenge.” That ABC series, a P.F.D.S. success story, wrung four seasons out of its Hamptons machinations before ending last year. It may have wrung the genre dry in the process — so far, its legacy is copycat series with impatient plotting.

The makers of newcomers like “The Family” and “American Gothic,” perhaps mindful that audiences have been there, done that, seem afraid of proceeding slowly as “Revenge” did. The goal, apparently, is to get overheated and labyrinthine as quickly as possible.

The problem is, that approach didn’t work for “The Family,” and after two episodes it’s nudging “American Gothic” toward silliness. There are lines in Episode 2 that might provoke unintended giggles. Can’t quote them here because they’re also spoilers, but you’ll probably know them when you hear them.


