


Samuel Wilson, meet Isaac Mayo. Now, will the real Uncle Sam please stand up?

A history professor in Nebraska tracing the origin of the popular personification of the United States government has fleshed out a reference to Uncle Sam that predates the traditional wisdom that the nickname was derived from Wilson, an upstate New York butcher who would stamp the meat he delivered to the military with the initials “U.S.” during the War of 1812.

That notion was popularized in 1830, in The New York Gazette and Daily Advertiser. Wilson’s claim to the name was recently buttressed by Christopher K. Philippo, who is researching a book on cemeteries in Troy, N.Y.; he discovered a letter from the Rev. Robert Russell Booth, who presided over Wilson’s funeral, and wrote that he “often talked with him about the circumstances which led to the singular transfer of his popular name to the United States.”

But other historians suggest that Uncle Sam predated Samuel Wilson. Barry Popik, an etymologist, has pointed out that in 1813 the upstate Troy Post, without mentioning Wilson, explained the derivation this way: “The letters U.S. on the government waggons, &c., are supposed to have given rise to it.”

Mr. Popik noted earlier that a broadside published in New York during the winter of 1812-13, referring to the war against Britain, included this doggerel: “If uncle Sam needs, I’d be glad to assist him.” And in 2013, the U.S.S. Constitution Museum discovered an even earlier reference.

Now Donald R. Hickey, a professor of history at Wayne State College in Nebraska and an expert on the War of 1812, has elaborated on that U.S.S. Constitution Museum citation, bringing the origin of Uncle Sam even closer to the nation’s original capital — New York City — by invoking Navy slang of the day.

Writing in The New England Quarterly, Professor Hickey says the first reference to the term has now been traced to Isaac Mayo, a 16-year-old midshipman on the U.S.S. Wasp, who reported for duty at the Brooklyn Navy Yard on March 1, 1810.

Mayo spent the next three weeks helping to prepare the Wasp, a sloop of war armed with 18 guns, for coastal patrol, to guard against British seizure of American cargo and impressment of American seamen. He was initially assigned to watch duty.

“The first night on board was put in for rather more than four hours of the mid watch, through a snowstorm, those 24 hours seemed longer to me that all my previous life,” he wrote, according to a transcription by Matthew Brenckle, a museum historian. (Life for Mayo got worse during the Civil War. As a Marylander, he resigned his commission, but President Lincoln rejected his resignation and dismissed him from the Navy. Mayo shot himself the same day.)

The Wasp left port on March 24. For the first two days, Mayo wrote that he was “most deadly seasick.” He added: “Oh could I have got on shore in the h[e]ight of it, I swear that uncle Sam, as they call him, would certainly forever have lost the services of at least one sailor.”

Professor Hickey, therefore, concluded: “The term originated more than two years before the War of 1812. That finding appears to discredit the role traditionally claimed for Sam Wilson as the original Uncle Sam, although he may still have had something to do with spreading the moniker’s use.”


