


ATLANTA — The Justice Department said Tuesday that it would conduct a review of the police department in North Charleston, S.C., where a white officer has been charged with fatally shooting an unarmed black man in April 2015.

But the federal inquiry in South Carolina’s third-largest city is voluntary and limited in scope; it is not a far-ranging civil rights investigation that might have prompted monitored reforms to correct unconstitutional patterns or practices. Instead, the Justice Department Office of Community Oriented Policing Services will assess the North Charleston force and issue recommendations that could include policy changes and added training.

“It’s my hope that this type of review will allow the community to have a lot of input,” William N. Nettles, the United States attorney for South Carolina, said at a news conference at City Hall in North Charleston, a city of 107,000 people. “There will be a thorough review of the policies and procedures of North Charleston.”

Although the Justice Department has faced demands for a civil rights investigation similar to its inquiries in Baltimore, Cleveland and Ferguson, Mo., the federal government has, for now, taken a tack that is likely to be seen as far less threatening to North Charleston. Recommendations will not be binding on the city, and critics there predicted that the investigation would ultimately do little to aid the police force, which has faced repeated accusations of prejudiced policing and the use of excessive force.

“It’s window dressing,” said Edward Bryant, the president of the North Charleston branch of the N.A.A.C.P. “It’s the easy way out. They should be embarrassed to even present such misguided delusions.”

The government announced its review more than 13 months after the videotaped shooting death of Walter Scott, 50, by a patrolman, Michael T. Slager. Mr. Slager said he fired eight times at Mr. Scott, who had fled on foot after a traffic stop, after a struggle, but federal and state investigators have questioned his account. Mr. Slager, who was fired after the shooting, has pleaded not guilty to murder and civil rights charges.

Mr. Slager’s lawyer, Andrew J. Savage III, had no comment on Tuesday.

L. Chris Stewart, a lawyer for Mr. Scott’s family, welcomed the Justice Department’s decision and praised officials in North Charleston, who previously agreed to a $6.5 million settlement with Mr. Scott’s survivors, for seeking the review.

“This should be a national prototype for how these kinds of situations are handled,” Mr. Stewart said. “I actually salute North Charleston for asking for this type of review. I think it’s needed in a lot more cities.”

North Charleston is the 11th city to participate in what the Justice Department describes as a “collaborative reform process.” The department is managing similar reviews in Milwaukee, Philadelphia and San Francisco, among other cities.

The inquiry in North Charleston will probably last at least two years, and North Charleston’s mayor, R. Keith Summey, said that the city was “more than willing to take recommendations” from the Justice Department.

But Mr. Bryant said that he was wary of North Charleston’s commitment and that he and other critics “want something more binding, something more outlined.”

“There is no teeth in it whatsoever,” Mr. Bryant said. “They’re trying to make it look like something and are being very basic about the issues.”

Mr. Nettles said Tuesday that the new inquiry did not eliminate the possibility that the Justice Department could eventually open a civil rights investigation, and he signaled that federal officials would be sensitive to feedback after the review.

“The community will get to decide whether the report went far enough,” he said. “The community will get to decide whether the government goes far enough in adopting the report.”


