


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

The stories of your Great Moments in Binge Watching delighted me to no end in my inbox and on Twitter. I learned that many of you have devoured “Lost,” “The West Wing,” and “Alias” in appallingly short periods of time. It’s nice to be among friends.

As we go into a long holiday weekend, it seems like the perfect time to watch an entire show from start to finish. There are lots of great one- and two-season wonders out there and I’ve suggested a few below.

While brainstorming, though, I was sad to discover some of my deep-cut favorites aren’t streaming anywhere: What’s a girl gotta do to get the magical, brilliant “Wonderfalls” on a legal streaming service? Will the strange, glorious 1996 drama “Profit” ever stream again? Sometimes you just want to watch a young Adrian Pasdar ominously curl up in a cardboard box.

Have a great weekend — enjoy your barbecues and white shoes. And let me know what you watched: watching@nytimes.com.

“Enlightened” is a half-hour show, but don’t go into it expecting a comedy. Think of it more as a dreamy, poetic character study. Laura Dern stars as a woman trying to lead a better life, who finds that her quest for decency can be alienating more often than it is helpful.

Season 2’s “The Ghost Is Seen,” which centers on creator and co-star Mike White’s character, is one of the most perfect half-hours of TV in living memory, and some of Season 1’s voice-overs will be lodged in my heart forever. Like this one, from the fourth episode: “You can try to escape the story of your life. But you can’t. It happened. The baby died. The dog died. The heart broke. I knew you when you were young. I know your heart broke, too. I will know you when we are both old. And maybe wise. I hope wise.” Agh, I can barely handle it. (Watch on HBO Go, Amazon Prime)

There are plenty of cop shows, plenty of buddy-cop shows, and plenty of sad-people-in-California shows. But there’s none quite like “Terriers,” a tender gem that subverts some of those worn-out formulas. There’s a distinctive voice and style to the series, and the mysteries are genuinely compelling. If you liked “Justified,” or have wanted a grown-up version of a USA procedural, or treasure shows with outstanding theme songs, try this one. (Watch on Netflix)

Oh, you mean my fondest wish? “The L.A. Complex,” a Canadian import that aired in obscurity on the CW in 2012, is set within a medium-scuzzy apartment building populated by young aspiring entertainers — comedians, actors, musicians, each talented and desperate in his or her own special ways. There’s the fun soapy vibe of an early “Melrose” (no insane back-from-the-dead stuff), the progressive politics and diverse ensemble of “Degrassi” and some authentic human behavior. (Watch on Netflix)

“The Wrong Mans” is a 10-episode dramedy in which a mopey City Council worker accidentally becomes embroiled in a massive criminal conspiracy. Like if Tim from the British “Office” was suddenly Jack Bauer. James Corden was a creator and co-star of this series. (Watch on Hulu)

“Hit & Miss” stars Chloë Sevigny as an assassin and trans woman who discovers she has a son. The story is strong enough for the show’s scanty six episodes, and the performances terrific, but my favorite part is honestly the British countryside ramshackle cottage stuff. Give me rubber boots and mud and a chicken to chase, and I’ll be an assassin, too. (Watch on Netflix)

“The Bletchley Circle” is set in the early 1950s among a group of women who worked as codebreakers during World War II — and now turn their skills to crime solving. Solve more crimes, Bletchley folk, seven episodes is nowhere near enough. (Watch on Netflix)

‘Julian Fellowes Presents Doctor Thorne’

That title is a mouthful, but Amazon will make sure that you know this four-part mini-series came from the maestro behind “Downton Abbey.” It’s based on a lesser-known 1858 novel by Anthony Trollope, “But ‘Doctor Thorne’ will feel familiar to fans of Trollope’s more famous near-contemporary, Jane Austen,” Mike Hale writes. “It’s about a smart, unmarriageable young woman and the various scenarios that could eventually render her marriageable.”

• Read the full review

• Watch ‘Doctor Thorne’ on Amazon Prime

• Or just rewatch ‘Downton’ on Amazon Prime

‘Heroes on Deck’

Looking for something that’s actually appropriate for the Memorial Day weekend? “Heroes on Deck: World War II on Lake Michigan,” which will air on several public television stations Sunday, tells the story of how some World War II pilots were trained on fake aircraft carrier decks on Lake Michigan. More interestingly, “it explains how dozens of wrecked planes came to be on the bottom of that body of water,” Neil Genzlinger writes. “That part of the film will be catnip to aviation buffs. A Corsair, a Grumman Wildcat and other battered planes, encrusted in quagga mussels, are brought to the surface.”

• Read the full review

• Watch the trailer

Looking for a more compact watching experience this holiday weekend? Stream a movie! These are expiring at the end of Tuesday. — Gilbert Cruz

Want to Laugh?

“Groundhog Day” (Watch on Netflix)

“Bridget Jones’s Diary” (Watch on Netflix)

“Wayne’s World” (Watch on Netflix)

Want to Cry?

“Ghost” (Watch on Netflix)

Want to Make Your Old-Fashioned Family Members Uncomfortable?

“Paris Is Burning” (Watch on Netflix)

“Madonna: Truth or Dare” (Watch on Netflix)

“Velvet Goldmine” (Watch on Netflix)

How does “Dancing With the Stars” even pick its “stars”? Slate has the story of how the casting director Deena Katz made the show “our culture’s foremost celebrity image rehabilitation machine.”

“It’s never been easy for an Asian-American actor to get work in Hollywood, let alone take a stand against the people who run the place,” Amanda Hess writes in The New York Times of Asian-American actors fighting for visibility. “But the recent expansion of Asian-American roles on television has paradoxically ushered in a new generation of actors with just enough star power and job security to speak more freely about Hollywood’s larger failures.”

Finally, if you’re still thinking about this past Sunday’s “Game of Thrones,” a guy from Pennsylvania totally called the origin of the name “Hodor” back in 2014.


