


On a lawn drawn long by sunset, who is not intoxicated? That cut-grass scent, cis-3-hexanol, is called leaf alcohol. You don’t need to name it to know it, the wooziness of air strewn by a mower. Still, I love a lawn overgrown and skimmed by the wind. Liminal hours are the best to enjoy it: dawn, dusk. A great green floor, pinned by dandelion clocks.

At the stadium, I watch the field — forget the game — enthralled by the whole fragmented vegetable, that creeping “carpet all alive” as Wordsworth had it. But here’s the rub any greenskeeper knows: The work of a living lawn is to self-destruct. In Australia, where I live, especially. Through summer, drought or no, the government enforces water-use restrictions in many cities. The unirrigated grass contracts, crackles underfoot and dots with bindii prickle. Then lawns turn to curated dust pits, pocked with loose, yellow tussocks. Resolute fertilizers drift underground. You can hire guys, and people do, to spray-paint the yard green. Such labor, such expense, toward a meager Eden. No, what I long for is a lawn that can give you an electric shock, a ground that’s knitted.

Once I lived in a house surrounded by AstroTurf. The landlord had scotched the real-grass garden — a blessing for renters. When I walked barefoot in the morning, the artificial grass emitted a static charge that set your hair on end and made your fillings tingle against your gums. The AstroTurf was soft and fibrillar and worn in. It held the heat of yesterday, luxe as a towel pulled down from the radiator. You could rumple it with your toes. We did. Dewy, the fake lawn shimmered an arsenic green. A term in our lease warned against spilling “mustard, butter, blood and glue” outside. (Inside, apparently, such spills presented no problem.)

Beyond the home’s awnings, the sun had bleached our synthetic turf, which graded through to a deeper viridian under the trees at the end of the lot — a Rothko flung outdoors. We caressed it one way and then the other, palming crop circles and cowlicks. I was 25 and romantic. This was a kind of yardwork I could get into; not gardening but “manicuring” the lawn, upkeep by fingertip. In the hot months, though, we vacuumed the yard — extension cords daisy-chained back indoors.

Once the rain swept in, the mock lawn sprouted moss and weeds. Then it turned into a microfauna park for insects, mushrooms and the odd frog that had wandered in as if out of a fable, gold-eyed and dark as a fig. We plucked at the damp matting, bored by the weather. A few times we tried to mow the AstroTurf, it was so clotted with clover. We put one frog back over the fence several times. Or: We put several frogs over the fence once.

Dried out in spring, the faux grass was as good as new.

Originally known as Chemgrass, AstroTurf was invented in the mid-1960s by a subsidiary of Monsanto. Chemgrass was designed for sports, and predictable ricochet was its appeal. Consistent with the starry lunacy of the zeitgeist, when the turf was installed in Houston’s Astrodome, men in spacesuits swept it between innings. People wanted it for their homes: this moon grass, sod anticipating the space age’s descent back down to Earth. Savvy marketers renamed it AstroTurf. Then ordinary people, too, took daily walks on a bit of sky.

Yet AstroTurf remains an object strangely out of time. By which I mean it feels like a souvenir from an era when the domestic aesthetic was all ersatz nostalgia. Those years when Bakelite, celluloid and laminate subbed in for tortoise shell, crystal and marble. Then the fake product celebrated its fakeness as an industrial improvement on the shortcomings of the “real thing.” When counterfeit was quality, everything memorialized nature’s deficiencies. How flaky, how impermanent, organic materials were! How idiosyncratic! That AstroTurf homogenized the lawn was not insidious. It was optimistic. Now plastic everywhere is thought such gimcrack stuff, ripe for landfill, and this attitude is passed off as naïve. But things look different from a world that’s populated by more plastic lawn flamingos than living flamingos.

So many things that appear like nature perfected turn out to be nature depleted. All lawns are a kind of plant taxidermy, sculpture made from botany gutted and flattened. Even alive, lawns occupy a state of eerie, suspended animation, bereft of seeding and grass flowers. Maybe this is why we like to bury our dead underneath lawns. But AstroTurf is the kind of taxidermy that veers enthusiastically into kitsch, the lurid wax museum of lawn. In part, attribute this to its persistence. AstroTurf is fixed in gaudy youth, that radiant peaking of the fantastical lawn — like a photograph of an ordinary lawn with the color dialed up and the imperfections smoothed out.

When you watch television from the late 20th century, all the lawns look like AstroTurf, even if they weren’t. I’m talking about that hyperreal grass in American grill advertisements and sitcoms. Video technology has so advanced that, in contrast, the lawns from the early years of color TV blur and saturate. They achieve the melodrama of AstroTurf.

What a pleasure that is, watching the grass not grow. AstroTurf is lawn not post-mortem but persistently teetering on the edge of the downward slope toward it. It can’t get more green than it is. AstroTurf is a surface that stays superficial. A rootless splendor.


