


RE: THE OBAMA RECOVERY

Andrew Ross Sorkin interviewed President Barack Obama about his economic legacy.

It takes far too much effort to follow the dots for the vast majority of Americans. Those who feel a general uneasiness, even as they know it is not as bad as it was, believe it is not as good as it used to be and blame the president for what they sense is a far too tepid recovery.

It matters not that the Republicans orchestrated much of the slowness, that they forced austerity measures upon a nation crying out for an infusion of capital. It is seemingly almost forgotten that President Obama inherited an absolute economic disaster and was called upon, in the face of unrelenting Republican obstructionism, to right a sinking ship.

History will be the ultimate arbiter for this president. It is a harsh and often unfair image being portrayed, but it is almost impossible for the president to ask the public to grasp that what he avoided is, to a large degree, a measure of what he accomplished. Robert S. Nussbaum, Fort Lee, N.J.

President Obama’s implication that the offshoring of American jobs is “irreversible” demonstrates a surprising absence of appreciation for American economic ingenuity. His lack of business experience and extensive experience in government sent him down a path of trying to change other nations’ labor and environmental standards instead of transforming our own domestic approach to business development.

Is it any wonder that Americans are flocking to a presidential candidate who has no such intention of surrendering to foreign economic competitors? Andrea Economos, Scarsdale, N.Y.

I was excited by the cover question: Why Do So Many Voters Feel Left Behind?

I opened the magazine to begin to learn the answer. The first eight pages of the issue were a glossy spread describing the Hudson Yards residences in Manhattan, inviting your readers to “Be a part of it.” Why do so many voters feel left out? An ad asking, “Hey, want to buy a $16,000,000 four-bedroom apartment?” on Page 1 might be part of the answer. Brad Robertson, Portland, Ore.

RE: WORCESTER MASS.

Adam Davidson investigated what happened to Worcester, a city that was once a haven for people to experience the good life of the middle class.

Adam Davidson’s parallel tales of Worcester’s legacy as an industrial powerhouse and his own family’s lineage in the city left me wanting more detail about the place that lies at the heart of the commonwealth. Davidson says that, during its boom years as a manufacturing center, “just about anybody willing to put in a hard day’s work” could get a job on the shop floor. My understanding, though, is that Worcester factories paid enough to foster a middle class because they required a skilled work force. To this end, Worcester was a leader in establishing trade schools to train mechanics and machinists, and Worcester Polytechnic Institute, the city’s prestigious science and engineering school, was founded by local manufacturers. They also paid enough to keep labor unions at bay. During the century that saw the rise of collective bargaining, Worcester was in the forefront of cities that suppressed it. Tom Reney, Holyoke, Mass.

As leaders investing in the future of our city and its residents, we read with great interest the history of the author Adam Davidson’s ancestors. We know Worcester today as a college town and a hub for innovation, education and jobs in health and biotech, robotics, advanced manufacturing and data science, among others, as well as a vibrant arts and cultural scene.

With a steady approach to private and public redevelopment, our city has become a bright spot in New England, and it is poised for future economic growth. Hard work and opportunity will never go out of style in Worcester. Dreamers are welcome here, too. Laurie A. Leshin, president of Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and Timothy P. Murray, chairman of the Worcester Regional Chamber of Commerce and former lieutenant governor of Massachusetts


