


BANGKOK — Plans by the Malaysian government to shut down the troubled state fund at the heart of a multinational investigation could saddle the government with billions of dollars in debt and may be a first step toward a government bailout, opposition leaders said.

The government announced plans this week to close the fund, which was created by Prime Minister Najib Razak and is suspected of being the source of hundreds of millions of dollars deposited in his personal bank accounts.

The Finance Ministry said on Wednesday that it would absorb the fund, 1Malaysia Development Berhad. The ministry, which Mr. Najib oversees in his capacity as the country’s finance minister, will take over 1MDB’s remaining assets.

Critics are concerned that the ministry will also assume the fund’s estimated $6.75 billion debt, setting the stage for a government bailout.

“My reading is that they will take the opportunity to transfer as much of the debt as possible to the Ministry of Finance,” said Tony Pua, an opposition member of Parliament. “Our fear is that the Ministry of Finance will mount a multibillion-dollar bailout of 1MDB, which is now unable to pay its debts.”

Government officials did not respond to requests for comment. The fund’s president, Arul Kanda Kandasamy, declined to discuss plans for scaling back the fund, how much it owes or the possibility of a government bailout.

Malaysian officials once had high hopes for the fund, which Mr. Najib created in 2009, promising that its investments would produce significant revenue for the country. The fund had planned a $3 billion initial public offering for its energy assets as recently as last year, which could have generated even more cash.

But critics say that the wealth fund was nothing more than a Ponzi scheme and that huge sums it borrowed were fraudulently diverted to well-connected insiders.

At least seven countries are investigating 1MDB and numerous international bank transfers involving the fund. Swiss investigators said in January that $4 billion may have been misappropriated from 1MDB.

Mr. Najib’s role in establishing 1MDB as prime minister, overseeing it as finance minister, directing its advisory board and reportedly receiving money from the fund has raised many questions about his culpability.

He denies any wrongdoing.

In January, Attorney General Mohamed Apandi Ali, who had been appointed by Mr. Najib, cleared him of any crime related to the transfers of $681 million into Mr. Najib’s personal bank accounts. Mr. Apandi said the money was a gift from the Saudi royal family.

The Saudi Foreign Ministry disputed that explanation in February but changed its position last month, confirming that the money was a Saudi donation.

In all, Mr. Najib has banked more than $1 billion from various sources, his office has acknowledged.

The moves announced on Wednesday were in keeping with recommendations by a parliamentary committee, which issued a report critical of 1MDB last month.

The Foreign Ministry said that it would take over 1MDB’s assets, accept the resignation of the 1MDB board effective May 31 and abolish its advisory board, which Mr. Najib had overseen.

The ministry said it would appoint new members to the board “to reflect the limited business profile of 1MDB.”

An adviser to Mr. Najib said that sales of 1MDB assets that are underway, combined with the transfer of other assets to the ministry, would leave 1MDB as a shell company without any operations. The fund will continue to service any remaining obligations, he said, but will eventually cease to exist.

Mahathir Mohamed, a former prime minister and a leading critic of Mr. Najib, charged that the fund’s debts could bankrupt the government.

“The sum is so huge that if the government cannot pay them (the financiers), it could be bankrupted,” he wrote in The Malaysia Chronicle on Thursday. “This has happened to Greece.”

Mr. Mahathir also challenged the contention by Mr. Najib’s allies that much of the money that the prime minister received came from a Saudi donor.

“None of his explanation can be believed,” Mr. Mahathir said. “No one would give this huge amount to anyone even if he had done something for Islam or for any other cause. The belief is that the money came from 1MDB, the only source of such sums accessible to Najib.”


