


EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — After years of building a roster around their interior, focusing on the offensive and defensive lines, and spending the commensurate draft capital, the Giants used the 2016 draft to shore up their perimeter. And, primarily, to try to fix their faulty pass defense, which was worse than any other N.F.L. team’s last season. So, for the first time, the Giants did not select an offensive or defensive lineman in the draft.

But in selecting Eli Apple 10th over all, they obtained another talented cornerback after having invested nearly $100 million in the free agents Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie and Janoris Jenkins since 2014. Apple has 4.4-second speed in the 40-yard dash and starred at Ohio State, the premier talent factory for this year’s draft.

“What he does on the field, how he played — he’s a big-time player, big-time program,” Giants General Manager Jerry Reese said. “He’s 20. He’s got a huge upside. He was the highest player on our board. It’s a need pick.”

The Giants hope Darian Thompson, their third-round selection, will add a ball-hawking safety to the secondary. And with B. J. Goodson, their fourth-round choice, they try to find a reliable player to plug in at linebacker, an asset that has eluded them for several years.

ELI APPLE



Cornerback, Ohio State

The Giants made an unexpected decision in the first round. In need of an offensive lineman and with Laremy Tunsil still available, they took a cornerback who was not seen as the best one remaining. But Apple, a Voorhees, N.J., native, will have the benefit of fitting into a secondary that could ask him to play in the slot initially and not carry the burden of being the primary cover man.

STERLING SHEPARD

Wide receiver, Oklahoma

The 5-foot-10 Shepard, selected in the second round (40th over all), has earned a reputation for playing beyond his size. He will be a complement to Odell Beckham Jr. and could replace Victor Cruz sooner rather than later. “You like them 6-5 and 200 and run 4.4 and all that, but this guy overcomes his lack of height with his other skills,” said Marc Ross, the Giants’ vice president for player evaluation. “He’s got a catch radius where he can go up and catch the ball. Short receivers who play small are a concern. Short receivers who play big are not a concern.”

DARIAN THOMPSON

Free safety, Boise State

Thompson, who was chosen 71st over all, represents the Giants’ latest attempt to establish continuity and reliability at safety. They have now chosen four safeties over their last three draft classes and are still waiting to see the return they are hoping for. “He’s very instinctive,” Coach Ben McAdoo said of Thompson. “He has tremendous ball skills, but the instincts and the twitch make it happen for him.”

B. J. GOODSON



Middle linebacker, Clemson

Goodson, selected in the fourth round (109th over all), represents a promising combination of strength and speed for the Giants, who need talent at linebacker. At the scouting combine, he topped all linebackers with 30 repetitions in the bench press and posted the fourth-fastest three-cone drill. After helping Clemson to the national title game and being one of five Tigers drafted this year, Goodson will try to make himself part of what the Giants hope will be a revamped defense in 2016. “He’s a tackling machine,” Reese said.

PAUL PERKINS



Running back, U.C.L.A.

The Giants had quantity, but not necessarily quality, in their backfield last year. In the fifth round (149th over all), they added another body to the collection. The elusive Perkins led the Pacific-12 in rushing in 2014 and added 1,343 yards last season. Rashad Jennings led the Giants in carries last season, so Perkins will join Andre Williams, Shane Vereen and Bobby Rainey on the depth chart.

JERELL ADAMS



Tight end, South Carolina

The Giants might have been tempted to look for a tight end earlier in the draft if there had been better options. Instead, they waited until the sixth round (184th pick) to snag Adams, who ran the fastest 40-yard dash of any player at his position in this draft. “He has a unique skill set for the position that we like,” McAdoo said. Despite his athleticism, Adams did not catch more than 28 passes in any college season.


