


“Dummies!” the candidate shouted at black protesters after they interrupted his speech in Brooklyn.

“You stand between us and the murderers and the rapists and the assaulters,” he told members of New York’s largest police union, at another point, after it endorsed him.

The candidate was not Donald J. Trump. It was Edward I. Koch — a Democrat, not a Republican, and at the time he was a candidate for mayor, not president. But as the tumultuous Republican race came to New York ahead of its presidential primaries on Tuesday, Mr. Trump’s pugnacious style and often divisive messages brought back memories of the politician who, in his day, similarly personified New York City’s sometimes assertive, sometimes obstreperous id.

Hectoring his hecklers, clamoring for affirmation from his crowds and playing on the resentments of white working-class voters, Mr. Trump has impressed millions of Republicans who see him as refreshingly uninhibited — an unfamiliar quality in a national politician.

But to New Yorkers old enough to remember, Mr. Trump is not merely familiar: He is a throwback to the era that delivered Mr. Koch, who led the crime-ravaged, financially beleaguered city through 12 turbulent years in the 1970s and ‘80s.

“We’re now talking about 2016, and Trump is like a cartoon character out of the most reactionary white view of New York of that era,” said Ken Sunshine, the former chief of staff to David N. Dinkins, whose 1989 election as the city’s first black mayor sent Mr. Koch into retirement. Mr. Koch died in 2013.

The echoes can be striking. “Send him home to mommy!” Mr. Trump bellowed when a protester interrupted him on Saturday in Syracuse. The next day, on Staten Island, he dismissed a demonstrator as a “professional agitator,” then told a group of retired police officers who had endorsed him that “you don’t get the kind of acclaim or respect that you should be getting.”

On Monday afternoon, Mr. Trump surrounded himself with black and Muslim supporters at Trump Tower to deflect continued accusations of racial insensitivity. It was similar to the way Mr. Koch sought to brandish endorsements from black leaders to insulate himself from the outcry over his decision to close a city hospital in Harlem in 1980, one of the rare decisions that he later said he regretted.

Still, the nightstick-to-the-knees brand of urban politics, famously parodied in Tom Wolfe’s 1987 novel “The Bonfire of the Vanities,” is sharply at odds with what most Republicans believe is needed to win a general election in an increasingly diverse country.

Former Koch aides also bristled at the comparison. Mr. Koch, they said, may have been a reformed liberal as mayor, but he was a liberal with a long record of public service.

“The similarity is that they are both loudmouthed New Yorkers who insult people, but otherwise they are not that similar,” said Jerry Skurnik, who said he was the first paid employee on Mr. Koch’s 1977 campaign for mayor.

Mr. Koch was once faulted for calling some community advocates “poverty pimps” after they were accused of abusing public funding. Yet he also ably brought leading black officials, including State Senator H. Carl McCall, to his side.

Mr. Trump is far more blunt. He has called for barring Muslims from entering the country and has described some Mexican immigrants as “rapists.” In an era in which such language has largely been drummed out of the political discourse, even his more subtle invocations of race can land jarringly, such as when he said during a protest at one of his rallies that the country has a “terrible president who happens to be African-American.”

In fact, when Mr. Trump now refers to “the Hispanics,” “the blacks” or “the evangelicals,” it is as if he is reviving a dead language.

Such language was very much the vernacular during his political upbringing. New York in the 1970s was symbolized in popular culture by Archie Bunker, graffiti-laden subways and “The Warriors,” the cult film about rampaging gangs. Political campaigns at the time were largely tribal: Citywide candidates often tried to win over a coalition of so-called white ethnic voters who identified with the “three I’s” — Ireland, Israel and Italy.

The Rev. Al Sharpton, who largely made his name as an opponent to Mr. Koch, said Mr. Trump was using scare tactics to capitalize on white economic anxieties the way Mr. Koch did after the city’s near-bankruptcy in the 1970s.

Mr. Sharpton said that Mr. Trump “in many ways nationalized this whole exploiting of fears and anxiety among people that Koch did in the late ‘70s in New York successfully.”

Mr. Trump points to immigrants as a threat to security, whether it be terrorism, crime or losses of American jobs. Mr. Koch, in the view of his detractors, exploited fears of black-on-white crime, such as when he spoke up in defense of the vigilante Bernhard H. Goetz, who shot four black teenagers, two of them in the back, when they accosted him on a subway in 1984.

Mr. Koch’s stylistic influence is manifest in Mr. Trump’s presidential bid.

Mr. Koch liked to say he did not get ulcers, he gave them; Mr. Trump boasts that when he is hit, he hits back “10 times harder.”

When Mr. Trump drew comparisons to Adolf Hitler for asking voters to raise their right hands and pledge him their support, Mr. Skurnik pointed out on Twitter that Mr. Koch “did this all the time.”

And while Mr. Trump begins his rallies by trumpeting his poll numbers, it was Mr. Koch who all but trademarked his needy catchphrase “How’m I doing?” — delivered with a smile.

Most striking is the approach to news coverage. “Trump saw how the loudest voices got the cameras and became political players,” said William T. Cunningham, a veteran Democratic operative.

It was most likely a lesson he learned from the former mayor.

“I decided early on you have to get the attention of the public, you’ve got to get them to follow you,” Mr. Koch said in “Koch,” Neil Barsky’s 2012 documentary. “And you can only do that by being bigger than life. It’s theatrics. Everybody has a role.”

Mr. Koch was more than a political forebear of Mr. Trump’s: He even had a hand in his ascension to pre-eminence in Manhattan real estate.

Reviving the city from its fiscal hole, Mr. Koch handed out lucrative tax cuts to developers, including one that Mr. Trump used to turn the shuttered Commodore Hotel into what became the Grand Hyatt on East 42nd Street — a crucial step in the rise of the Trump brand.

Even so, the mayor and the developer did not remain allies. After Mr. Trump rebuilt the decrepit ice skating rink in Central Park, long a symbol of government inefficiency, Mr. Koch felt shown up, his former aides said. The two soon clashed over another project, and before long the mayor was making Mr. Trump a frequent target for his abuse.

Mr. Koch’s ridicule of Mr. Trump — he memorably called him “Greedy, greedy, greedy” and “Piggy, piggy, piggy” — might sound familiar to those on the receiving end of Mr. Trump’s mockery in this campaign.

If Mr. Trump was “squealing like a stuck pig,” as the former mayor said at one point, “I must have done something right.”


