


CINCINNATI — In 2011, Martie Maguire of the Dixie Chicks took her twin daughters to a Taylor Swift concert, and it churned up some melancholy.

The Chicks, whose bluegrass roots and rock ’n’ roll spirit broke down country music barriers and made them the best-selling female band of all time in the United States, were in the middle of a lengthy hiatus. The trio had not been heard from since scaling back a 2006 tour that suffered from continuing reverberations from “the incident”: a remark the singer Natalie Maines had made about President George W. Bush a few years earlier.

“I was feeling like maybe our time had passed, and this was Taylor’s time,” said Ms. Maguire. Then Ms. Swift covered the Chicks’ 1999 hit “Cowboy Take Me Away,” much to her daughters’ astonishment, and the crowd sang along. Loudly.

Ms. Maguire said the moment was “surreal” and “super emotional.” Apparently, the world had not forgotten about the Dixie Chicks, whose four studio albums sold more than 30 million copies. Now, the band — Ms. Maines, Ms. Maguire and Emily Strayer — is finding out how much of its fan base is still out there. When the group members realized that 2015 would be their 20th anniversary together, they started thinking about how to mark the occasion; last week, they set out on their first headlining tour in the United States in 10 years. (They play Madison Square Garden on Monday, June 13.)

During the band’s break, Ms. Maguire and Ms. Strayer released two albums under the name Court Yard Hounds, and Ms. Maines put out a solo record, but they say that for now, new Dixie Chicks music is “not on the agenda.” Ms. Strayer (who was known as Emily Robison during the band’s glory years and who remarried in 2013) said that she and Ms. Maguire write regularly, “just to keep the muscle moving.” Ms. Maines added, “My muscle for songwriting is like a 600-pound man right now — way flabby, not exercised at all.”

But live, the trio sounds like it has never been away. “I just wait for it to feel right, and it felt right,” said Ms. Maines, 41, on the night before the 53-city “DCX MMXVI Tour” kicked off. The Chicks gathered in a backstage lounge at the Riverbend Music Center, an outdoor amphitheater on the banks of the Ohio River here, and happily talked over one another, making their decision to return to the spotlight sound casual and carefree.

If the Riverbend audience is representative, the Chicks’ fans are primed for this comeback. The sold-out show cleared more than 20,000 tickets, one of their biggest crowds ever. Forty-something fans filled the more expensive seats under the roof, while packs of raucous college-age women in tank tops, jean shorts and boots packed the lawn area.

The rise and fall of the Dixie Chicks, with its extreme highs and lows, seems practically scripted for maximum drama. Ms. Strayer, 43, who plays banjo and guitar, and Ms. Maguire, 46, a fiddle player, are sisters (born Emily and Martha Erwin), who were among the co-founders of the band. It took its name from Little Feat’s hit “Dixie Chicken,” in Dallas in the late 1980s. After a few independent releases and lineup changes, Ms. Maines stepped in as lead singer in 1995.

The group seemed to come out of nowhere when its 1997 album, “Wide Open Spaces,” spun off three No. 1 singles on the country charts and was certified 12 times platinum. Its 1999 follow-up, “Fly,” slightly modernized the band’s sound and style, and sold 10 million copies.

As they racked up honors, including multiple Grammy Awards (13 to date), the Dixie Chicks were helping transform the playing field in Nashville and empowering a generation of female musicians.

“When we saw these women writing witty, intelligent music; playing instruments; and basically doing it all, it inspired us to do the same,” wrote Madison Marlow, of the country duo Maddie & Tae, in an email.

Her partner, Taylor Dye (who, like Ms. Marlow, was all of 2 when “Wide Open Spaces” was released), added, “The Dixie Chicks encouraged us all to unapologetically be who we are.”

Then, in 2001, the Chicks sued their label, Sony Music, for unpaid royalties; they settled out of court, but it delayed the release of the 2002 acoustic-based “Home.” Though the record’s sound was less conventionally commercial, it sold six million copies.

But in March 2003, in the days leading up to the invasion of Iraq, Ms. Maines introduced the song “Travelin’ Soldier” at a London concert. “Just so you know, we’re on the good side with y’all,” she said. “We do not want this war, this violence, and we’re ashamed that the president of the United States is from Texas.”

A firestorm erupted back home. Country radio stations banned the group’s music; protesters smashed and burned the band’s CDs; Ms. Maines received death threats. The Chicks appeared nude on the cover of Entertainment Weekly magazine, with some of the slurs directed at them — “Saddam’s Angels,” “Dixie Sluts” — painted on their bodies. (The events were chronicled in the 2006 documentary “Shut Up & Sing.”)

Though “the incident” has come to largely define the public legacy of the Dixie Chicks, often overwhelming their musical contributions, the band members now seem to shrug it off. They laugh when Ms. Maguire recounts recently visiting a friend, who instructed her not to go into the bathroom because she might be offended by something on the wall — a picture of the family with President Bush.

“I’m really proud of what went down,” said Ms. Maines. “I spoke up for what I believe — that’s what art is about and what musicians should be about. And if I’d known anybody was listening, I would have said something to really make a mark.”

“I look at how much more polarized and intolerant people have become now,” she continued. “With social media, opinions all start becoming noise, but at that point, people weren’t really supposed to have an opinion.”

Ms. Strayer said that the controversy “feels like another lifetime to me, it doesn’t even feel real — our country’s changed, we’ve changed, the fans definitely have.”

She described a recent phone call from her ex-husband. “He said, ‘Well, what’s going to happen the day that the kids find that Entertainment Weekly cover, what are you going to tell them?’ — like, ‘Gotcha!’ So I said, ‘Well, I’ll probably explain to them what happened to us, and how you have to stand up for yourself when something like that happens.’”

Ms. Maines added, with a guffaw, “I’m going to tell them, ‘This is how good Mommy’s body looked before she had you!’”

Ms. Maines has remained active in various social causes. She has been a supporter of the West Memphis Three, a group of Arkansas men convicted of the 1993 murder of three young boys. And on the current tour, she is raising funds for Proclaim Justice, an organization that advocates for the wrongfully imprisoned. Ms. Maines expressed reluctance, though, about getting involved in the current presidential election.

“I hate politics,” she said. “It’s become an industry. It sickens me.”

During the concert, the Chicks’ performance of “Ready to Run” was accompanied by video screens with goofy animated images of all the candidates, crosscut with shots of clowns and hot dogs. But one moment in the show received particular attention in the news media: While they sang their 2000 hit “Goodbye Earl,” a tale of a woman and her best friend murdering an abusive husband, a montage of criminals and shady-looking characters through history flashed to a quick shot of Donald J. Trump, with devil horns, a mustache and a goatee scribbled on. In a sign of changing times, it drew cheers.

“He’s great entertainment for a reality show,” said Ms. Maines. “He’s scary as hell for president of the United States.” (Social media response was predictable, with the Dixie Chicks’ Facebook page instantly filling up with comments like “You idiots should keep your politics to yourselves and stick to playing music.”)

One thing that never recovered was the Dixie Chicks’ relationship with Nashville. Their last album, the 2006 LP “Taking the Long Way,” took a more pop-oriented direction on its way to winning five Grammy Awards. The band members claim to pay no attention to country music today; Ms. Strayer even needed to describe to the other two last year’s “Tomato-gate” controversy, when an influential radio consultant insisted that country stations needed to limit how much music they play by female artists.

The 24-song set at Riverbend illustrated some of the music that is closer to the band’s heart these days, including covers of a song by Lana Del Rey and by the group favorite Beyoncé: a hoedown version of “Daddy Lessons,” which became a viral hit when they first performed it, just a week after the release of “Lemonade.”

Ms. Maguire expressed the closest thing to regret about taking a decade away from the group. “I don’t love that we didn’t do anything for 10 years,” she said. “But I’m really proud that we focused so intently on our children.”

In the end, the biggest deal about this tour for the Dixie Chicks may be that it offers the first chance for their sons and daughters — nine in total, ranging in age from 3 to 15 — to see their mothers at work. “I realized that my second-oldest daughter had never even seen our videos,” said Ms. Strayer, “so about a month ago, we sat in bed and watched them all — and she was mortified. ‘You did not wear that! You did not just do that!’”

Ms. Maines reiterated that, especially after their experiences, she had no problem walking away from the celebrity mountaintop. “You look at the stars who do maintain staying on top and honestly it looks like so much work and self-involvement,” she said. “I wouldn’t have done all this personal growth and become the person that I’ve worked on becoming. There’s something almost sad about that being what you’re so hungry for — I just don’t relate to that. So I was happy to pass the baton.”


