


LONDON — Rupert Murdoch’s Sun tabloid, Britain’s most popular, came out on Tuesday in favor of a British exit from the European Union, as a series of opinion polls suggested that the campaign to leave the bloc is picking up support, inducing anxiety in the financial markets and in No. 10 Downing Street.

The country will decide the issue in a referendum on June 23, and there is a growing sense on both sides that the early confidence of those who support remaining in the European Union has given way to recognition that the vote could go either way, with historic if hard-to-predict consequences for Britain and the Continent.

Measuring public opinion has been difficult, both because of problems plaguing pollsters everywhere and because there is no sure way to compare this referendum with previous votes. Although different polls using different methodologies have found widely varying results, established pollsters have generally given the edge to those favoring remaining in the bloc.

But after a push by the “leave” campaign and its allies focusing on immigration and Islamist radicalism, including the possibility that Turkey and its 77 million Muslims might one day join the European Union, the polls are showing signs of a shift.

A respected “poll of polls,” averaging voting intentions in the previous six major polls, now shows the “leave” campaign with a lead of two percentage points, 51 to 49. As recently as three weeks ago the “remain” camp held a 10-point lead, 55 to 45. The “poll of polls” is directed by John Curtice, professor of politics at Strathclyde University and a senior fellow at NatCen, an independent social research institution.

A similar aggregation of polls by The Financial Times also shows the “leave” campaign with a two percentage point advantage, 47 to 45.

Three polls released on Monday, including online and telephone polls, all showed the “leave” campaign with leads inside the polls’ margins of sampling error. Two Guardian/ICM polls — one conducted using traditional telephone sampling of voters, the other based on an online survey — both found the “leave” campaign with a six percentage point advantage, 53 to 47.

Bookmakers are also showing an increased probability of a British exit, or Brexit, with Betfair putting the probability of leaving at 42 percent, compared with 25 percent on Friday. But at the moment, despite the narrowing odds, bettors and many investment banks still think the “remain” camp will win.

On the news of the polls, the pound fell by more than a cent to $1.41, while a measure based on the cost of insurance options taken to protect investors against movement in the pound over the next month jumped to a record high.

If the polls are accurate, they suggest the urgency of the efforts by Prime Minister David Cameron, who is leading the charge for staying in the European Union, as the campaign heads into its final week. Mr. Cameron’s Conservative Party is deeply split on the issue, which has initiated debates about national identity, sovereignty, immigration and economic integration.

The Sun is Mr. Murdoch’s flagship, and he decides its editorial policy, its editors say. In a front-page editorial under the headline “BeLEAVE in Britain,” the tabloid argues that staying in the European Union would be “worse for immigration, worse for jobs, worse for wages and worse for our way of life.” It said that free from “dictatorial Brussels,” Britain could become “richer, safer and free” to forge its own destiny, instead of engulfed by a “relentlessly expanding German-dominated federal state.”

Trevor Kavanagh, The Sun’s associate editor, columnist and former political editor, told the BBC that the editorial represented “a long and legitimate campaign” on the part of the newspaper going back more than 40 years.

While declining in circulation, The Sun has a daily circulation of about 1.8 million, according to figures in January. The Daily Mail, which has also been siding with the “leave” campaign, sells nearly 1.6 million copies daily, and it is also considered the country’s most popular online newspaper. Other Murdoch properties, including The Times and The Sunday Times of London, have been more neutral in their news coverage and have not yet taken editorial positions.

Mr. Cameron has stepped back somewhat from campaigning this week to let the opposition Labour Party, which officially supports the “remain” campaign, get more news media attention as it tries to motivate voters.

The Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who admitted last week on television that on a scale of 10, he was only “seven, seven and a half” for the “remain” side, has been criticized as not doing enough to support the campaign. He is giving more speeches this week, and Gordon Brown, the former prime minister who intervened successfully in last year’s Scottish referendum, has also stepped up campaigning to remain.

In an open letter to The Daily Mirror, which supports Labour, leaders of 12 trade unions, including the powerful Unite, argue that leaving the European Union would be “a disaster” for jobs, workers’ rights and the National Health Service.


