


OAKLAND, Calif. — The day after Klay Thompson accused him of being too sensitive and Marreese Speights posted an emoji of a baby bottle on social media, LeBron James showed up at Oracle Arena and was showered with boos as soon as his face appeared on the massive video screens. The game was about a half-hour from even starting.

James, one of the most famous athletes in the world, widely celebrated for his feats with the Cleveland Cavaliers, arrived for Game 5 of the N.B.A. finals on Monday and settled in for an evening as the subject of the Bay Area’s ire. Fans screamed at him, calling him a whiner and a player past his prime, just hours from another postseason exit.

Then they watched James reach into his bag of basketball greatness to steer the Cavaliers away from the edge of a cliff.

The Golden State Warriors had goaded James — mocked him, even — before he delivered for the Cavaliers in their 112-97 victory, which underscored that it was probably a huge mistake to pick on him in the first place.

There was something about the energy in the building that fueled James, whose Cavaliers narrowed the Warriors’ lead in the best-of-seven series to three games to two, with Game 6 scheduled for Thursday in Cleveland. In fact, James sounded as if he had relished the experience. He turned almost wistful, talking about life after basketball, whenever that time comes.

“No matter how loud you turn the stereo system up in your house, you’ll never be able to get it back,” James said. “You just don’t take these moments for granted.”

Amid the din, James collected 41 points, 16 rebounds and 7 assists, becoming the fourth player in N.B.A. history to finish with at least 40 points, 15 rebounds and 5 assists in a finals game, according to Elias Sports Bureau. James had loads of help from Kyrie Irving, who had his own transcendent game with 41 points on 17-of-24 shooting.

“It’s probably one of the greatest performances I’ve ever seen live,” James said of Irving. “Just calm. Just calm for 48 minutes.”

As the building seethed around them, James and Irving operated with calculated cool, feasting on the absence of the Warriors’ Draymond Green, who served his one-game suspension by watching the game on television from a luxury suite at the baseball stadium next door, where the Oakland Athletics were playing. (The A’s won.)

It was James, of course, who had played a role in provoking Green in Game 4 by stepping over him after a tussle in the fourth quarter. Green retaliated by swiping at James’s groin, and the league, which had seen enough of that from Green over the postseason, assessed him with a flagrant-1 foul on Sunday, triggering an automatic suspension.

Ahead of Game 5, some of the Warriors suggested that the Cavaliers (and James specifically) had lobbied the league to punish Green. James laughed it all off, saying he intended to take “the high road.” Once the game began, that road — unimpeded by Green’s steamer-trunk frame — led straight to the basket. The Cavaliers shot 53 percent from the field.

“Well, he’s their best defender,” Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue said of Green. “I’ve said it all along that he’s the best guy in the N.B.A. as far as reading when to help, triple switches and kicking guys out of mismatches, knowing when to go and when not to go. He’s an underrated shot blocker, and he can guard one through five. So that definitely hurt their defense.”

It was a mouthful, and give credit to Lue for being candid: The Cavaliers benefited from Green’s landing in baseball purgatory, where a simple trip to use the restroom drew huge crowds.

The good news for the Warriors is that Green will return for Game 6, and they have been in such a situation before. Last year, they clinched their first championship in 40 years by winning Game 6 at Quicken Loans Arena, soaking the visiting locker room with champagne. They delighted in the familiar aroma when they returned there for the first time this season.

“I like our position a lot better than theirs,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said Monday night.

But the Cavaliers must feel confident, too, after staving off elimination on the Warriors’ home court. Forget that no team has ever come back from a 3-1 deficit in the finals. James likes being first, and helping the Cavaliers win three straight games to claim the first championship in franchise history would be his greatest stunt in an all-world career.

Last season, James had to wrestle the Warriors without the aid of Irving, who injured his left knee in the first game of the series. Now, both are playing well and heading home emboldened, apparently undaunted by the task ahead of them.

Irving, whose partnership with James has been the source of so much scrutiny over the past two seasons, was asked how they had been able to strike the right balance.

“When we stopped caring about what everyone else said,” Irving said. “Honestly, what goes on in our locker room — and I’ve said it multiple times — as long as we’re taking care of what’s going on in our locker room, internally, we can power through anything.”

On Monday, the Cavaliers powered through the noise and their critics and a depleted opponent. A new challenge awaits, just the way they like it.


