


BALTIMORE — When six police officers were indicted last year in the death of Freddie Gray, a black man who suffered a fatal spinal injury while in police custody, it was a watershed moment for activists and residents who wanted to see this city’s police force held accountable. Many people were eager for the legal reckoning to begin.

“I had the date written down,” said Shai Crawley, 21, referring to the first officer’s trial, late last year, “and I was excited about it.”

But that case, against Officer William G. Porter, ended in a mistrial, dimming some residents’ hopes for a conviction of any of the officers and setting off months of legal maneuvering and delays. Since then, voters have cast ballots for a new mayor and activists have pressed onward, focusing on cases involving the use of force by police officers or on issues like housing and education.

This week, more than a year after the charges were announced, the prosecution is set to begin anew with the trial of Officer Edward M. Nero, who was present for the initial arrest of Mr. Gray. Trials of the remaining four officers, in addition to a retrial for Officer Porter, will follow on a schedule that stretches into the fall.

“I don’t get the sense that a lot of folks here in Baltimore are focused a lot on the trial,” said Dayvon Love, the director of public policy for Leaders of a Beautiful Struggle, a policy organization. He said, however, that close attention would be paid to the verdict.

“Folks are really focused on the day-to-day,” he said, “and also just focused on how to actually move things forward.”

That seemed to be the case for Mr. Crawley. “Now, I can’t even tell you the dates,” he said as he stood on a rainy street corner in Baltimore last week, protesting a death in police custody. “Now, I kind of brace for disappointment.”

Mr. Gray’s death last April touched off widespread unrest in Baltimore, making ever more pressing the nation’s, and this city’s, discussion of the use of force by the police, especially against minorities. With Officer Nero’s trial, a city that is working to move forward will find itself looking back into the first moments of Mr. Gray’s arrest — some of which were caught on widely circulated videos, taken by bystanders, that fueled public outrage.

“We’re going to finally be talking about actually some of the circumstances that gave rise to the video that has been the focus of so much attention in this case,” said David Jaros, a law professor at the University of Baltimore. Officer Nero was one of the officers who arrested Mr. Gray last year, and his trial may yield more information about the circumstances of the arrest.

Professor Jaros cautioned that the trial could turn on complex legal theory and would probably offer little insight into how Mr. Gray sustained the injuries that killed him. “I think we are going to continue to have questions about what happened, and I don’t think the trial is going to clear it all up,” he said.

Some activists are planning to demonstrate outside the courtroom as proceedings pick up, even though the spread-out schedule of the trials has made it hard to keep an intense public focus on them.

“We have to ensure that there’s an expectation that we’ve received justice in the courts,” said the Rev. Cortly C. D. Witherspoon, who leads Baltimore’s branch of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.

He added, “People think that the concept of black lives mattering is on trial inside of that courtroom.”

Many of the details of the case are well known by now: On the morning of April 12, 2015, Mr. Gray, 25, was walking in the downtrodden neighborhood of Sandtown-Winchester, saw a group of police officers and ran. Officers Nero and Garrett E. Miller pursued and arrested Mr. Gray less than a minute later and found that he was carrying a folding knife, which they said was illegal (prosecutors have questioned this point). A video taken by bystanders showed the officers placing a screaming Mr. Gray inside a police van that was driven by Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr.

Mr. Gray was never buckled in. After the van made multiple stops in the neighborhood, it arrived at a police station, where Mr. Gray was found unresponsive and not breathing. He died a week later of a functionally severed spinal cord.

After more than a week of protests that set off looting and violence and prompted the governor to call in the National Guard, Marilyn J. Mosby, the city’s top prosecutor, announced that she had charged six officers — three black and three white — in the death of Mr. Gray. The toughest charge, of “second-degree depraved-heart murder,” was for Officer Goodson.

During Officer Porter’s trial, which ended in December with a hung jury, prosecutors and defense lawyers said that Mr. Gray sustained a fatal spinal injury during his ride in the police van. Officer Nero’s trial will focus on a different part of the officers’ encounter with Mr. Gray: his initial arrest.

“It’s hard not to separate the Freddie Gray incident into a two-act event,” said José F. Anderson, a professor at the University of Baltimore School of Law. “What happened to get him in the van? What happened in the van?”

Officer Nero, who was 29 and had three years of experience on the force when he was charged, faces charges of second-degree assault, two counts of misconduct in office and reckless endangerment. The trial was scheduled to start on Wednesday, but prosecutors on Monday asked for a one-day delay, saying a power failure over the weekend prevented them from preparing. A judge is expected to rule on the motion on Tuesday.

His trial will be the first time prosecutors lay out extended detail on their theory of why Mr. Gray’s arrest led to charges for three of the officers. Court filings have suggested the case could hinge on the question of whether the officers had probable cause to arrest Mr. Gray. If the officers did not have cause to arrest Mr. Gray, prosecutors may argue, then the physical act of arresting him could amount to assault.

But Warren S. Alperstein, a lawyer in Baltimore who handles defense cases and has represented police officers, said it could be difficult for prosecutors to secure a conviction on those grounds.

“The Supreme Court has made it very clear that in circumstances like this, law enforcement has the absolute legal right to chase, pause, apprehend an individual who, for no apparent reason, flees from the police in a high-drug-traffic area,” Mr. Alperstein said.

Prosecutors are also expected to allege that the officers’ failure to secure Mr. Gray in a seatbelt after putting him into the van was a crime. They have taken the unusual step of securing a ruling that will most likely compel another officer present at Mr. Gray’s arrest, Officer Miller, to testify against Officer Nero, even though he is also facing trial in connection with Mr. Gray’s death. (Officer Porter will also be required to testify in other officers’ trials before his own scheduled retrial in September.) Normally, co-defendants are not compelled to testify against one another before their own trials to avoid incriminating themselves.

And, in another twist, the court has not scheduled jury selection for Officer Nero’s trial, which indicates he may want to put his fate solely in the hands of Judge Barry G. Williams.

That could leave some residents of Baltimore unsatisfied, said the Rev. Westly West, 28, who was a frequent presence during the protests after Mr. Gray’s death.

“I think it’s important that the people decide in this,” Mr. West said. “It’ll make them feel like they’re left out of this process.”

But out in Sandtown-Winchester, where Mr. Gray grew up and was arrested, many residents already feel left out. Brandi Murphy, 36, leaned against a recreational center and watched two teams of 8- to 10-year-olds play a game of baseball one evening last week.

“If there was a conviction, I’d say that would open my eyes and give a little more hope in the system,” Ms. Murphy said.

But, she added, “I just don’t see it happening.”


