


Four years ago, one of China’s largest agricultural importers sent representatives to the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, N.C., hoping that meetings with elite party officials might yield business opportunities. The company, the Dandong Port Group, was particularly focused on the governors in attendance, according to an interview with Dandong’s general counsel broadcast by Chinese state television.

“If you really want to influence, let’s say, U.S.-China policy,” he said, “it’s almost worth it to have emphasis and influence on the state level.”

The meetings, arranged by a former South Carolina governor, marked a period of expansion in the United States for Dandong and its affiliated companies, involving negotiations with officials in Washington, Arkansas, South Carolina and Virginia. But now, the company’s widening influence is coming under scrutiny by federal prosecutors, who are examining the relationship between Dandong’s wealthy and connected chairman, Wang Wenliang, and Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia, a Democrat who was elected in 2013.

A federal law enforcement official said the inquiry included $120,000 in contributions that a New Jersey construction firm controlled by Mr. Wang made to Mr. McAuliffe’s 2013 campaign and inaugural committee. That official and a second law enforcement official, both of whom asked for anonymity to discuss the matter, said it was a preliminary inquiry of Mr. McAuliffe’s campaign donations, and they provided no detail about the nature and scope of any potential violations being scrutinized.

Though Mr. Wang is a Chinese citizen, he is also a legal permanent resident of the United States, according to a spokeswoman for him, which entitles him to make campaign contributions.

The inquiry was first reported on Monday by CNN, which said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Justice Department’s public integrity unit were involved in the review. The inquiry also encompasses Mr. McAuliffe’s role as a board member of the Clinton Foundation, to which another company linked to Mr. Wang pledged a $2 million contribution in 2013. The foundation has raised millions of dollars from companies and wealthy individuals overseas as well as from foreign governments.

Representatives for Mr. McAuliffe and Mr. Wang said they had not been contacted by the Justice Department or the F.B.I. A spokesman for the Clinton Foundation also said it had not been contacted by law enforcement officials.

Speaking to reporters in Virginia on Tuesday, Mr. McAuliffe said he was shocked by reports of an inquiry. He had played no role in soliciting Mr. Wang’s pledge to the Clinton Foundation and said the contributions to his campaign from by Mr. Wang’s company were legitimate.

“I’m very confident this gentleman had been fully vetted,” Mr. McAuliffe said of Mr. Wang.

But the federal inquiry throws a cloud over Mr. McAuliffe at a critical time: He is a top fund-raiser for Hillary Clinton, a close confidant of her and her husband, and the governor of a swing state critical to her chances of becoming president. On Sunday, Mr. McAuliffe headlined a $5,000-a-head Virginia fund-raising event for Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign.

Mr. McAuliffe and Mr. Wang are, in a sense, mirror images: wealthy self-made men with intertwined careers in business and politics. Before becoming governor, Mr. McAuliffe was an inveterate deal-maker involved in everything from real estate to banking to electric cars. Last year, a separate federal review found that Mr. McAuliffe had lobbied officials at the Department of Homeland Security to speed visas for Chinese investors in an electric car company.

The review said department officials had created a perception of “special consideration” for Mr. McAuliffe and other prominent Democrats, but found no evidence of criminal wrongdoing.

Mr. Wang is a delegate to China’s legislative house, the National People’s Congress. His companies run ports, import agricultural products and construct Chinese embassies around the world. His extensive business empire is based in Dandong, a port city that borders North Korea.

After starting his career as a municipal adviser to the Dandong government on planning and economics issues, he amassed a fortune, partly by securing construction contracts to work on Chinese embassies and consular offices around the globe, including the Chinese Embassy in Washington.

From 2012 to the end of last year, according to federal records, Mr. Wang’s companies paid $1.5 million to McGuireWoods Consulting to lobby on trade and visa issues. Dandong’s lobbyists included Jim Hodges, the former South Carolina governor. In 2012, Mr. Hodges arranged meetings with governors for Mark T. Fung, who was Dandong’s general counsel.

Mr. Wang also met with Mr. McAuliffe before he ran for governor, at a 2012 dinner hosted by Mr. Hodges. Mr. McAuliffe was an American businessman investing in China; Mr. Wang was a Chinese executive whose firms did business in Virginia. The next year, when Mr. McAuliffe ran for governor, one of Mr. Wang’s companies, West Legend, contributed to his campaign. (Corporate contributions are permitted in Virginia.)

But records and interviews reveal that Mr. Wang’s companies have had numerous reasons to seek the favor of United States government officials. Among Mr. Wang’s ventures are importing and crushing soybeans. In late 2012, his company entered negotiations to buy a privately owned port on the Mississippi River in Arkansas. The negotiations led to a review by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, which includes representatives of the departments of State, Commerce and Homeland Security.

A letter from Rilin, one of Mr. Wang’s companies, to the American Embassy in Beijing, obtained by The New York Times, says that company representatives met with then-Gov. Mike Beebe of Arkansas while negotiating that deal, which was worth $27 million. Reached on Tuesday, Mr. Beebe said he did not remember ever having met with the company.

The foreign investment committee approved the deal in April 2013, but it ultimately fell through. Mr. Wang’s company complained that a delegation of Chinese nationals the company wanted to review the port had been denied visas.

About that same time, McGuireWoods contacted the American Embassy to discuss “visa issues.”

Later that year, Gary Locke, then the United States’ ambassador to China, and the United States consul general in Shenyang met with Rilin in Dandong, according to a news release issued by the Dandong Port, which said the company had obtained a “group visa” making it more convenient for employees to travel to the United States “for business and education purposes.”

Reached on Tuesday, Mr. Locke, who is a lawyer in Seattle, said that he remembered visiting Dandong, but added that there was no such thing as a group visa for a company.

Mr. Wang’s agricultural business also extended to Virginia. In 2011, Gov. Bob McDonnell announced that Perdue Agribusiness had agreed with Mr. Wang’s company to export soybeans through Perdue’s port in Chesapeake, Va.

In a statement, a spokeswoman for Mr. Wang said: “West Legend does business in Virginia and supports Gov. McAuliffe’s jobs-creation agenda. Its political contributions comply with all federal and state laws.”


