


PARIS — When David Haggerty was elected president of the International Tennis Federation in late September, he planned to focus on revamping the long-running team competitions Davis Cup and Fed Cup and on increasing revenue and the game’s developmental footprint.

It seemed a busy agenda at the time. But that was before a series of crises rocked global sports, the upcoming Olympics in Rio de Janeiro and tennis. It all has amounted to a wild ride on the learning curve for Haggerty, a former American tennis industry executive.

“It isn’t exactly what I planned,” he said in an interview at the French Open last week.

From the Russian doping scandal and Maria Sharapova’s positive test for the newly banned drug meldonium to renewed concerns about match fixing and integrity in tennis that compelled the sport to commission an inquiry in January, there has been no shortage of brush fires to try to extinguish.

The I.T.F., the international governing body now led by Haggerty, is just one of the entities in tennis’s overly fragmented power structure. There are also the men’s tour (the ATP), the women’s tour (the WTA) and the four Grand Slam tournaments, all of which operate independently — sometimes very independently — of one another.

But there has been more cooperation of late, in part because it has become a necessity under duress and in part because the new wave of leaders in tennis has much in common. Haggerty, the WTA chief executive Steve Simon and the ATP chief executive Chris Kermode were all fine amateur players who tried in vain to break through to the higher levels on the professional tour.

“I came in with ideas and an ambitious program, and the good news is the ambitious program continues strategically,” Haggerty said. “But you learn a lot when you have challenges, and we certainly have had some challenges. And I think it made us stronger, united us, made us work together more as a sport.”

The proof will be in the progress, not in collegial dialogue or the number of meetings. But Haggerty, a former president of the United States Tennis Association, has long been a consensus builder unafraid to act. And there has been an unmistakable shift toward greater transparency in areas that had become particularly sensitive to the touch.

The Tennis Integrity Unit, the sport’s internal anticorruption watchdog, has begun publishing quarterly reports that indicate the number of professional matches that have triggered betting alerts. Haggerty also said last week that the game’s governing bodies had now agreed in principle that it is time to change policy and announce provisional bans after a player tested positive rather than waiting for each case to be adjudicated before releasing the information (and then only in the case when a violation had been confirmed).

But players under the current policy are still banned even if no suspension is announced, which can lead to speculation, when a player is off the tour for an extended period with an injury, that he or she is serving a “silent ban” as the case is processed. Marin Cilic, the 2014 United States Open champion, cited an injury in 2013 when he was in fact serving a suspension. He was eventually given a nine-month ban, later reduced on appeal to four months, for ingesting a banned stimulant.

Rafael Nadal is suing a former French minister, Roselyne Bachelot, for defamation in France after she said that one of his long layoffs from the game was linked not to injury but to a positive test: an allegation that Nadal and the I.T.F. have rejected.

“Without announcing provisional suspensions, there’s mystery, and there’s supposition,” Haggerty said. “I think the tennis bodies will come to an agreement to publish and announce provisional suspensions, and I think that would be a form of transparency and a way to have confidence that nothing is being withheld or suppressed.”

Other sports do announce provisional bans after adverse analytical findings, including track and field.

“There are only a few that do,” Haggerty said. “But I think we are confident in the system and the laboratories and the way we do this. So we will be diligent not to put someone in a position where there isn’t a case to prove.”

Kermode confirmed in an email that the men’s tour supported the move. “This change will help remove any unfair suspicion or doubt around players who are forced out of competition for an extended period of time for legitimate injury reasons,” Kermode said.

But Haggerty said Nadal’s call for the I.T.F. to publish all of his doping test results was more problematic. Haggerty and Nadal met in Barcelona earlier this year.

“There are legal issues,” Haggerty said. “He can release all the information he wants to; he can absolutely do that. We can’t.”

Part of the concern in releasing tests and test dates is that it could reveal the patterns of testing to would-be cheaters. It also would require release forms and cooperation from all the other bodies that conduct testing, such as the national antidoping agencies.

“It’s easy to say, hard to do,” Haggerty said.

Haggerty has concerns about the Olympic tennis venue — worries about the lighting and the impact of cost-cutting moves by the Rio organizing committee. The Russians have even had the chutzpah to name Sharapova to their Olympic team even though she is suspended and facing a sanction that is likely to be announced soon. “I don’t know technically if they can,” he said of Russia putting her on its provisional roster. “They at least think they can.”

On the anticorruption front, Haggerty said the I.T.F. had increased oversight at the Futures level, which has generated the most concern about match fixing with its microscopic prize money. Haggerty said that more observers had been assigned to those tournaments and that there was also more digital oversight of officials after two umpires were penalized for corruption — without any announcement — and four others charged.

“We’ll be able to livestream matches, which will go a long way in being able to have somebody be able to watch and see suspicious patterns,” he said.

As for his original agenda, Haggerty said he believed the support was there to expand the Fed Cup, the women’s team event that has rarely punched its weight, from eight teams to 16 in 2018 with a Final Four at a neutral venue.

He has also expressed support for the Final Four concept for the Davis Cup, the men’s team competition that is the I.T.F.’s primary revenue generator. But there has been resistance to the idea, he said, and the more likely change in the short term would be a neutral site for the final from 2018 so that the I.T.F. could secure a large indoor facility well in advance and better promote the final.

Our interview in Paris was about to be interrupted, however, by an adviser who explained to Haggerty that Nadal was about to conduct a news conference on short notice to announce his withdrawal from the French Open because of a wrist injury.

It was yet another unexpected development in a tennis year that has had so many.


