


Bill de Blasio, currently in the Pigpen phase of his mayoralty, with clouds hovering everywhere he goes, did not lay the pipes that carry unlimited cash to candidates for the State Legislature.

Those pipes — party committees that can accept far more money than individual candidates, and then freely pass along the money to the campaigns — have been used in virtually every competitive legislative race this century.

Nevertheless, a recently appointed state election official has called on prosecutors to investigate Mr. de Blasio and his allies in the 2014 legislative campaigns for availing themselves of the pipes. The official, Risa S. Sugarman, the chief enforcement counsel for the Board of Elections, asserted in a report that she had found “willful and flagrant” violations of laws limiting campaign money for candidates.

The de Blasio group solicited money for Democratic candidates they thought had a chance of winning election to the State Senate in 2014. The candidates could accept donations of as much as $10,300, but party committees in their counties, and at the state level, could receive about 10 times that.

“This is a widespread practice that Republicans and Democrats, county and state committees, take advantage of,” said Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York.

The committee pipeline has become even more important as the Republican majority in the State Senate has dwindled.

In 2008, when Michael R. Bloomberg was mayor, he gave $1.2 million to the tiny Independence Party, which used the money to help the campaigns of two Republican senators in Queens, Frank Padavan and Serphin R. Maltese. “In many ways, we are the party of Bloomberg,” Frank MacKay, the leader of the Independence Party, told Tom Robbins of The Village Voice. He said he had coordinated his efforts for the two senators with a Bloomberg aide.

Mr. Bloomberg also gave $500,000 to the Republicans’ Senate campaign committee, which supported Mr. Padavan and Mr. Maltese in their races. The mayor had promised his backing, Mr. Padavan told The New York Times in 2008.

“He’s made it very clear he wants me to stay in the Senate,” Mr. Padavan said.

In the same 2014 election that drew the scrutiny of Ms. Sugarman, a Republican senator running in Erie County, Mark Grisanti, was in a tight race. At the direction of the Republican Party’s leader, Dean G. Skelos, the real estate company Glenwood sent $100,000 to the Erie County Republican Committee, which transferred $78,000 a few days later to Mr. Grisanti’s campaign.

In Ms. Sugarman’s report, she pointed to large contributions organized by the de Blasio group to county committees that everyone involved — donors, county committee and candidates — knew were going to support the Democratic candidates.

“The documents established a pattern of coordination between Team de Blasio, the candidates,” and county and state political committees, Ms. Sugarman wrote.

Her memo does not make clear why such coordination violates the law. Rather than being a matter of “everyone does it,” there appears to be nothing in the state election law that says it cannot be done.

Apparently, Ms. Sugarman’s understanding of the law is that the county and state committees can spend the virtually unlimited money that comes their way on individual candidates as long as there is no joint plan to get and spend it.

That’s like a regulation that permits sex only if all parties to the process keep their eyes closed. No such rules exist for sex or for campaign donations.

The lawlessness of the state’s campaign finance structure has long been a target of government watchdog groups and people seeking reform.

The political parties have “housekeeping accounts” that the law explicitly states are not subject to regulation. Those accounts can take any amount of money from anyone, which can then be used for anything.

Contributions to those accounts have increased by 50 percent since 1999, according to research by Prudence Katze and Kyle Gorman of Common Cause.

Common Cause and others groups have lobbied for reform of the state’s campaign finance laws, but it has never survived the annual negotiations.

“The big problem with New York State’s campaign finance laws is that there’s relatively little guidance, almost no enforcement, and every campaign and committee figures out the best they can,” Ms. Lerner said. “It’s a systemic problem that requires a systemic solution that doesn’t just involve enforcement against this campaign or that campaign.”

The Democrats promise that if they win control of both houses of the Legislature, they will fix it. Meanwhile, they are running millions of dollars through the pipelines they promise to dismantle.


