


A Chicago singer, music educator and former contestant on the Mexican version of the TV singing contest “The Voice” died over the weekend after being shot near the youth arts studio he directed.

The singer, Alejandro Fuentes-Rosas, who was known as Jano, was shot on Thursday, the police and medical examiner said.

Mr. Fuentes, 45, was in a car when a man approached, flashing a gun and demanding that he get out of the vehicle. When he refused, the man fired several rounds, striking the singer in the head. The man then ran a short distance away before eventually taking the vehicle, according to the Chicago Police Department.

Mr. Fuentes was shot on his birthday, according to a fund-raising page set up to solicit donations for his family and linked to from the studio’s Facebook page. Ultimately, he was pronounced dead at Mount Sinai Hospital at 2:07 p.m. Saturday, according to the Cook County Medical Examiner’s Office.

Chicago police have made no arrests in the case, though an investigation is underway, a spokesman said on Monday morning. The medical examiner has not yet identified the cause or manner of death. While the Police Department does not identify crime victims, the medical examiner confirmed his identity.

“The Latino community in Illinois today lost a great artist, teacher, friend and above all a great human being,” the Tras Bambalinas theater, where Mr. Fuentes was president, wrote in a Spanish-language Facebook post Saturday. Tras Bambalinas is Spanish for “backstage” or “behind the scenes.”

The theater also shared a post, by a man identified on the social network as Santiago Jimenez, linking to a GoFundMe crowdfunding page soliciting donations for the dead man’s family. Mr. Jimenez’s Facebook profile lists his job as production assistant with the theater.

Mr. Fuentes quickly became a fixture at Mexican-American cultural events in the area after opening the studio, The Chicago Tribune reported.

“He was a very talented guy — one of a kind,” Miguel Sanchez, who had worked with Mr. Fuentes, told the paper.

Mexico’s “The Voice” posted a remembrance of Mr. Fuentes on its website, noting his versatility as a singer, dancer and composer. He auditioned for that show in 2011 with a rendition of Ricardo Montaner’s “Tan Enamorado,” Spanish for “so in love.”

Mr. Fuentes’s shooting death came one week and one day after that of Christina Grimmie, a contestant on the American version of “The Voice,” who was shot and killed following a concert in Orlando.

Mr. Fuentes’s coach on the Mexican show, the actress and singer Lucero Hogaza León, described him on Twitter as a “great man” who brought joy to those around him.

The Chicago police have logged 269 homicides through June 12 of this year. That represents a 48 percent increase over the same time period last year and a 74 percent increase over the year before, according to city data.

Chicago is home to a disproportionate share of homicides. The Times documented the devastating effects of such violence over just one weekend during the Memorial Day holiday this year.


