


These days he generally sits, very quietly. Joe Allen, owner of the 46th Street restaurant he uncharacteristically named for himself, is unfailingly polite, reluctantly conversational.

D D Allen, the interior designer and his not-exactly-estranged wife, said that whenever his friend Al Pacino walked into the restaurant, which was often, with the Actors Studio just blocks away, he’d nod at Joe, and Joe would nod at him. No talk. Just that.

“A lot of people considered Joe to be dismissive, but he just didn’t want to bother anyone,” she said.

The singer and dancer Chita Rivera, whom Mr. Allen was involved with in the 1970s, said of him: “I would look up from wherever I was playing and see him sitting alone at a table, watching me. That’s so romantic, made me feel so good.

“And when we were dating, he wrote me the most beautiful love letters a girl could ever hope to have. He wrote me every single day when I was away doing ‘Chicago’ in Philadelphia. He’s a fabulous guy to have a crush on, only it was probably more than a crush.”

Told that he is said to have a way with women, Mr. Allen said, “I don’t think so.”

His signature restaurants are Joe Allen and Orso, and once he had seven of them, in New York, Los Angeles, Toronto, London and Paris. When Joe Allen opened in Paris in 1972, The International Herald Tribune proclaimed, “American Hamburger Has Come to Paris,” and ran a photo of him and his Labrador retriever, Alice, on the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.

About the same time, French Vogue ran a three-page spread on the restaurant. Orso in Los Angeles remained fabulous through the 1990s, an essential luncheon spot for celebrities like Mel Brooks and Johnny Depp.

Nonetheless, food does not appear to be a passion. “He doesn’t know how to boil water,” said Taylor Lumia, Mr. Allen’s son from his first marriage. (Theo Faber Lumia, who died in 2009, had remarried, and the couple adopted Mr. Lumia and his sister, Julie Lumia.)

Mr. Allen disputes the non-cooking allegation, although not passionately: “An exaggeration. I can cook eggs, but I certainly don’t find it enjoyable.”

He was lured into a restaurant career by neither cuisine nor a love of the business. “It was the glamour, I guess that’s what you could call it,” he said.

Born in Jackson Heights, Queens, he was 12 when his father, a middle manager for Mobil Oil, died. Married at 19, Mr. Allen was already divorced and out of the Army by the late 1950s, when he became such a habitué at P. J. Clarke’s that one of the owners said to him: “This is not going to end well. You owe me money. Come work for me.”

He liked the idea, especially since it meant working nights. “You could do nothing during the day except lie in bed, and you’re not doing anything wrong,” Mr. Allen said.

He was won over the day he showed up to begin his 5 p.m. shift, after the lunch crowd had gone and before the dinner crowd arrived. “I walked into the back and three people were in the room: Marilyn Monroe, Frank Costello and Hubert H. Humphrey. Each waiting for someone.”

Diplomatically, he added, “They weren’t together.”

For a few years, he ran a bar on the Upper East Side, then opened Joe Allen in 1965. His menu stressed familiarity, and his gastronomic ambition was to make sure that certain dishes were prepared well.

That’s still the same. The hamburger is thick, juicy and not overwhelmed by an oversize bun. “As you take the last bite of your hamburger,” he said, “the bun should disintegrate in your mouth.”

The restaurant has wide-ranging virtues, including a certain classiness that comes with white tablecloths and cloth napkins. Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton were regulars in the ’60s, and theater people still hang around, often using the tables as impromptu offices and holding informal meetings during slow hours.

Then there’s his gallery of Broadway fiascos. Mr. Allen has brought infamy to flops, lining the walls with framed posters of theatrical failures.

The first was “Kelly,” a 1965 musical inspired by a man who claimed to have jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge and survived. The show closed after opening night, a major disaster.

“Breakfast at Tiffany’s,” starring Mary Tyler Moore and Richard Chamberlain, was a debacle so profound that David Merrick called it his Bay of Pigs. The poster is among Mr. Allen’s favorites. Strolling around the dining room, you’ll find Bette Davis in “Miss Moffat,” Yul Brynner in “Home Sweet Homer,” Donald Sutherland in “Lolita.”

“I told him I’d kill him if I ever saw one of my posters on the wall,” Ms. Rivera said.

The restaurant remains New York’s premier theater district spot, busiest at lunch, before curtains rise and after the show, and dependent on a good theater season for good profits. “Whether we like it or not, we’re joined at the hip to theater,” Mr. Allen said. “The years the shows crash and burn, we don’t do well.”

The place turned 50 a year ago, although New Yorkers somehow missed the celebration. “So did I,” he said. “We had a lot of plans but decided the hell with it. Who cares?”

He has sold off or closed his out-of-town branches and is now the proprietor of three places, all on 46th Street: the original Joe Allen; Orso, serving Italian food; and Bar Centrale, an eccentric, dapper hideaway with a soundtrack that includes Jimmy Durante crooning “I’ll Be Seeing You.” The three are clustered in what he refers to as his “compound,” three adjoining brownstones that he owns. In the oldest of restaurant traditions, he lives above the store.

Restaurant Row, 46th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, on the fringe of Broadway, is conspicuously garish, with low-priced pre-theater restaurants and hawkers stalking passers-by.

His little realm remains classic, permanent, serious: The Joe Allen exterior is devoid of ornamentation. Bar Centrale’s front door is nearly invisible and Orso’s facade is subdued, though oddly Japanese in appearance.

He is 83 now, hobbled by back problems and surgically repaired but-never-quite-the-same torn quadriceps tendons. It’s another reason he sits. “I’m feeling old, is what I’m feeling,” he said.

He may drink a beer or a glass of wine, though not much anymore. He once gave up drinking for 14 years, which Ms. Allen said were his most productive, although he wasn’t fond of them. “I prefer a world with alcohol than without,” he said. “I don’t understand how people get through this world without drinking.”

Once he ran up to 40 miles a week, mostly through Central Park. Ms. Allen said he was a great dancer, and in his day, a natty dresser who shopped at Savile Row.

Almost all lifestyle details come courtesy of her and other family members. The restaurant business has no lack of loquacious owners, eager to promote their food or themselves. He is not among them.

Asked his role at his restaurants these days, he said: “I’m pretty much retired. They humor me and act like I have a job here, but I don’t do anything.”

Asked to explain what Chita Rivera saw in him, he said: “I really don’t know. I bore myself. Imagine what I do to other people.”

His success with women is not easily explained. On one of his first dates with Ms. Allen, he took her to his local gym, operated by Nicholas Kounovsky, who introduced European-style gymnastics to America.

“I was horrified, having to watch Joe and Roy Scheider hanging from parallel bars,” she said, recalling the date. “I barely knew how to put on my sneakers. He loved it and thought I would love it. I think I went home and cried.”

And yet, she said: “Not outwardly, but still he is one of the most romantic people I know. I have a stack of Valentine poems he sent me every year since I first met him. He still sends them. Every year.”

“D D is the love of his life,” said Ms. Lumia, his daughter. “I’ve never seen two people who don’t live together have such a great relationship.”

It keeps coming up, despite his persistent denials, that women adore him. Ms. Rivera and Ms. Allen see suggestions of Humphrey Bogart. “He’s a quiet, sexy man,” Ms. Rivera said, “and you can put ‘man’ in capital letters.”

Ms. Allen added: “When I look at ‘Casablanca,’ I see the same attitude. I feel he was influenced by Bogart’s style. He has a definite cynicism but he’s not mean — more like a wiseguy.”

Men have seen it, too, particularly the actor Ken Howard, a close friend who died in March. At the time Mr. Howard was president of SAG-Aftra, the screen actors’ union, which suggests that any comparison he made to a fabled movie star was done thoughtfully. “He really is ‘Casablanca,’” Mr. Howard said in an interview a few weeks before his death.

Mr. Lumia, his son, agreed. “I’m not the first to say this,” he said. “But it’s a little about resemblance, a little about the screen persona.”

Mr. Allen’s distinctive manner of pursuing relationships is best illustrated by his son, rather than by his romantic entanglements. From age 4 until 21, Mr. Lumia had no contact with his father. “I never saw him, never heard from him, not one peep,” he said matter-of-factly. “He had no desire to get in touch with me.”

His sister concurs, and said she thinks his total absence resulted mainly from her father’s belief that his former wife and her new husband wanted a life without him.

Then, one day, Mr. Allen was contacted by his brother-in-law, who asked if he would like to be reacquainted with his son. He said yes.

“I think this was in 1974 or 1975, about when he was opening a Joe Allen in Los Angeles,” Mr. Lumia said. “I’m in New Mexico, a starving student. I got a letter from him. There was a phone box on the corner near where I lived. I wrote him, said he should call the box at a specified time, and I’d be waiting.”

They arranged to meet in Los Angeles. “We had no idea what the other looked like, but there was immediate recognition,” Mr. Lumia said. “That’s how I got to meet him. The first thing he did was take me to a sporting goods store and buy me a pair of basketball shoes. Then we played one-on-one. I won. I was thankful for that and I think he was, too. It was a way of feeling each other out.”

They became friends, and eventually Mr. Lumia started working for his father, as did his sister. She became head chef at Orso in New York, and Mr. Lumia was the longtime manager of Orso in Los Angeles. But before that, the father-and-son relationship had to survive yet another misadventure.

Mr. Allen took a house in Amagansett, N.Y., one summer, and he found his son a job at a bar where Ms. Allen happened to be working as a waitress. She and the son started dating. They both moved in with Mr. Allen. Mr. Lumia left for school. His father started dating Ms. Allen.

“It took a lot of explaining, I’ll tell you that,” Mr. Allen said.

Mr. Lumia remembers being “somewhat confused, somewhat dismayed,” he said. “Why in God’s name, why this? But the truth was that I had left, was in Wyoming, and it was behind me. But it was sort of unseemly.”

Still, the friendship endured. “We get along tremendously,” Mr. Lumia said. “He’s been a terrific father in terms of mentoring me, and a terrific grandfather to my children. He’s just very guarded. To those of us who love him, it’s frustrating.”

His sister feels the same. “Joe’s an enigma,” Ms. Lumia said. “Everyone knows he’s loving and kind, but he cannot expose an emotional side. Even he knows it. It’s not a mystery.”

Mr. Howard, who said simply that he loved Mr. Allen, added the same caveat: “Joe always was and describes himself as impossible, not exactly reachable. I once told him something heartfelt and personal, very emotional. He looked at me and said, ‘That’s a sad tale.’”

Mr. Allen’s response to the nonstop analysis? “Not being forthcoming isn’t something I aspire to,” he said. “At some time, you’re just who you are.”

He had his loves — perhaps some of them women, although much of his passion appeared to be reserved for the champion New York Knicks of the early 1970s. He is decidedly sentimental when recalling Walt Frazier and Dave DeBusschere.

One last thing, about those Bogie comparisons. Mr. Allen said they began when he was 14, and decades later he was able to consult Lauren Bacall, who was married to Bogart from 1945 until his death in 1957. “I asked her, ‘Do you think there is any validity to this resemblance to your ex-husband?’”

Bacall never hesitated, saying: “Why would people have this idea? You’re nothing like him at all.”


