


FRONT PAGE

A picture caption on May 11 with the continuation of an article about the persistence of differing interpretations of the United States’ decision to detonate an atomic bomb over Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945 referred incorrectly to the cloud of smoke shown and misstated the timing of the picture, using information from The Associated Press. The smoke was the result of huge fires that broke out several hours after the bomb was detonated; it was not from a mushroom cloud, which appears immediately upon explosion. And the picture was taken several hours — not “about an hour” — after the explosion.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on May 6 about a concert by a Russian orchestra, the Mariinsky Theater Orchestra, in Palmyra, a Syrian city of ancient Roman ruins further damaged by the Islamic State during its occupation, misspelled the given name of one of the composers whose music was played and misstated one of the other orchestral titles of Valery Gergiev, artistic director of the Mariinsky. The composer was Johann Sebastian Bach, not Johan, and Mr. Gergiev is also the current music director of the Munich Symphony Orchestra, not its former principal conductor.

•

An article on Wednesday about an opinion by the European Court of Justice on the wearing of head scarves by Muslim women at work misstated the effect of decisions by a separate European court, the Court of Human Rights. Its decisions are binding on national governments, not merely advisory.

SPORTS

An article on May 20 about the possibility that the Preakness Stakes might leave Pimlico Race Course referred incorrectly to the history of the race there. While Pimlico has hosted most Preakness Stakes since the first one in 1873, it has not hosted the Preakness since 1873. (The race was held in New York in 1890 and from 1894 to 1908.)

•

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions last Thursday about the Yankees’ 8-4 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays referred incorrectly in some copies to the record of the losing pitcher, Ivan Nova. The loss to the Blue Jays was his second of the season, not his first.

•

The On Tennis column last Thursday, about Andy Murray’s five-set victory over Mathias Bourgue in the second round of the French Open, misidentified the person whose best and favorite surface is clay and “skidded into wide forehands and repeatedly produced something special.” He is Bourgue — not Olivier Malcor, his coach.

THE ARTS

An article on Tuesday about a debate on safety at rap concerts after a shooting last week before a concert in Manhattan by the rapper T.I. misidentified the city where the rapper Fat Trel, who was featured at a concert in Manhattan in 2013 where four people were shot, is based. It is Washington, not Atlanta.

WEEKEND

A classical music entry in the Listings pages on Friday about a production of the opera “Le Comte Ory” by LoftOpera, at the Muse in Brooklyn, misidentified the work’s composer. He was Gioachino Rossini, not Gaetano Donizetti.

THURSDAY STYLES

An article last Thursday about events taking place in the Hamptons this summer misspelled part of the name of the Swedish pop group tentatively scheduled to appear at the Surf Lodge in Montauk. It is Miike Snow, not Mike Snow. And because of an editing error, the article also misstated the given name of one of the party promoters holding Champagne brunches at Kozu, a Japanese restaurant in Southampton. He is Daniel Koch, not David.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


