


EVERYONE BRAVE IS FORGIVEN By Chris Cleave 424 pp. Simon & Schuster, $26.99.

Inspired by the courtship of his own grandparents, Cleave’s foray into historical fiction is both grand and intimate. The novel’s ability to stay small and quiet against the raging tableau of war is what also makes it glorious.

Mary North, a pampered socialite, is assigned a teaching job just as London’s children are being evacuated — all the children, that is, except those who happen to be disabled, mentally impaired or black. As Mary sees to her charges in the dusty, mostly empty rooms of the Hawley Street School, she drifts into a romance with Tom Shaw, its earnest young administrator, then falls deeply in love with Tom’s former roommate, Alistair Heath, a soldier who will soon be sent to the ­isolated island of Malta.

Cleave crafts an absorbing account of survival, racism, classism, love and pain, and the scars left by all of them. He writes of the men who don’t come back, the buildings flattened to rubble, the hope that sinks into the Thames. That’s not to say the novel is all ash gray. Hardly. The characters’ brave concord is both inspiring and heart-rending, and Cleave’s prose is imbued with a Dickensian flair, deploying brilliant metaphors (“People spoke in whispers, as if the war were listening”) and crackling dialogue. The correspondence between Mary and Alistair is worthy of Noël Coward. Were the British all this witty as the Luftwaffe dropped its bombs? Probably not. But who cares? If everyone brave is forgiven, then we can surely forgive Chris Cleave.

THE GIRL FROM THE PARADISE BALLROOM By Alison Love 321 pp. Broadway, paper, $16.

This British author’s American debut is a soapy romantic spin through wartime London. The novel opens in 1937 as Olivia, a calculating young dance-hall hostess, and a Panglossian Italian singer named Antonio have a most decidedly uncute “meet cute.” Interestingly, he’s the ingénue here.

Amid a melodramatic plot worthy of Douglas Sirk, Olivia, seeking security, weds Bernard, a lovestruck toady with a savior complex, while Antonio suffers the moods of his wife, Danila, a harpy who has fallen under the spell of his ne’er-do-well Fascist brother. Darting through Olivia and Antonio’s star-crossed tale, the supporting players prove a plucky, engaging lot, adding to the story’s energy and resonance — none more so than Antonio’s obstinate sister, Filomena, who emerges from the book’s shadows to become its moral compass.

A surprising plot twist sends the action in a different but still involving direction, even if things do get a tad silly, with characters even coming back from the dead as if this were a British riff on “Days of Our Lives,” finally capitulating to treacle with an eye-roll-inducing ending. Still, the story compels with its vivid cast of flawed characters, all fighting for their own kinds of survival with their own kinds of weapons. Especially Olivia, who mollifies her grumpy husband with a seductive tango after they quarrel: “It’s going to be all right, thought Olivia, as triumph turned her limbs to jelly. Deep down, though, she felt the icy whisper of disdain, that her husband should fall for something so obvious.”

LILAC GIRLS By Martha Hall Kelly 487 pp. Ballantine, $26.

The female prisoners who underwent horrific surgical experiments at the Ravensbrück concentration camp became known as “the Rabbits.” In her first novel, Kelly rotates portraits of two real-life women involved in this story (an American named Caroline Ferriday, who led a crusade on behalf of the survivors, and Herta Oberheuser, the Nazi surgeon who performed the gruesome operations) with that of a fictional Polish woman, Kasia, loosely based on two of the actual Rabbits.

Although Kelly’s novel is clearly the result of exhaustive research, the deficiency in “Lilac Girls” rests, unfortunately, with its characters. Caroline comes off as a dilettante, and Kasia starts out as something of a Joan of Arc, a passionate if naïve operative in the Polish resistance whose feelings of guilt when she takes down her entire family after a botched assignment aren’t plumbed in any meaningful way. Herta, arriving at Ravensbrück oblivious to its real purpose, is aghast when she learns its secret. But the next time we see her, she’s encased in ice: heartless, cruel, infuriating. What happened? Like everyone else, she’s a stereotype with no narrative force of her own.

Postwar, things only get worse. Caroline and Kasia devolve into shrill, selfish brats (it takes some doing to make a concentration camp survivor appear an ingrate), and Herta mercifully disappears from the story — though, alas, not for good. “Lilac Girls” is an earnest attempt to tell the Rabbits’ story, but it sinks ­under the weight of its own ambition.

TIGHTROPE By Simon Mawer 500 pp. Other Press, paper, $15.95.

In this sequel to Mawer’s 2012 novel “Trapeze,” a young, glamorous British spy named Marian Sutro returns to postwar England after parachuting behind enemy lines and being captured by the Nazis. Diffident and depressed, she marries a bland former airman and accepts a clerical job at a vaguely defined French-English cultural organization, even as she engages in clandestine affairs to keep her life interesting. Drifting back into the espionage game to save her homosexual brother from ruin, she finds herself entangled with a Russian spy she persuades to become a double agent. And then he disappears.

Marian is an interesting heroine — Merle Oberon meets Mata Hari — but the book she’s trapped in can’t seem to get going, or at least get going anywhere worthwhile. A successful espionage fable needs to burrow deep beneath the masks these spies wear, even in their private lives (think of le Carré’s enigmatic George Smiley), but Marian remains a tabula rasa, aloof and unknowable.

There’s also a structural problem: The story is bloated, a hundred pages too long, and told through an omniscient narrator until a first-person voice (a man who had a boyhood crush on Marian) pops up. He leaves, he’s back, a storytelling jack-in-the-box. It’s a distracting and ill-considered device. And when Marian tries to play the British and the Russians against each other, Mawer’s climax simply deflates. As Marian herself declares, it’s “all irrelevant — just a dusty piece of history.”


