


Roger Federer of Switzerland squandered two match points Saturday and lost to Dominic Thiem of Austria, 3-6, 7-6 (7), 6-4, in a rain-interrupted Mercedes Cup semifinal in Stuttgart, Germany.

Thiem beat Federer in the third round of the Italian Open before Federer took a month off to deal with a back injury. That win was on clay, while Saturday’s came on grass, Federer’s favorite surface.

“I can’t believe that I beat him on grass,” said Thiem, who has little experience on the surface. Federer is a seven-time Wimbledon champion.

Thiem will play seventh-seeded Philipp Kohlschreiber of Germany for the title. Kohlschreiber defeated Juan Martín del Potro of Argentina, 6-3, 6-4.

Jake Arrieta allowed four hits in seven strong innings and, backed by four home runs, led the visiting Chicago Cubs in an 8-2 rout of the Atlanta Braves.

Arrieta (10-1) allowed two runs after sustaining his first loss of the season last Sunday. He also had two hits as the Cubs’ offense rolled.

Miguel Montero hit a three-run homer, Kris Bryant hit a two-run shot, and Jason Heyward and Anthony Rizzo also hit home runs.

BOGAERTS PACES RED SOX Xander Bogaerts tacked four more hits, including a two-run homer, onto his major-league-leading total, bringing it to 92, as the Boston Red Sox broke away late to beat the Minnesota Twins, 15-4, at Target Field. Bogaerts also doubled, scored four runs and drove in three.

ROYALS HALT SKID Cheslor Cuthbert hit two solo home runs, Danny Duffy pitched six shutout innings, and Kansas City ended an eight-game losing streak, beating the White Sox, 4-1, in Chicago.

Daniel Berger shot a one-under-par 69 on a hot, sticky day at the FedEx St. Jude Classic, giving him a three-stroke lead over Phil Mickelson, Steve Stricker and D. A. Points in Memphis.

Berger, the 2014-15 rookie of the year, who had led after a PGA Tour round only once before this event, in 2014, has now led in consecutive rounds as he looks for his first tour victory. Berger carded four birdies, a bogey and a double bogey to reach 10-under 201.

Mickelson (68), Stricker (66) and Points (64) were at seven under.

Berger hit 13 of 18 greens, with six straight pars at one point, and finished the day with the same three-stroke lead he held in the second round.

KO’S ADVANTAGE DWINDLES Top-ranked Lydia Ko bogeyed the 18th hole as her lead shrank to one stroke heading into the final round of the KPMG Women’s P.G.A. Championship in Sammamish, Wash.

Seeking her third straight major title, Ko shot a one-under-par 70 to reach two under. She won the Evian Championship in September in France for her first major title and took the ANA Inspiration in April in California.

Brittany Lincicome and Gerina Piller were tied for second. They each shot a 71, with Lincicome also bogeying the 18th.

LANGER LEADS SENIORS EVENT Bernhard Langer was all alone under par at the Senior Players Championship in Flourtown, Pa.

Langer, a 58-year-old German, was in position to win the tournament for the third straight year, sitting at two-under 208 for a three-stroke lead on Jay Don Blake with one round remaining.

SOUTH AFRICAN ON TOP IN AUSTRIA Zander Lombard of South Africa squandered an early three-stroke advantage because of a triple bogey but still led Wu Ashun of China by one after the third round of the European Tour’s Lyoness Open in Atzenbrugg, Austria.

Daniel Suarez became the first Mexican-born driver to win a Nascar national race, passing Kyle Busch at the Menards 250, an Xfinity Series race in Brooklyn, Mich.

Suarez, 24, moved to the United States five years ago.

Busch led 88 of the 125 laps but could not stay ahead of Suarez for the final two.

HAMILTON CLAIMS POLE POSITION Lewis Hamilton, the defending champion, earned the pole position for Formula One’s Canadian Grand Prix in Montreal for a fifth time, and for the second year in a row.

Hamilton turned in the fastest lap of qualifying, completing the 2.71-mile Circuit Gilles Villeneuve in 1 minute 12.812 seconds. That was 1.5 seconds faster than his qualifying time last year.

Chris Froome of Britain held the overall lead going into the final day of the Critérium du Dauphiné in France, while the French rider Thibaut Pinot won the sixth stage.

Pinot, 26, snatched the stage win ahead of his countryman Romain Bardet, 25, after an 88-mile ride from La Rochette to Méribel in the French Alps.

(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)

Sugar Rodgers scored 22 points, and Tina Charles added 21 to help the visiting Liberty beat the San Antonio Stars, 90-75.

The Liberty (5-4) rebounded from their worst loss of the season on Tuesday against Los Angeles to beat an overmatched Stars squad. San Antonio lost its fourth in a row and fell to 1-7.


