


ROME — Italy’s anti-establishment Five Star Movement moved one step closer to governing Rome on Monday, when returns released from nationwide municipal elections over the weekend took its candidate to a runoff vote in two weeks.

A victory for the movement would be a blow to the center-left government of Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, whose Democratic Party candidates struggled in the first round of voting in many major Italian cities.

The Five Star Movement candidates did particularly well in Rome, where Virginia Raggi received 35.3 percent of the vote, and in Turin, where Chiara Appendino garnered 31 percent. In Rome, Roberto Giachetti, the Democratic Party candidate, reached only 25 percent.

“We know that Virginia Raggi holds the pink shirt,” Mr. Renzi said in a televised news conference on Monday, using a cycling metaphor for a race’s leader. “We still hope Giachetti is going to be successful in his endeavor.”

The Five Star Movement also made large gains in Rome’s suburbs. Ms. Raggi, a 37-year-old lawyer, has promised to fight corruption and bring back Rome’s splendor a year after a wide-reaching scandal exposed criminal infiltration in city bidding contracts.

“We are facing a historic moment,” Ms. Raggi said on Monday. “The Romans are ready to turn the page, and I am ready to govern this city and to restore Rome to the splendor and beauty that it deserves.”

The Democratic Party did not win, but made it to the runoffs in Milan, Turin and Bologna. In Milan, the center-left candidate, Giuseppe Sala, received 42 percent of the vote, slightly more than his center-right opponent, Stefano Parisi.

In Turin, the Democratic Party candidate, former Mayor Piero Fassino, won 42 percent of the vote and will face Ms. Appendino in the second round. In Bologna, another traditional bastion of the center-left, the Democratic Party-backed candidate, Virginio Merola, got around 40 percent. He will face a center-right candidate, Lucia Borgonzoni, in the runoff.

The center-left party gained little traction in Naples, where the candidate supported by Mr. Renzi, Valeria Valente, reached only 21 percent. Former Mayor Luigi de Magistris, Mr. Renzi’s independent opponent, will face a runoff against a center-right candidate.

“We are not happy,” Mr. Renzi said. “We had wanted to do better, especially in Naples.”

Yet Mr. Renzi said the Democratic Party’s outcome was not linked to his government’s stability, or to a national referendum in October on proposed constitutional changes that he hopes will bring greater stability and clarity to voting in the country.

“I do not believe there is a correlation between the local election and the referendum,” Mr. Renzi said, arguing that even those who had chosen a protest vote at the local level would vote in favor of the constitutional changes.

Mr. Renzi has pledged to step down if voters do not approve the constitutional overhaul.

Giovanni Orsina, a professor of contemporary history at LUISS University in Rome, said the results reflected the same discontent seen in Austria’s recent presidential election, in which a far-right candidate narrowly lost.

“Of course, this is only a preliminary result, and the P.D. did not go too badly,” he said, using the Italian abbreviation for the Democratic Party. “But the group of its adversaries has shown to be very strong.”

“We now have to see if the discontent is reined in in the runoff or not,” Mr. Orsina said.


