


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this article, Barry Meier, an investigative reporter at The Times, describes the almost decade-long journey that led to his latest book, “Missing Man: The American Spy Who Vanished in Iran.” The book tells the story of Robert A. Levinson, a former F.B.I. agent turned C.I.A. consultant who disappeared in Iran in 2007.

In late 2007, I stumbled across a newspaper article that would alter the course of my work and my life.

The article, which appeared in the Financial Times, was shot through with mystery. It reported that Robert Levinson, a former F.B.I. agent turned private investigator, had disappeared on an Iranian island while investigating cigarette counterfeiting on behalf of a big tobacco company. What grabbed my attention was the disclosure that the investigator had vanished while meeting another American in Iran, a murderer who had fled the United States in 1980 after assassinating a former aide to the Shah of Iran outside his home near Washington, D.C.

The story was not only intriguing but offered the prospect of getting me to Dubai and Iran, places I had never visited. Back in the late 1990s, I had covered the lawsuits state officials were then bringing against Big Tobacco and had gotten to know people who investigated cigarette counterfeiting and smuggling. The way I saw it, the Levinson case could provide a window into a bigger piece about the international trade in counterfeit cigarettes, a hidden industry in which both China and North Korea are major players.

Soon, however, things started to get strange. Every private investigator with whom I spoke told me they would never have sent a white, ex-F.B.I. agent with a Jewish last name to Iran; they would have used an Iranian-born operative who spoke Farsi. I was tempted to forget the whole idea when another journalist called and told me that he had heard I was poking around the Levinson case. He said he didn’t think there was much there but offered to put me in contact with one of Mr. Levinson’s friends, a retired television producer named Ira Silverman.

Soon afterward, I met with Ira and a former federal prosecutor, David McGee, who was also close to Bob, as Mr. Levinson’s friends called him. They told me that the ex-agent had a part-time consulting contract with the C.I.A. They were also certain he had gone to Iran on an approved mission to try and develop the American assassin living there as a C.I.A. source. In 2002, Ira had written a profile for The New Yorker of that man, Dawud Salahuddin, and he had arranged for Bob to meet Dawud on an Iranian island called Kish in the Persian Gulf. It was there that Bob had vanished.

At the time of our first meeting, some seven months had passed since Bob’s disappearance. The C.I.A. had yet to say a single word about him to his wife, Christine, who was naturally frantic to find him. Dave and Ira were also dismayed by the F.B.I.’s seeming lack of interest in the case and hoped that inquiries from a reporter at a publication such as The New York Times might force the government into action.

To be honest, I probably wasn’t their best choice. I had never covered the C.I.A. or the F.B.I.; I’d spent much of my career at The Times covering the medical industry and public health issues. But I told Dave and Ira that I would be willing to review his files and records. So, after traveling to Florida to get permission from Bob’s wife, Christine, I flew down to Dave McGee’s law firm in Pensacola, Fla., where a journalistic fantasy awaited.

On a desk in a conference room sat ten cardboard boxes crammed with files that were a mix of Bob’s work for the C.I.A. and for corporate clients. Every folder was a fragment from a little-glimpsed shadow world where information serves as currency and the lines between the “good” guys and the “bad” guys are often blurry. One file recounted, for example, how a big donor to Hillary Clinton’s New York Senate campaign was looking to get his prison time on a fraud charge reduced in exchange for information about the leader of Hezbollah, the Lebanese terror group. In another file, an emissary offered the services of the president of Kazakhstan as an informant for the United States government if the Justice Department unfroze the politician’s Swiss bank account, which was allegedly stuffed with bribes paid to him by multinational companies. Meanwhile, Dave’s paralegal, Sonya Dobbs, had figured out the passwords to Bob’s email accounts and was printing out hundreds of messages, including many from the investigator’s handler at an analytical unit inside the C.I.A.

I had planned to spend two days in Pensacola. When I finally left — nearly a week later — my head was spinning. I had gotten a glimpse into Bob’s life, and it was clear to me that C.I.A. analysts had encouraged him to collect intelligence about Iran, a country about which he knew little. There was nothing to show that they had ordered him to go there or even knew beforehand that he had decided to take that risk. Still, there were tantalizing clues. For example, in a memo written not long before his disappearance on Kish Island, he told his C.I.A. handlers that he planned to meet in Dubai or “on an island nearby” with a source who had information about a corrupt Iranian leader.

I spent months reconstructing Bob’s path to Kish and was stunned and dismayed to learn that many of the people I spoke with hadn’t been contacted by the F.B.I. As a condition of reviewing Bob’s files, I had also promised his wife and Dave not to do anything to jeopardize his safety. I liked to flatter myself by thinking that my reporting about medical products, like a flawed heart device, helped people. Now I felt that one wrong step or one inadvertent remark could bring serious harm to someone.

Government officials continued to insist that Bob had gone to Kish to investigate cigarette counterfeiting. As journalists, we instinctively want to tell the truth. But the tiny circle of people at The Times who knew the truth about Bob agreed that identifying him as a C.I.A. consultant could seal his fate or complicate efforts to free him. As a result, we did not challenge the government’s cover story or report on certain events related to his case about which we became aware, such as a secret 2008 internal C.I.A. investigation that led the ouster of three agency analysts, including Bob’s handler.

By then, an international manhunt for the missing man had begun, and some of those recruited by Bob’s friends or the F.B.I. — a collection of colorful characters that included arms dealers, Russian oligarchs and con men — also entered my life. Some of my editors were also losing patience with my obsession over a story that couldn’t be published; they started suggesting that it might be wise for me to find other outlets for my energies. I began casting around for medical stories — and found an important one.

By late 2010, three years had passed without a single shred of evidence that Bob Levinson was still alive or any clues as to who was holding him. One Saturday that fall, I told my wife that the former agent was probably dead, and it was time to talk with my editors about running our story. That same evening, I received a copy of an email that had been sent to Christine, Bob’s wife. Attached to it was a video showing her husband sitting in a stark cell and pleading for the American government to help him after three years in captivity. When it came to espionage and hostage-taking, I learned, one could not assume anything.

In the years that followed, I tried my best to balance the demands of my job with my reporting on Bob’s case. Every day, I reached out to sources to monitor any and all developments. I also followed the heart-wrenching efforts by Christine and her seven children to learn what had happened to their husband and father.

Over time, other reporters also learned about Bob’s role at the C.I.A. There were several instances when my editors and I thought that relationship would come to light and prepared to pull the trigger on our account. Then, in December 2013, The Associated Press, which had been sitting on its story about Bob’s work for the C.I.A. for three years, disclosed his agency ties. The following day, The Times released my account.

I had known early on that I had wanted to write a book about Bob’s case. It is a remarkable and tragic tale rife with indelible characters. There were many days when I thought it would be a fictional spy novel, since Bob’s secret life might never come to light. When it did, my nearly decade-long journey as a keeper of those secrets ended — and I was finally free to write “Missing Man.”


