


I know someone who knows someone who slept naked with James Baldwin. My best friend Cate grew up hearing stories about “Jimmy,” her mother’s cuddle buddy who’d occasionally drop by the house. In this way, I’ve always felt that Cate was introduced to the literary world before she could even read. And it didn’t just come from her mother. Her father used to get hammered with Norman Mailer.

To be clear, there is nothing of the debutante in Cate. Her family lived in a modest Massachusetts fishing town; her mother was a poet and professor who knew Baldwin from graduate school. Her father was in the Coast Guard and would run into Mailer in Provincetown. But she was given something precious early in life — something I hold responsible for her staunch belief in herself as an artist: a literary inheritance.

There are, of course, writers like Nabokov who are born into a literary lineage. But a birthright of intellectual and aesthetic training can be handed down even in the face of deep disadvantage. I’ve heard Andre Dubus III, who spent a scrappy and violent youth in mill towns along the Merrimack River, speak fondly of the barroom brawlers he regards as his role models, but also of the extraordinary (if distant) father he had in Andre Dubus, who counted Kurt Vonnegut and John Irving among his closest friends. Mary Karr has documented the chaos of her childhood in her memoirs — how her mother tried to stab her with a butcher knife, how her father had to pay down his bill at the pharmacy in $5 installments, how lean times meant squirrel on the dinner table. But their home was also filled with books and opera. In an interview with the Book Review, she said that discovering writers like Shakespeare and Langston Hughes in childhood “eased a prickly reality.”

For other writers, cultural inheritance comes formally, through schooling. James Baldwin was mentored by Countee Cullen, who taught him in middle school. George Saunders, who worked for his family’s fast-food franchise, Chicken Unlimited, in his youth and went on to study engineering, got his literary training only when he enrolled in Syracuse’s M.F.A. program. As recently as 2013 I heard him speak about the urgency he feels to “catch up” to his fellow writers.

Although there were a great many things to be thankful for in my childhood, and my parents gave me everything they could, there was no literary inheritance to speak of. My father was a Greek immigrant to America, a welder who came to own his own business. I am among the first in my family to graduate from college. As a result, I’ve often felt myself left behind — untutored, fraudulent. But the truth is that anyone who makes a life of writing eventually finds her inheritance of culture. Mine just came a little later, like Saunders’s, through that great equalizer, education.

I have been wondering, recently, about how many other writers share my story. We’re reluctant to out ourselves because what we’d be revealing is our lack of refinement, our own ignorance. (I was deep into my 20s before I fully understood the cultural importance of The New Yorker.)

But I see my experience as an immigrant into the world of letters as a blessing. Being an outsider is the origin of my imagination; it gives me the constant consciousness that my perspective is only one of many and that there are myriad ways of being in the world. It grants me the gift of being attuned to the voices in the room, as well as all of those shut out of it.

For nearly 15 years, I’ve worked with high school students who are low-income, first generation to college. While their more privileged peers grew up being dragged to museums and casually absorbing the names of great writers, my students are forced to play a frantic game of catch-up. They have to ingest entire bodies of knowledge in only a few years — to say nothing of overcoming a plethora of inheritances I am fortunate to know nothing about: racism, systemic oppression, poverty, failing schools.

I don’t mean to suggest that having a parent who passes down stories about James Baldwin or reads aloud from Roald Dahl or Dickens guarantees inevitable success, literary or otherwise. Only that these experiences matter. There is something important in hearing the names of writers in your parents’ mouths, in having certain books in your home, in encountering art in a shared, intimate way that conditions you to make art yourself. Without this early immersion, the notion of becoming an artist might be unfathomable because making art is so audacious.

I still have to convince myself that a life of writing is worthy and that I am worthy of it. My grandfather farmed grapes and olives. My parents and sisters wake up at 4 in the morning to get to their jobs. I was raised to understand work as having direct and immediate impact, and the truth about writing is that it takes decades, sometimes longer, before you can collect your harvest. A life of writing is and is not a privilege; it is and is not a luxury to do this work in the darkness. Lately, I have been trying to tell myself that an honest day’s work for me means achieving honesty on the page, in planting something that may in time offer nourishment to someone, perhaps even a fellow immigrant.


