


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Emily Bazelon, a staff writer at The Times Magazine, recounts how she and the photo editor Stacey Baker convinced more than three dozen sex workers to “come out from underground” and pose for the camera.

When Jake Silverstein, the editor of The New York Times Magazine, and Kathy Ryan, the magazine’s director of photography, proposed a cover image showing dozens of sex workers for my article on the debate over whether prostitution should be a crime, I was daunted. I had been reporting the article for months and I’d spoken to lots of people who do sex work (for a range of reasons: some out of economic duress and others as a matter of true choice). They were suspicious of the media, and I couldn’t blame them. Often, news media coverage of prostitution is sensationalized or one-dimensional, or plain disrespectful. It’s hard for people who have been portrayed in those ways to trust us, and that includes The Times. Also, sex work is against the law. So we were asking people to take a legal risk — to come out from underground.

We got lucky. The sex worker who helped me begin my reporting for this article is a dominatrix in Seattle who goes by the name Mistress Matisse. She got excited about the possibility of a photo spread that portrayed sex workers as their ordinary, everyday selves — a concept that, we hoped, would be the opposite of exploitation. She connected us to a friend of hers, Savannah Sly (also her professional name), who is the president of the Sex Workers Outreach Project USA and a born organizer.

SWOP was hosting a four-day festival in Seattle. So, working with Stacey Baker, the unflappable photo editor on this project, Savannah helped us wrangle more than two dozen sex workers into a photo studio. Holly Andres, our equally unflappable photographer, took group shots and portraits. We told people they didn’t have to show their faces. They could turn their backs or wear masks. And we asked them to wear the clothes they would wear to the grocery store — to just be themselves.

By many accounts, it was a fun and rewarding day. (I wasn’t there; now I can’t believe I missed it.) But we wanted more photos, and we especially wanted to make sure to convey the diversity of sex workers in terms of race, ethnicity and sexual identity. So Savannah helped us put out a call in New York City.

Here we hit a bump: The activist leader I had previously been in touch with in New York had dropped out of sight, and the leaders taking her place didn’t know us and didn’t have reason to trust us. To make matters worse, I was going on vacation the week of the planned photo shoot and would not be there. A couple of the leaders pushed back: Why did we want to take pictures of people without hearing their stories? If we wanted diversity, why wouldn’t I be there to interview people? Were we treating minorities and trans people as faces to show rather than as full human beings?

Those were legitimate questions. Stacey and I felt terrible. So we changed our plans. We postponed the New York photo shoot. I came back from vacation and spent an hour and a half in the Times cafeteria explaining the story to two activists, Janet Duran and Anna Saini, and hearing their stories, about why they had gotten into sex work, how it had affected their lives and how they felt about the legal issues surrounding it. They got interested in the article and, in the end, helped us recruit a dozen people for a very successful New York photo shoot. I included comments from Ms. Saini and others I interviewed at the shoot in my piece. And we shot five videos in which people who gathered that day spoke for themselves.

With Savannah’s help, Stacey followed up with a photo shoot in San Francisco. And with the help of Monica Jones, a transgender activist in Arizona, we did a shoot there as well. When the article went online on Friday, readers, sex workers among them, shared it on social media from all over the country, and all over the world. One of my favorite Twitter posts reads, “In many ways the thing I love most is the picture. It’s never how we are shown but it’s how we are.”


