


A man in the Bronx was fatally shot by New York City police officers early Sunday after he refused to drop a gun he was carrying and pointed it at the officers, the authorities said.

The police arrived just before 2 a.m. at the Soundview Houses, a New York City Housing Authority complex in the South Bronx, after receiving 911 calls reporting gunfire, the authorities said. The officers encountered the man, 25, holding the gun outside a building on the corner of Randall and Rosedale Avenues, the police said.

The man, whose name was not released, walked toward the officers with the gun raised, Assistant Chief Larry W. Nikunen, the police commander for the Bronx, told reporters on Sunday. “He pointed the gun at them on two separate times,” Chief Nikunen said.

The officers, who were in uniform and in plain clothes, ordered the man to drop the weapon, and he did not comply, the police said. Three of the officers opened fire; 31 shots were fired, the police said, and the man was struck several times.

The man was taken to Jacobi Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead. No officers were injured.

A 9-millimeter handgun was recovered by the police at the scene, and Chief Nikunen said investigators had reviewed surveillance-camera footage that appeared to support the officers’ account of the confrontation.

Later on Sunday, the site of the shooting remained cordoned off with crime-scene tape as investigators surveyed the scene and several officers guarded the entrance to one of the buildings, allowing only its residents to go inside.

Candles had already been placed on the sidewalk near the corner of Randall and Rosedale Avenues, with “Rest in Peace” and other messages written on them. They sat just a few yards from a larger cluster of candles, stuffed animals and tequila bottles that served as a memorial for someone else.

The shooting had cast a pall over Father’s Day for some in the complex. Anita Oselmoe, who has lived in the Soundview Houses for five years, said people did not feel “like doing anything or going anywhere anymore.”

And many were outraged, saying that the spray of gunfire directed at the man was an overreaction. “They don’t have no business shooting that baby no 31 times,” Ethel Massay, who has lived in the complex for 57 years, said as she walked to the grocery store.

Rosie Chisolm, who has lived in the complex for two decades, was sitting on a bench in the courtyard. “Shoot him in the leg or something,” she said. “They shooting to kill.”

Some residents said they first heard a couple of shots that the man had fired, which prompted the 911 calls and were, according to the authorities, detected by the Police Department’s ShotSpotter system, which sent the officers to the location as well. Minutes later, the residents heard more shots; this time, it was the police.

“I woke up and touched my husband’s chest,” Violet Levis, 48, said, clutching a balloon for her husband that said “I Love You.” “I looked out the window, and I saw about four or five cops.”

Ms. Oselmoe was in her apartment when the shooting happened. “People were running and ducking for cover,” she said. “My heart was beating so fast.” And hours later, she remained angry. “They don’t have no respect for us,” Ms. Oselmoe said of the police. “This is no Father’s Day gift.”


