


PARIS — When the French Open was finished, the sun finally came out, which seemed a most inappropriate punctuation mark for the cold and clammy tournament that had just ended.

Unless, that is, you were Novak Djokovic.

He has been waiting 12 years to slide out of others’ shadows and find the light at Roland Garros and, after Sunday, it can no longer be argued that he is the best men’s clay-court player never to win the French Open.

Djokovic, a 29-year-old from Serbia, stared down the past and all the salt, vinegar and baseline brilliance that Andy Murray could muster to finally win the title, 3-6, 6-1, 6-2, 6-4.

“It’s a very special day, perhaps the biggest moment of my career,” Djokovic said in French to the tough-to-conquer Parisian crowd that has gradually come to embrace him and his quest.

The victory made Djokovic the eighth man to complete the tennis career Grand Slam. More remarkably, he became the third man after Don Budge in 1938 and Rod Laver in 1962 and 1969 to hold all four of the major singles titles at the same time. Call it a Djoker Slam in this instance.

“This is his day today,” said Murray, the No. 2 seed from Britain, in a gracious postmatch speech. “What he’s achieved in the last 12 months is phenomenal. Winning all four of the Grand Slams in one year is an amazing achievement. It’s something that is so rare in tennis. You know it’s not happened for an extremely long time, and it’s going to take a long time for it to happen again. Everyone here who came to watch is extremely lucky to see it.”

Murray then made it clear that he was not so delighted to have been the foil, but that he had the wider view in mind. “I’m proud to have been part of it today,” he said.

Though Djokovic has won the four major tournaments in the last 12 months, he has not won them all in the same calendar year, which is what defines the true Grand Slam. But he is now in position to chase one of the ultimate prizes in international sports, just as Serena Williams did last year before faltering within sight of the finish line in the semifinals of the United States Open.

“I don’t want to sound arrogant, but I really think everything is achievable in life,” Djokovic said.

If he could win Wimbledon and the United States Open this year and also win the singles title at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro in August, he would give new meaning to his childhood coach Jelena Gencic’s vision of his potential by completing the so-called Golden Slam. (Gencic, now deceased, told Djokovic’s parents that Djokovic was a “golden child.”)

He has grown up to be quite a champion; an articulate one, too. Few tennis players have better described their state of mind during a breakthrough victory than Djokovic did on Sunday.

After wresting control of the match and the baseline from Murray early in the second set, he ended up serving for the title first at 5-2 in the fourth. He was broken and then got a second chance to serve for it at 5-4. From 40-15, he failed to convert on two championship points. But at deuce, Djokovic won the next exchange by attacking and coming forward to hit a swing volley winner. He then won the final point when Murray’s backhand landed in the net to conclude a 20-stroke rally that was an apt reflection of the physical demands Murray and Djokovic, with their similar gifts and game styles, impose on each other.

Djokovic said he felt his body was “on autopilot” during that final rally.

“I think between 5-2 and 5-4 and actually closing out the match, a lot has happened in my mind and in my soul,” Djokovic said. “Just being filled with joy, kind of serving for a match, being like overwhelmed with positive emotions and sensations. And then, you know, getting myself to the opposite side where I’m tense and nervous, whether or not I can close it out. But I guess in order for me to win this trophy, I had to go through that. To achieve big things in life, when you do that, you need to push yourself above the limit.”

Djokovic, who beat Murray to win the Australian Open and the French Open this year, is now the first man to complete the first two legs of the Grand Slam since Jim Courier in 1992. This was also Djokovic’s 12th Grand Slam singles title, tying him with Roy Emerson for fourth on the career list and putting him in increasingly close range of his rivals Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal.

Federer has the men’s record with 17 major singles titles; Nadal and Pete Sampras are next with 14. But Djokovic is still at the peak of his powers and still paying close attention to the details — diet, recovery, flexibility — that might help him stay at the summit longer than usual.

“In the beginning, I was not glad to be part of their era,” he said of Federer and Nadal. “Later on I realized that everything happens for a reason. You’re put in this position with a purpose, a purpose to learn and grow and evolve.”

Djokovic is quite a conundrum for the opposition with his fast-twitch returns, improved serve and elastic, tight-to-the-baseline groundstrokes. He is very quick laterally and increasingly fast and effective coming forward as he proved repeatedly Sunday against Murray: making clutch volleys and responding to fine drop shots with acute and decisive angles.

To reduce it to the essential, he can make a tennis court feel claustrophobic to the opposition.

He had his awkward moments in this clay-court season, losing to Jiri Vesely in his opening match in Monte Carlo. He had his flashes of frustration: pushing away the chair umpire Carlos Bernardes’s arm while examining a ball mark in Rome and throwing his racket during his quarterfinal match at Roland Garros and narrowly missing a linesman.

He also had to deal with the fallout of an unusually rainy Paris spring and was forced to play singles on four straight days before getting a break on Saturday to prepare for the final. Although Murray, who came through the bottom half of the draw, did not have to adjust to the same scheduling constraints, he had played quite a bit more tennis entering Sunday: 17 hours 50 minutes to Djokovic’s 12:54.

Trumping Djokovic at this stage requires all the resources and resolve an opponent can muster. And though the moody Murray is a great tennis player, Djokovic is one of the greatest ever to play the game.

Both 29 and born a week apart, Djokovic and Murray have been rivals since their European junior days. Murray has had his moments: beating Djokovic to win the United States Open and, above all, Wimbledon, where Murray put an end to a 77-year drought for British men in singles.

But he could not find a way to end Britain’s 81-year men’s drought at Roland Garros even though he had beaten a weary Djokovic in straight sets on red clay last month to win the Masters 1000 event in Rome.

Djokovic leads their head-to-head series, 24-10, and holds an 8-2 edge in the majors. But amid all the statistical updates and Grand Slam projecting, what mattered most on Sunday was simply winning the French.

Many a great player has faltered hereat Roland Garros. The list includes Sampras, Jimmy Connors, Bill Tilden, John Newcombe, John McEnroe, Stefan Edberg and one of Djokovic’s coaches, Boris Becker.

“I was always dealing with this,” said Marian Vajda, Djokovic’s other coach. “I mean, the history doesn’t lie. You have to face it, but there was just so much pressure here.”

But Djokovic, who had lost three of the last four French Open finals, is now on a different list, and Becker was soon holding the French Open trophy in the locker room as part of a team. Not long before, the effervescent Brazilian Gustavo Kuerten, a three-time French Open champion, watched inside Philippe Chatrier stadium after having given Djokovic permission, just in case, to reprise Kuerten’s 2001 victory celebration.

The title secure, Djokovic fell to the clay and lay spread-eagled on his back before rising and jogging to embrace Murray, who had stepped over the net to greet him.

Struggling to keep his feet at first amid the emotion and fatigue, Djokovic soon returned to the same baseline and followed Kuerten’s precedent, drawing a heart in the clay with his racket and then lying on his back again inside it.

He was a man complete, a champion complete, and the sun — of all things — soon joined him.


