


We think of the opt-out clause as an escape hatch, a way for a free agent to break one lucrative contract and seek another. At Class AAA, though, the opt-out clause is a ticket to opportunity — a lottery ticket, really, a gamble with uncertain odds.

Rich Hill will start for the Oakland Athletics at Yankee Stadium on Thursday. That fact would have sounded implausible at the end of the 2014 season, when Hill was a side-arming Yankees reliever, summoned twice in September to strike out David Ortiz.

Now he is an over-the-top starter. It never would have happened if Hill had not left the Washington Nationals’ organization — without a job — in June.

“It’s a really difficult decision,” Hill said Wednesday. “You’re sitting there saying: ‘O.K., I have a job right now; I know it’s in Triple-A, but at least I’m pitching with an opportunity to possibly get called up to the big leagues. But if I take this, there’s 29 other options out there — and possibly out of those 29, there could be five or six.’ So do you take it, or do you not take it?”

Hill, a left-hander, could have stayed with the Nationals affiliate in Syracuse. It was a stable job, just one step below the majors. But with a 2.91 E.R.A. in 25 appearances, and more than a strikeout per inning pitched, Hill had reason to believe other teams would want him.

He took the opt-out clause, as he had done five years earlier, when he left the St. Louis Cardinals’ Memphis affiliate and found work in the Boston Red Sox’ system within four days.

This time, nobody bit. For more than a month — from late June to late July — Hill had no team. At least there was a nibble: a visit from Jared Porter, then the pro scouting director for the Red Sox.

Hill, now 36, went back to his old high school, in Milton, Mass., for a throwing session, and Porter suggested he move to the third-base side of the rubber. Porter liked what he saw, but with no job available, he suggested that Hill try independent ball.

The Red Sox had been interested in Hill as a situational left-hander. But Hill made a deal with himself: If he was going to join an independent team, he would do so as a starter, throwing over the top, which would give him more of a downhill plane on his fastball, more depth on his breaking balls and more chances to use his changeup.

He made two starts for the Long Island Ducks and fired 11 scoreless innings. On Aug. 14, the Red Sox signed him as a starter and sent him to Class AAA Pawtucket. Within a month, Hill was in the majors. He became the first pitcher since 1900 to make his season debut in September and strike out at least 10 in each of his first three starts.

“When he got back to starting, he just kind of relaxed and trusted his stuff,” said Larry Rothschild, the Yankees’ pitching coach, who saw Hill pitch six strong innings in New York on Oct. 1. “He looked almost like he was just going to have fun and enjoy starting. A lot of things fell into place for him.”

Rothschild had been Hill’s first major league pitching coach, with the Chicago Cubs from 2005 to 2008. Hill was good enough to start for the Cubs in the 2007 playoffs, and Rothschild said, “We knew his breaking ball was something that was different and special.”

But the success did not last. Injuries plagued Hill, who wound through three more organizations before needing Tommy John surgery in 2011. He pitched for Boston the next year, Cleveland in 2013, and the Los Angeles Angels and the Yankees in 2014 — after enduring personal tragedy that spring when his infant son, Brooks, died of an undisclosed medical problem.

Adversity steeled Hill’s resolve, on and off the field.

“I think that’s life, right?” he said. “You’re going to be thrown a lot of different curveballs, so to speak. It’s not just: ‘Here it is; this is what you’re going to do; this is your path.’ How are you going to handle failure? How do you handle injury? And we’re just talking about baseball here, not life issues.”

He continued: “To me, the locker room is just a mirror image of everything that goes on outside of the clubhouse because you have different nationalities, everybody has a story, everybody has a journey to get to this point. It’s important to understand that we are playing baseball and it’s not anything more than that. You put it in context — although, to get to this level, this is what I’ve always wanted to do.”

Hill got back partly with help from Brian Bannister, a former major leaguer who works closely with Red Sox pitchers. Bannister helped Hill understand that some of baseball’s most dominant pitchers, like Felix Hernandez and Clayton Kershaw, throw a high percentage of off-speed pitches. Hill would have the freedom to emphasize his strengths.

As well as his four Boston starts went last season — a 1.55 E.R.A., with 36 strikeouts in 29 innings — the Red Sox sought a proven ace to upgrade their rotation. They guaranteed $217 million in free agency to David Price. The A’s, who always look for bargains, signed Hill for one year and $6 million.

That salary would be incidental to several of the Yankees who will face Hill on Thursday. For Hill, though, this is the first season in 15 as a professional that he has earned more than $1 million.

“Maybe for some guys, it is the driving factor, to make lots of money, but it’s not for me,” said Hill, who has a 4.15 E.R.A. for Oakland with 19 strikeouts in 13 innings. “Other things will fall into place, but pitching at this level is where you want to be. There’s no other place.”

Hill smiled. He worked for this job, to be sure, but it was not the one he wanted last spring. Luck shined on him at last.

“If I was in the majors relieving, I don’t think I would have said: ‘You know what? I’m going to go to leave to go to independent ball and try to come back as a starter,’ ” Hill said. “I don’t think that would have been the most savvy move.”


