


This weekend, an army of choreographers, performers and artists will take over the alternative arts space Knockdown Center to explore themes of obedience and submission — and are inviting audience members to join in. Directed by Sarah Kinlaw and Monica Mirabile, “Authority Figure” leverages movement, sound and sculpture to explore different modes of obedience and how they affect us.

Submission to the experience begins with the ticket-buying process. The Personality of Endurance Quiz, five short questions with intriguingly vague options, is a prerequisite, and determines one’s personalized entry time with questions like “Which best describes your sense of agency?” Like-minded groups enter the space in 20-minute intervals. It’s a slightly ominous introduction — which only heightens the expectations set by the campaign “Authority Figure” is running on Kickstarter and the social media presences of cast members like artists Alexandra Marzella and India Salvor Menuez, who post to followings of over 40,000. “It is mysterious, and it’s intentional in some way,” Mirabile says of the Kickstarter campaign, which doesn’t reveal much detail about the project. “Each person that goes through is going to experience something different. We don’t want people to come in with too many preconceived ideas.”

Individual voices played a large role in the development process. More than 150 people contributed to the project: Mirabile, Kinlaw and six others choreographed the movements, but the development included asking everyone to contribute their experiences. “Everyone we are working with is someone we admire or collaborated with before,” Kinlaw explains. “We asked everyone to supply their own voice, the project is very much a product of that. If you pay attention to the music or the movements, you know who did what. It’s been a period of growth for everyone.” The core group includes longtime collaborators like choreographer Sigrid Lauren, who performs with Mirabile as FlucT. After touring with Caroline Polachek of Chairlift and Ramona Lisa, Kinlaw also tapped her friend to work on the score for “Authority Figure” alongside talents like Eartheater, Dan Deacon and Devonté Hynes of Blood Orange. “The whole thing is about authority and obedience,” Mirabile adds. “It’s all about relationships; these are people I trust.”

Visitors will have to extend their trust to the process. The directors recommend wearing comfortable shoes and clothing, but refuse to get very specific about what to expect once inside. “Be prepared to stay awhile; but if you want to leave, you of course can,” Kinlaw explains. “If you come in a group, be willing to break off — and embrace the individual experience.”


