


A 55-year-old man stabbed and killed his longtime girlfriend and injured a 9-year-old girl early Wednesday morning in the Bronx before setting the apartment on fire and injuring himself, law enforcement officials said.

The police were able to subdue and arrest the man, Henry Maldonado, as firefighters extinguished the blaze.

The episode started as a predawn domestic dispute at 700 East 156th Street, a building in the St. Mary’s Park Houses, the police said. It quickly escalated and Mr. Maldonado stabbed his girlfriend, Carmen Irizarry, 60, repeatedly in the chest, they said.

The 9-year-old girl is the granddaughter of Ms. Irizarry but is not related to Mr. Maldonado, the police said. The girl was stabbed in the chest, thigh, armpit and upper abdomen but still managed to escape to a neighbor’s apartment.

The neighbor, Loretta Fleming, was awakened just after 5 a.m. by pounding on her door.

It was the girl. She was covered in blood.

“She said, ‘My grandfather went crazy, he went crazy in the apartment, please help me, help me,’” Ms. Fleming said.

Ms. Fleming said she could hear a man yelling, knocking things over and breaking glass. The girl was hysterical, she said, blood pouring down her leg. Ms. Fleming called 911 and calmed the child, who was terrified the man would come after her.

“He’s not going to touch you,” she told the girl.

Then, Ms. Fleming said, she smelled smoke.

When firefighters and the police arrived, a fire they believe was set by Mr. Maldonado was burning. The Emergency Service Unit breached the door and the firefighters entered, the police said.

As the flames were brought under control, police officers moved in. Ms. Irizarry was on a couch in the living room, unconscious with multiple stab wounds. Mr. Maldonado was standing in the smoke, a knife in his hand.

He had apparently cut himself several times, the police said.

When he would not drop the knife, officers used a Taser to subdue him.

Ms. Irizarry was pronounced dead at the scene. Mr. Maldonado and the 9-year-old girl were taken to Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center and transferred to other hospitals.


