


ROME — About 20 corpses from a sunken migrant boat were sighted off the coast of Libya on Thursday, even as European Union naval operations were able to rescue thousands of other migrants taking advantage of good weather to attempt to cross the Mediterranean.

The boat, which capsized 35 miles north of the Libyan port of Zuwarah with an unknown number of passengers, was located Thursday by an aircraft from Luxembourg. The rescue operations for the boat were carried out by the Spanish frigate Reina Sofía, which boarded 77 migrants, and two Italian Coast Guard rescue vessels, which boarded 11 more, an Italian official said. The Reina Sofía was already carrying migrants from other rescues on Thursday.

Lt. Rino Gentile, a public information officer for E.U. Navfor Med, the European Union’s military operation to rescue migrants and fight human trafficking in the Mediterranean, said the number of dead would be known only once the bodies had been retrieved.

About 4,000 migrants were rescued from the sea on Thursday as the Italian Coast Guard coordinated and concluded nearly two dozen operations, said Cmdr. Filippo Marini. In total, more than 10,000 migrants have been rescued this week by various international agencies.

Warm weather and calm seas prompted many hundreds of migrants to attempt the perilous sea crossing from North Africa to Italy this week, the Italian Coast Guard said.

In addition, officials said the near closing of the route from Turkey to Greece after a deal between Ankara and the European Union earlier this year may be putting still more pressure on the route to Italy.

As of Wednesday, nearly 40,500 migrants — primarily from African countries — had arrived in Italy in this year, a number on par with this point in 2015, when about 41,500 people had landed, according to Interior Ministry statistics.

The International Organization for Migration estimates that 1,370 migrants have drowned during the same period, including seven people who died on Wednesday when their crowded ship overturned as rescuers watched.

More than 500 survivors from that shipwreck arrived on Thursday in Porto Empedocle, Sicily, where they will receive assistance and be processed to determine their status. Officials could not say if other passengers on the ship had remained trapped in the hold when it sank.

More than 115,000 migrants are now in Italy, more than five times the number of migrants who arrived in 2013, according to the Interior Ministry. The migrants have been distributed among Italy’s 20 regions, with Lombardy and Sicily together accommodating 25 percent of the new arrivals.

“The reception system is always under pressure, but so far, Italy has been able to provide adequate first assistance,” distributing the arrivals to different ports where they receive medical and legal assistance, said Flavio Di Giacomo, a spokesman for the International Organization for Migration.

“Certainly, if the flux continues to be so intense, it becomes more difficult to find structures. But so far, Italy has shown it can make it.”


