


When was the last time you saw an origami maker become the focus in your night at the theater? Never, you say? Then why, you might ask, would anyone make it happen?

The playwright Rajiv Joseph, a Pulitzer finalist for “Bengal Tiger at the Baghdad Zoo,” has some metaphorical answers to that question in his comic and surprising “Animals Out of Paper,” the current offering of the Hudson Stage Company in Armonk. If origami seems to you just a darling way to fashion a crane, you’ll come away with other ideas after seeing it here as a symbol and device to examine the mysteries of the human heart.

Creating from paper a human heart is the task before the despondent origamist Ilana (Jenny Sheffer Stevens), who as the play opens is burrowed into the couch of her messy studio, days of empty cartons of Chinese food within her reach. Seems Ilana can’t get herself to create much of anything after a divorce and the loss of her elderly, three-legged dog. But when a fan, the calculus teacher Andy (Michael Guagno), asks out of the blue to be buzzed into her apartment, she begins a journey back to her next paper fold.

That sounds like an obvious arc — the blocked artist gets unblocked! — and the first scene is an improbable meet-cute, a patience-demanding conversation that lasts well beyond a series of moments when it would realistically stop. These are not the script’s only problems. Yet here’s the thing: Great opportunities can diminish even the peskiest problems, and for the most part the Hudson Stage production, well directed by Stephen Nachamie, mines what is special — and at it’s best, it’s wonderful — in Mr. Joseph’s script.

The role of Andy, for instance, is a tricky one. He admittedly worships Ilana; he has repeatedly read her origami book and has recorded his every exchange with her in a diary of blessings, begun at age 12. (For one blessing, he praises a rake.) There’s a lot of besotted nerd in Andy, but also a sensitive and honest integrity that could be overshadowed onstage. Yet Mr. Guagno earns laughs as the silly geek, affection as the lovable suitor and, most of all, respect as the loving man of immense goodwill. It’s a nigh ideal performance, and idiosyncratically his.

Ms. Stevens has the sort of natural, easy stage presence an audience can rely upon, even as her character — passive until she’s not — does the unexpected. Hers is a characterization you can trust in details as simple as when she ties back her hair, or as complicated as when she fields a kiss. She also knows her way around funny, and it’s charming and convincing to watch her and Mr. Guagno having an eventful St. Valentine’s dinner date.

But there’s a wild card to what, at this point, might seem to be a ready-for-sitcom love story: the play’s third character, Suresh (Adit Dileep), a troubled student at Andy’s school and a prodigy of origami. Andy persuades Ilana to take on Suresh, whose mother was recently killed, as an apprentice. “Most people start by folding a boat or a flower,” Andy says. “He folds an Amazonian toad.”

The hip-hop-loving Suresh, though, is a moody teenager who baits and berates Ilana even as he entertains and astonishes her. After he presents Ilana with an origami heart, complete with all the chambers, she invites him to accompany her to a conference on the form in Japan. And that’s where this deceptively simple play becomes more unsettling (in ways I won’t reveal), and where Mr. Joseph’s skillful writing becomes apparent.

Mr. Dileep looks perfect for this difficult, play-making role, which he attacks with commitment, charm, insight and energy. There’s a bit too much of that last quality, though, with anger that becomes dispersed and generalized where a deeper tangle of emotions might be revealed.

While some moments land, he and perhaps Mr. Nachamie could have better finessed others (and Mr. Nachamie, in spots, could have better served the momentum of the two-act play). Still, the play’s final complications have a punch.

The actors are lucky to wear Charlotte Palmer-Lane’s smart and character-enhancing costumes, and Shoko Kambara’s multi-location set serves the script with practical efficiency, a trick in Hudson Stage’s Whippoorwill Theater space. The contributions of Talo Kawasaki, credited as origami consultant, were no doubt helpful.

“Folds leave scars,” Ilana says, explaining the consequences of each decision in origami. That’s true for these characters, whose lives become enfolded, and it’s the metaphor that should linger after the last scene of this arresting production.


