


Barcelona fell at home to Valencia, 2-1, on Sunday, losing its third straight game to allow Atlético Madrid to draw even on points atop the Spanish league with five rounds to go.

Atlético erased Barcelona’s lead by beating Granada, 3-0, earlier Sunday. Real Madrid is only 1 point behind after winning on Saturday. Atlético was trailing by 9 points three rounds ago, and Real Madrid was 12 points back four games ago.

Lionel Messi scored his 500th career goal in the 63rd minute against Valencia to end a five-game scoring slump that was his worst with Barcelona in five years.

LEICESTER MANAGES TIE Down to 10 men after Jamie Vardy, its top scorer, was given a red card in the 56th minute, Leicester allowed visiting West Ham to score twice and trailed, 2-1.

But in the fifth minute of stoppage time, Leicester’s substitute striker Leonardo Ulloa displayed coolness from the penalty spot to tie the game.

Despite dropping points with the 2-2 draw, Leicester extended its lead to 8 points over Tottenham, which plays Monday.

Arsenal dropped to fourth after being held to a 1-1 tie by visiting Crystal Palace.

Liverpool, which is eighth in the Premier League, followed up its midweek quarterfinal win over Borussia Dortmund by winning at Bournemouth, 2-1.

GOAL FOR YOUNG AMERICAN The American teenager Christian Pulisic scored his first Bundesliga goal to help Borussia Dortmund win at home, 3-0, against nine-man Hamburger S. V. At 17 years, 212 days, Pulisic became the fourth-youngest player to score in the Bundesliga.

JUVE BUILDS LEAD Juventus continued its march toward a fifth successive Serie A title as it beat visiting Palermo, 4-0, to move 9 points ahead of Napoli. Third-place Roma missed the chance to close the gap with Napoli to 3 points as it drew, 3-3, at Atalanta.

SCOTTISH RIVALRY RENEWED Rangers, the fallen Scottish power, marked the latest stage in its recovery by winning on the road against its Glasgow rival, Celtic, by 5-4 on penalties to reach the Scottish Cup final. Tax debt forced Rangers into liquidation in 2012, and the re-formed club had to start over in the fourth tier.


