


The United States on Friday rejected Iranian accusations that it had broken international law with a Supreme Court ruling that allows the use of seized assets from Iran’s central bank to compensate American victims of terrorist attacks.

The Iranian accusations, which hinted that retaliation was possible, were contained in an angry letter by Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, sent on Thursday to Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations.

The letter, which Iran’s United Nations mission distributed to the news media, asked for Mr. Ban’s help in stopping the United States from carrying out the April 20 court ruling.

Under the ruling, nearly $2 billion in impounded assets from Iran’s central bank may be disbursed to more than 1,000 Americans — survivors and relatives of victims killed in terrorist attacks that the United States has attributed to Iranian agents. Iran, which has denied any responsibility for the attacks, has described the ruling as an “outrageous robbery.”

Mr. Zarif’s letter also asked Mr. Ban to help ensure that the United States carries out its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the official name of the nuclear agreement between Iran and major powers that took effect in January. Mr. Zarif reiterated complaints that the Americans were interfering with Iran’s ability to conduct financial transactions permitted by that agreement.

Mark Toner, a State Department spokesman, said in a statement on Friday that American officials were aware of Mr. Zarif’s letter to Mr. Ban but that the United States rejected the complaint about the Supreme Court ruling. “We believe the U.S. laws and the application of those laws by the courts of the United States comport with international law,” Mr. Toner said.

Regarding Mr. Zarif’s other complaint, Mr. Toner reiterated assertions made last week by Secretary of State John Kerry that the United States was “committed to doing our part” in the nuclear deal.

“The United States is not standing in the way and will not stand in the way of business that is permitted with Iran” since the nuclear deal took effect, Mr. Toner said.

Mr. Ban’s spokesman, Stéphane Dujarric, confirmed on Friday that Mr. Ban had received Mr. Zarif’s letter but declined to comment further.


