


Donald J. Trump boasted of his business success. He railed against political correctness. He insisted his opponents could not handle “the tough guys, the bad guys” the way he could.

Oh, and one other thing.

“They don’t look like Indians to me,” Mr. Trump said of the Mashantucket Pequot tribe, stunning a packed congressional hearing room by assailing the operators of the Foxwoods Resort Casino in Connecticut. “They don’t look like Indians.”

The year was 1993, and Mr. Trump was maneuvering furiously to protect his casino business in Atlantic City from neighboring competition.

But in that episode and several others since the 1980s, Mr. Trump’s navigation of Washington’s corridors of power appears all too familiar in hindsight — fusing showmanship, a reductive approach to ethnicity, shape-shifting policy rationales and gleeful name-dropping into the political currency required to get what he wanted, or at least make headlines trying.

As he sets off on a round of meetings this week to announce himself as the town’s new Republican standard-bearer — most notably a sit-down scheduled for Thursday with the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan — Mr. Trump can draw on decades of intermittent, but memorable, experiences.

He is no Jimmy Stewart, wide-eyed and reform-minded. But not infrequently, Mr. Trump goes to Washington, making the short flight by jet to advance his business enterprises, hold forth on economics and charm lawmakers — including some future supporters, like Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who seemed tickled by his visit in 2005.

“I want to thank you for your courage,” Mr. Sessions told him, after Mr. Trump’s swaggering testimony about proposed renovations to the United Nations headquarters in New York. (In critiquing the United Nations before Mr. Sessions and other Republicans, he was preaching to the choir.)

In large measure, despite his self-styled reputation as a political outsider, Mr. Trump seems to have had little trouble fitting in — less a bull in a china shop than a New Yorker briefly on the wrong end of the Acela corridor.

John A. Boehner, the former House speaker, became a golfing buddy. Lobbyists counted Mr. Trump as a client. And lawmakers came to recognize his tactics and recurring themes.

Though a handful of Mr. Trump’s excursions to Washington are well documented — his roasting at the White House Correspondents’ Dinner in 2011, his push to redevelop the Old Post Office into a luxury hotel — his forays into the arcana of congressional panels have received little attention during his presidential bid.

During his stops on Capitol Hill, he foretold several campaign motifs: a frustration with the pace of government, scattershot policy prescriptions, predictions of impending doom.

Before a House panel on the credit shortage in November 1991, Mr. Trump seemed irritated at times, calling changes in the tax code a “catastrophe” for real estate entrepreneurs and offering a bleak assessment of the economy and its stewards in Washington.

“I truly feel that this country right now is in a depression,” he said. “It is not a recession. People are kidding themselves if they think it is a recession.” (The recession had actually ended the previous March.)

Mr. Trump presented suggestions, including a tax increase on the wealthy to encourage investment.

“For high-income people, it should be raised substantially with the understanding that if you invest, you can get it down, and down substantially,” he said. “The incentive was taken away when the tax rates came down for high-income people.”

And in a flourish that has earned Mr. Trump some scorn from conservatives recently, he was critical of Reagan-era tax reforms, at one point suggesting the United States was “no different than the Soviet Union.”

“They have no incentive, and we have no incentive,” he said. “And if something isn’t done to quickly put the incentive back, this country is going to be in very deep problems. It already is, but it’s going to get far worse.”

Mr. Trump and his ambitions were discussed from time to time by presidential aides as far back as the Reagan administration, and records show that he attended some White House events, though not frequently or recently. He attended a state dinner for King Fahd of Saudi Arabia in 1985 with his wife at the time, Ivana.

The next year, records from the Reagan Presidential Library show, Mr. Trump invited Nancy Reagan to be his guest at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida. (She politely declined.)

Mr. Trump was not shy about traveling to Washington to advance his own business interests.

In 1985, Mr. Trump, as an owner of the United States Football League’s New Jersey Generals, testified on the regulation of the National Football League, which he referred to as a “great monopoly.” (The U.S.F.L., which would soon disappear, had filed an antitrust lawsuit against the N.F.L.)

As his testimony wore on, Mr. Trump seemed to recognize the frivolousness of turning to Washington over a sports matter. “With all of the problems of the country, it does seem strange that we are sitting here this morning talking about football,” he said. “But the fact is, it is something somewhat close to my heart.”

Mr. Trump’s 1993 appearance before the House Subcommittee on Native American Affairs was perhaps his most memorable.

An overflow crowd packed Room 1324 of the Longworth House Office Building, eager to take in a celebrity’s testimony. By the end, Mr. Trump had accused the committee chairman of having a “totally closed mind,” predicted “one of the biggest scandals since Al Capone” and ridiculed those who he said had played down the threat of organized crime in tribal gambling.

“That an Indian chief is going to tell Joey Killer to please get off his reservation is almost unbelievable to me,” Mr. Trump said.

Yet at other times, Mr. Trump preferred to keep his distance, dispatching others to operate on his behalf during Beltway casino disputes.

One lobbyist, Ronald Platt, who worked for Mr. Trump about 15 years ago on a tribal gambling matter, said he had been owed thousands of dollars in outstanding bills. Mr. Trump would not pay, Mr. Platt recalled in an interview. So he traveled to New York to collect.

Mr. Trump, he said, was not pleased to see him. “It is so prestigious down in Washington to represent me that you ought to be willing to do it for free,” Mr. Trump said, according to Mr. Platt.

Mr. Platt replied with a profanity, he said, and Mr. Trump stormed out of the room.

Eventually, Mr. Platt said, he got his check.

Mr. Trump described the proceedings differently.

“I have no idea who he is,” Mr. Trump said in a statement emailed by an aide, “but if I held back payment, it was probably because he did a lousy job.”


