


On the inaugural game day, Penny Toler drove into an arena parking lot transformed into a carnival of child-friendly slides and noisy roller coasters to behold what for her was the most distinctive sight for a historic occasion.

It was the decorative surprise that Johnny Buss, of the family that owns the Los Angeles Lakers, had furtively told her was coming. Giant posters of Toler and four teammates were draped along the exterior of the Great Western Forum, welcoming Toler to the Los Angeles Sparks, to the W.N.B.A. and to a game in her home country after eight transient years in which she had played professionally in Italy and Israel.

“I had tears in my eyes,” Toler said.

It was June 21, 1997. The Sparks, led by Toler and Lisa Leslie, hosted the New York Liberty, launching the N.B.A.’s summer annex — Commissioner David Stern’s gift to the growing women’s sports movement and a calculated attempt to market the game as a year-round production — in front of 14,284 fans and a national television audience on NBC.

As the W.N.B.A. begins its 20th season on Saturday, and notwithstanding the continuing challenges in sustaining the league, Toler and several others involved in the much-hyped start-up could look back and acknowledge to their relief that its survival did not depend on the quality of its debut.

“An ugly game,” said Rebecca Lobo, the former Connecticut star, who was placed with the Liberty as part of the league’s strategy of allocating two regionally designated core players per team.

For the record, the Sparks and the Liberty combined to make 47 of 128 shots, or slightly less than 37 percent. They committed an unsightly 54 turnovers.

On top of that, Leslie, the 6-foot-5 marquee player and Wilhelmina model, found herself with an unobstructed opportunity to “throw one down” and athletically validate the N.B.A. Entertainment-inspired league marketing slogan, “We Got Next.”

While contemplating the value of a league-launching dunk — and, by her own admission, not in ideal game shape to begin with — Leslie failed to achieve maximum liftoff. She slammed the ball into the rim.

“We all knew Lisa could dunk,” Toler said. “But in that first game, there was so much excitement, so much tension, I’m not sure any of us were ourselves.”

Two decades ago, the women’s game — while chock-full of talented, deserving but mostly little-known players who made their living in Europe and Asia — was not qualitatively what it has become in the wide-ranging era of Diana Taurasi, Maya Moore, Elena Delle Donne and this year’s answer to who’s got next, the N.C.A.A.-decorated Connecticut star, Breanna Stewart.

Toler, a point guard who scored the league’s first basket 59 seconds into what became a 67-57 Liberty victory, is a bridge to the past. Now the Sparks’ general manager, she is 50, a proud pioneer and none too shy about sharing with her players what they ought to be doing for the good of their game.

“These kids nowadays, they really can’t remember a time when there wasn’t a league,” she said in a recent telephone interview. “They have to be reminded of the sacrifices that were made, the things we had to do to keep our careers going.”

Toler added: “But as much as it’s been 20 years now, and the young players may take it for granted, I still feel that we were the lucky ones that had the wild ride.”

The emotional roller coaster, she meant — all the way home.

After the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta — a gold-medal showcase for a United States women’s team that for the first time trained and toured as the men did, with its players paid $50,000 plus expenses — the W.N.B.A. began in earnest the preparations for its debut.

Val Ackerman, the league’s first president, signed three showcase players — Leslie, Lobo and the gifted Sheryl Swoopes — to serve as the promotional faces via the N.B.A.’s marketing machine.

Then there was the challenge of filling eight rosters at a time when a rival league, the A.B.L., was planning an earlier start across the conventional 1996-97 basketball season.

The top W.N.B.A. salary was $50,000, with bonus incentives for certain players.

“The A.B.L. was paying more but for a longer season, and you couldn’t play for anyone else,” Ackerman said. “Our players could continue to play abroad, and obviously, they still do.”

To move beyond Leslie, Lobo and Swoopes, Ackerman hired Renee Brown, a longtime college assistant coach and director of player personnel for Coach Tara Vanderveer’s Atlanta Olympics team.

Brown worked with Kim Bohuny, who, as part of the N.B.A.’s international team, had contacts in basketball federations worldwide. Having been in Atlanta for the Olympics, Brown knew of each country’s best player — like Elena Baranova of Russia, Michelle Timms of Australia and Janeth Arcain of Brazil.

“We wanted to make it a global company from the beginning,” said Brown, who is still with the W.N.B.A. as chief of basketball operations and player relations. “We went after players everywhere.”

Three years before Yao Ming introduced himself to the world at the 2000 Sydney Games, and five years before Yao became the N.B.A.’s No. 1 draft pick and joined the Houston Rockets, Brown persuaded Chinese officials to send over another giant, Zheng Haixia.

At a bulky 6-8, Zheng, 30, wound up in Los Angeles playing alongside the slender Leslie, speaking little English, charming teammates with a universal basketball body language and resting her elbow on their heads during timeouts.

The Sparks also featured the raw but explosive guard Mwadi Mabika from Zaire, which in 1997 was renamed the Democratic Republic of the Congo after a civil war.

Mabika had been impressive at the 1996 Olympics despite Zaire’s losing all seven of its games. There was one problem in her recruitment.

“The country was in chaos; the airport was closed,” Brown said.

Dikembe Mutombo, then of the Atlanta Hawks, helped reach contacts in Zaire, his native country. Mabika found her way to Atlanta. Mutombo brought her to Los Angeles for a tryout. Mabika became an All-Star and a member of two championship teams.

The Sparks’ assigned players were Leslie and Toler. The charismatic point guard Teresa Weatherspoon joined Lobo in New York.

Brown hit the European trail for a second phase of roster building, finding pros for an elite draft before the selection of college players.

She flew to Milan and made a stop in nearby Pavia, where Kym Hampton, a 6-2 frontcourt veteran, was toiling after tours in Spain, France and Japan.

“I was 35, turning 36,” Hampton said. “I always figured there would be pro ball for women, eventually. I just didn’t think I’d still be playing when it happened.”

She had been approached by the A.B.L., which offered six figures, but her agent told her not to sign, predicting that the league would not last; it folded after two seasons. Brown watched Hampton have a 25-point night against one of Italy’s better clubs and then followed her to a nightclub, where Hampton, a talented singer of mostly rhythm and blues, had a gig.

Brown was selling the N.B.A. imprimatur, and Hampton was eventually drafted fourth by the Liberty.

With NBC, ESPN and Lifetime lined up as television partners, with many sponsors leaned on by Stern aboard, with logos created and a two-tone ball selected, the league was taking shape. Then Ackerman received a call from Brown one night in early 1997.

“Sitting down?” Brown said.

“What is it?” Ackerman said.

“Sheryl Swoopes is pregnant.”

Ackerman sighed, then said, “That’s wonderful.”

Welcome to women’s professional sports. Swoopes, assigned to the Houston Comets, would miss several weeks of a 10-week season, though she remained in the promotional campaign, her pregnancy camouflaged, and returned to help the Comets win the league’s first title.

For a logical league opener, that left Leslie against Lobo, Sparks versus Liberty. Except that Lobo, well-known from Connecticut’s first unbeaten national championship team in 1995, had been, at 22, the youngest Olympian in Atlanta, averaging fewer than 4 points a game.

Leslie had barely touched a ball after the Olympics until she reported to the Sparks for a three-week training camp.

“When they first came to me, I was thinking I might already be retired, doing the modeling thing, and this would be a nice opportunity to play a few summer league games, maybe wear reversible jerseys,” she said. “I didn’t get the magnitude of what they were planning.”

As the game approached, “We Got Next” commercials aired frequently during televised N.B.A. playoff games. Billboards appeared in Manhattan and Los Angeles, featuring Leslie and Lobo. When the Liberty bus rolled out of the airport a few days before the game, Lobo was excited and a bit sheepish when she spotted the images of her and Leslie looming over the traffic.

“In New York, we had trained at the Reebok Club, and you had people like Jerry Seinfeld walking in and out,” Lobo said. “N.B.A. players were used to that. For us, it was a whole new world.”

Weatherspoon recalled “a lot of giddiness” as the Liberty practiced in Los Angeles and made the news media rounds. “Until we got on the bus to the arena for the game,” she said. “Now nobody’s talking. Headphones on. It finally hit us that, as the first, everyone would be watching, judging.”

Hampton walked into the visitors’ locker room at the Forum and took the opportunity to “go move my butt around every one” of the dressing stalls.

“The greatest players had all sat in those places, Cousy to Jordan,” she said. “I was so overcome with emotion, felt so blessed.”

A little ornery, too. When Liberty Coach Nancy Darsch told the 6-4 Lobo that she would be matched with Leslie on both ends of the floor, the maternal enforcer in Hampton emerged.

She asked Darsch if she could guard Leslie to allow Lobo to focus on offense. Hampton knew Leslie well, her tricks of the trade.

“She’d elbow you here, elbow you there,” she said.

“You’re giving away too much size,” Darsch said.

“What, two, three inches?” Hampton said.

Hampton, a physical player, recalled: “Lisa didn’t score her first point until I took a rest.”

Leslie did notch 16 for the game — same as Lobo — on 6-for-17 shooting, the dunk attempt her most memorable miss.

“I was proud to see her go for it,” Weatherspoon said. “I was happy to see her miss it.”

Leslie would not become the league’s first in-game dunker until July 2002. She wound up playing for 11 seasons, with one regret.

“If I could do anything over, I would have trained for that first game, that first season,” she said. “I guess I figured 50 percent of me was good enough.”

She recalled “endless interviews” leading up to, and even on the morning of, the game. By tipoff, she said, her legs felt like Jell-O. Having her friend Magic Johnson at courtside added to the tension.

Before Leslie and Hampton participated with Ackerman in a ceremonial jump ball, the national anthem was performed — by a recording. Jeffrey Osborne was supposed to have sung it, but, according to Ackerman, he was caught in traffic.

Nobody thought to ask Hampton, who did not volunteer.

“I had never performed in a place that big,” she said. “I probably would have passed out.”

Instead, Hampton leaned on Leslie, who became more fatigued because a fairly immobile Zheng was unable to deal with the pace of the new pro game and transition back on defense. That left Leslie alone to defend against Lobo and Hampton, who scored 13 points, among other penetrators.

“I’d be yelling, ‘Get her out, she can’t keep up,’ ” Leslie said of Zheng, whom she otherwise adored.

Zheng, she added, fortunately could not understand her.

For those who played or participated in that first game, the result 20 years later has become irrelevant. Game details are a blur. It was all about being there, even for the lead official, Violet Palmer, who already knew she was being considered, along with Dee Kantner, to cross the gender barrier into the N.B.A. for the following season.

“The timing was so perfect for me,” Palmer said. “I was so proud to be on the court with all those women who had to play in other countries for so long.”

Ackerman said it was a bonding experience that never seems to have ended. As commissioner of the Big East Conference, she was in Raleigh, N.C., during the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament in March, when someone called out, “Val, Val!”

She spun around to find Jordan Jackson, Sheryl Swoopes’s son, breaking from his warm-up for Texas Tech. They embraced, and she told him, “It’s been 20 years — I still remember getting that call.”

Where will the W.N.B.A. be in another 20 years? That is a more difficult call, or prognostication.

Toler said, “I know it will be here at 40.”

Echoing her, Hampton said she agreed that while today’s players feel entitled to a United States-based league and make more money — though not that much more, which is why many still play and fare much better abroad — “That first year, we were like rock stars.”

The novelty subsided, predictably, and the W.N.B.A.’s future and fate lie, Hampton said, in an ever-expanding grass-roots world.

“I have an 11-year-old daughter who plays A.A.U. ball,” she said. “Many of the parents don’t bring their kids to W.N.B.A. games, and I just don’t understand why they’re not into the business of it all.

“I go to camps, and I could ask a girl, ‘Name three players on the Liberty,’ and much of the time they could not.”

She sighed and added: “I just want people to get it. That’s what that first game — and these last 20 years — have been all about.”


