


Kenneth W. Starr, the former independent counsel who delivered a report that served as the basis for President Bill Clinton’s impeachment in 1998, was removed as president of Baylor University on Thursday after an investigation found the university mishandled accusations of sexual assault against football players.

The university also fired the football coach, Art Briles, whose ascendant program brought in millions of dollars in revenue but was dogged by accusations of sexual assault committed by its players — an increasingly familiar combination in big-time college sports.

Mr. Starr was stripped of his title as university president but will remain Baylor’s chancellor and a professor at the law school. The chancellor position is “centered around development and religious liberty,” a regent said on a conference call Thursday afternoon, adding that Mr. Starr’s “operational responsibilities have been removed.”

Mr. Starr’s demotion delivered a twist to the biography of a man whose reputation was built on what many considered an overzealous pursuit of allegations of sexual transgressions by Mr. Clinton. Now he is being punished for leading an administration that, according to a report by an outside law firm commissioned by the university’s governing board, looked the other way when Baylor football players were accused of sex crimes, and sometimes convicted of them.

“We were horrified by the extent of these acts of sexual violence on our campus,” Richard Willis, chairman of Baylor’s Board of Regents, said in a statement. “This investigation revealed the University’s mishandling of reports in what should have been a supportive, responsive and caring environment for students.”

Mr. Starr said in a statement to news organizations: “I join the Board of Regents and the Senior Administration of the University in expressing heartfelt contrition for the tragedy and sadness that has unfolded. To those victims who were not treated with the care, concern, and support they deserve, I am profoundly sorry.”

Violence against women on college campuses has risen as a national conversation in recent years, and one particular thread has been whether athletes in big-time sports like football and basketball are afforded favorable treatment by universities and communities that come together to support and protect successful teams.

Critics have said that Baylor sacrificed moral considerations — and the safety of other students — for the sake of its winning football team. The investigation said as much, describing the flouting of federal gender-equity law and rebuking a university leadership that “created a cultural perception that football was above the rules.”

In one instance, according to a summary of the investigation released by the board, university administrators discouraged an accuser in a manner that “constituted retaliation against a complainant for reporting sexual assault.”

What investigations did occur, the summary said, “were conducted in the context of a broader culture and belief by many administrators that sexual violence ‘doesn’t happen here.’”

Mr. Starr, who was solicitor general and a federal judge before taking on the Clinton case, has been credited with raising hundreds of millions of dollars for Baylor, the country’s largest Baptist university, in part by yoking its fortunes to football. Much fund-raising was centered on building a gleaming on-campus home field, McLane Stadium, which opened in 2014, the same year that Mr. Starr added the title of chancellor to his role as president.

“Let me be clear,” Mr. Starr wrote in a public letter in February: “Sexual violence emphatically has no place whatsoever at Baylor University.”

That Baylor had an apparently functioning athletic department was seen as an achievement in itself: The university experienced one of the worst college sports scandals ever after a men’s basketball player murdered a teammate in 2003, with a subsequent investigation revealing drug use and payments to players, resulting in harsh N.C.A.A. penalties.

Baylor said it had retained a law firm for the possibility of an N.C.A.A. investigation into the latest transgressions.

The circumstances took on a new dimension nearly a year ago, when a former football player, Sam Ukwuachu, was convicted of sexually assaulting another Baylor athlete and sentenced to six months in jail. During the trial, a former girlfriend of Mr. Ukwuachu’s testified that he had assaulted her several years earlier, when he had been a football player at Boise State. Baylor denied that it had been apprised of Mr. Ukwuachu’s history; Boise State disputed that denial.

The Ukwuachu case came a year after Tevin Elliott, a former Baylor player, was convicted of sexually assaulting a Baylor freshman. Two other Baylor students testified that Mr. Elliott had also sexually assaulted them. He was sentenced to 20 years in prison.

Subsequent news reports have found several other accusations of sexual assault by Baylor athletes, including one against two players that Baylor did not investigate for more than two years.

After Mr. Ukwuachu’s conviction, Mr. Starr chose Baylor’s faculty athletics representative, a former federal prosecutor, to lead an inquiry into the university’s handling of Mr. Ukwuachu. A week later, based on that investigation, Mr. Starr recommended that Baylor’s board hire outside lawyers to conduct another investigation.

Soon, Baylor announced that the Regents had retained two lawyers from Pepper Hamilton to conduct a “thorough and independent and external investigation.” Pepper Hamilton, a firm based in Philadelphia, said it reviewed more than one million documents and conducted 65 interviews, including with “individuals who identified as victims/survivors of sexual assault or dating violence.”

Such investigations are sometimes cited by defendants in Title IX lawsuits as proof that the university did not possess “deliberate indifference” to a problem of sexual assault, according to Erin Buzuvis, a Title IX expert and a law professor at Western New England University.

Some courts, Ms. Buzuvis said, “might put a little more teeth on that requirement.”

Baylor settled a lawsuit by an accuser of Mr. Ukwuachu’s last year, while one by an accuser of Mr. Elliott’s was filed earlier this year.

The Education Department’s Office of Civil Rights is investigating nearly 200 postsecondary institutions under Title IX over sexual violence cases, but as of Thursday, Baylor was not among them.

Athletic Director Ian McCaw was placed on probation, the board said, while Mr. Briles was suspended with intention to terminate. Several news media reports said the football team’s defensive coordinator, Phil Bennett, would serve as interim head coach. Mr. Willis, the board’s chairman, said on the conference call that Pepper Hamilton’s findings had nothing “specific” to implicate Mr. Bennett.

Mr. Briles, a Texas lifer, was one of the most successful coaches in college football — and one of the best paid, with an annual salary of nearly $6 million, according to USA Today (as a private university, Baylor is not required to make such figures public).

Formerly Houston’s head coach, Mr. Briles installed an unorthodox, wide-open offense and built the Bears, historically a football also-ran in a state dominated by larger neighbors like Texas and Texas A&M, into a powerhouse. In 2011, quarterback Robert Griffin III won the program’s first Heisman Trophy — a statue of Griffin, now with the Cleveland Browns, graces the front entrance to McLane Stadium — and the team won or shared the Big 12 title in 2013 and 2014.

The allegations in the Baylor report are similar to others that have surfaced at universities with prominent athletics programs. Florida State’s Heisman-winning quarterback Jameis Winston was accused of rape in 2012 (he denied the charge) and was not disciplined by the university after an incomplete police investigation and a hearing. At Tennessee, a lawsuit filed this year partially blamed a noncompliant climate for sexual assaults by five athletes.

Despite a Department of Education letter in 2011 advising colleges to have detailed, appropriate guidelines for handling accusations of sexual assault, Baylor did not appoint a full-time Title IX coordinator until late 2014, according to the investigation.

In 1985, Baylor received a partial exemption to Title IX for several policies that it said conflicted with its sincerely held religious beliefs, such as condemnation of “premarital unchastity.”

The report released on Thursday found that Baylor’s religiously informed outlook on drug use, alcohol and premarital sex made accusers fearful of coming forward.


