


In “The Bell Jar,” Sylvia Plath wrote: “When I was 19, pureness was the great issue.” “At 46,” Virginia Woolf told her diary, “one must be a miser; only have time for essentials.” Those are just two insights pegged to stages of life that are collected in “100 Years,” an anthology by Joshua Prager that pairs one literary excerpt with every age from birth to a century old.

The end result, with a varied color palette designed by the graphic artist Milton Glaser, looks clean and simple, but the path there was a slog. At one point while gathering material, Prager writes in the introduction, he read 2,700 pages by Tolstoy and Thomas Mann and came away with two usable references.

For writers, even the earliest youth inspires rueful reflection. At 2 years old, Wendy in “Peter Pan” “knew that she must grow up. You always know after you are 2. Two is the beginning of the end.”

The conceit allows room to gather everything from Freud’s ideas about childhood to Nora Ephron’s take on her neck, and it’s also ideally built for amusing aphorisms, like this one by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in “Cancer Ward”: “After the age of 40, a man’s flat gives a good indication of what he is and what he has deserved.”

As the pages pass, there is an increasingly wistful sense of what time takes from us. “He was turning 62,” Paul Theroux wrote in “The Lower River,” “not an age of life-altering shocks but only of subtle diminishments.” And near the end, at 94, we get the testimony of Hugh G. Flood from Joseph Mitchell’s “Old Mr. Flood”: “Except for the bottle, I always walked the straight and narrow; a family man, a good provider, never cut up, never did ugly, and I regret it.”

Quotable

“If a character really does ‘come to life’ on the page as you write, she’s liable to do anything. Anything! Mine are always having religious fits or running off with men.” — Lee Smith, in an interview with BookPage

Prose on Russo’s Original ‘Fool’

This week, T. Coraghessan Boyle reviews “Everybody’s Fool,” Richard Russo’s sequel to “Nobody’s Fool,” the novel about a declining town in upstate New York and a hard-bitten resident named Sully, later played by Paul Newman in a movie adaptation. In 1993, Francine Prose wrote about “Nobody’s Fool” for the Book Review. She concluded by comparing the experience of reading the novel to what it must be like to spend time in its fictional setting of North Bath: “Mostly you’re curious and pleased, glad for a chance to eavesdrop and see into these lives, these souls. Then, after a while, you begin to fear that you’ll never get out of this place alive. But as the end of your stay approaches, you feel a premature nostalgia — you’ll miss the town, especially Sully — and you look around fondly, regretfully, as you speed up and drive on through.”


