


For his bookshop and website One Grand Books, the editor Aaron Hicklin asked people to name the 10 books they’d take with them if they were marooned on a desert island. The next in the series is the actor, director and writer Alan Cumming, who shares his list exclusively with T. (From May 1-22, One Grand will host a pop-up shop at Industry City in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.)

“The Trick Is To Keep Breathing,” Janice Galloway

This is like a Scottish “Catcher in the Rye.” You actually feel you’re inside this woman’s head, it is that visceral. And having experienced a downward spiral myself, I so admire her accuracy in every detail.

“The Passion,” Jeanette Winterson

Again, it’s all about the visceral! She understands yearning like no one else. And also, I love a good historic European romp.

“The Blind Assassin,” Margaret Atwood

Margaret Atwood is so clever and brilliant, just reading her book and keeping up with it made me feel like a genius. But to engage a reader emotionally over so many different story lines is awe-inspiring.

“Christopher and His Kind,” Christopher Isherwood

This is the unedited and unadulterated version of the stories that made up Isherwood’s books “Goodbye To Berlin” and “Mr Norris Changes Trains,” which were the source material for the play “I Am a Camera” and later the musical “Cabaret.” I find it fascinating that Isherwood still writes about himself in the third person. An interesting literary device, yet it feels like a smokescreen and leaves you wondering how much more there is to tell.

“Lanark: A Life in Four Books,” Alasdair Gray

This is an epic modern Scottish classic. Gray is a renowned artist as well as author, and here he paints a dystopian Glasgow that is mesmerizing and terrifying in equal measures.

“Close Up,” John Fraser

This is a beautifully written memoir that is completely frank and fascinating about life in the ’60s as an up-and-coming matinee idol who just happens to be gay.

“Maggie and Me,” Damian Barr

Margaret Thatcher loomed over my youth, and so she did with Damian Barr’s, though more pointedly and intricately woven in his. This is harrowing family saga but written with an abundance of wit and tenderness.

“The Beautiful Room Is Empty,” Edmund White

I found this book so educational in terms of what it must have been like to grow up in America, discovering you need to harbor a secret. And the yearning in these pages is so palpable.

“Five on a Treasure Island,” Enid Blyton

I grew up reading the “Famous Five” books, and recently I reread the first one and was shocked to realize it contains the first trans person I ever encountered, and also how much its almost fetishistic description of food had everything to do with the rationing that Britain was ensuring at the time. Lashings and lashings of ginger beer!

“After Leaving Mr. Mackenzie,” Jean Rhys

This is the story of a woman who has been discarded and who will not go down gently. If ever there was an unsung heroine of feminist literature, it is the amazing Jean Rhys.


