


Did you celebrate Bloomsday on Thursday? Yes, yes, yes? You needn’t have read the book. In many Bloomsday celebrations, huge chunks of the book, the incomparable “Ulysses,” are read for you and to you. It’s a perfectly good way to experience the Odyssean slog without having to, you know, do the work.

And work it is and always has been. In the 1920s, it was work just to get hold of “Ulysses,” because the Post Office Department burned any copies arriving on these shores. It had been serialized in an American magazine called The Little Review starting in 1918, but the Review went on trial on obscenity charges after it published the masturbation episode, and the Postal Service burned copies of the magazine, too.

The book and its Irish author, James Joyce, had their American champions from the outset, however. One of the biggest was Joseph Collins, who reviewed “Ulysses” in The New York Times. Dr. Collins was a prominent New York neurologist, but he also wrote books and wrote about books.

He wrote this in The Times on May 28, 1922, when “Ulysses” was first published as a book (although it was banned in the United States until 1933):

“A few intuitive, sensitive visionaries may understand and comprehend ‘Ulysses,’ James Joyce’s new and mammoth volume, without going through a course of training or instruction, but the average intelligent reader will glean little or nothing from it — even from careful perusal, one might properly say study, of it — save bewilderment and a sense of disgust.”

That was not an indictment. Dr. Collins was simply acknowledging that the book was tough going.

He was unequivocal when he got to his opinion of the work: “‘Ulysses’ is the most important contribution that has been made to fictional literature in the twentieth century,” he declared.

As for the “disgust” many readers might have felt: “Mr. Joyce has seen fit to use words and phrases that the entire world has covenanted and people in general, cultured and uncultured, civilized and savage, believer and heathen, have agreed shall not be used, and which are base, vulgar, vicious and depraved. Mr. Joyce’s reply to this is: ‘This race and this country and this life produced me — I shall express myself as I am.’”

What impressed Dr. Collins most (and many others after him) was the sheer comprehensiveness of the undertaking:

“Mr. Joyce is an alert, keen-witted, brilliant man who has made it a lifelong habit to jot down every thought that he has had, whether he is depressed or exalted, despairing or hopeful, hungry or satiated, and likewise to put down what he has seen or heard others do or say. It is not unlikely that every thought that Mr. Joyce has had, every experience he has ever encountered, every person he has ever met, one might almost say everything he has ever read in sacred or profane literature, is to be encountered in the obscurities and in the frankness of ‘Ulysses.’”

And then there was Joyce’s manner of assembling his jottings:

“He is the only individual that the writer has encountered outside of a madhouse who has let flow from his pen random and purposeful thoughts just as they are produced.”

Dr. Collins hastened to add that he was not trying to “impugn the sanity of Mr. Joyce.” Rather, “let me say at once that he is one of the sanest geniuses that I have ever known.”

Joyce even helped him be a better doctor: “I have learned more psychology and psychiatry from it than I did in ten years at the Neurological Institute. There are other angles at which ‘Ulysses’ can be viewed profitably, but they are not many.”


