


PEDERNALES, Ecuador — President Rafael Correa of Ecuador said Wednesday that the government would temporarily increase some taxes and might issue new bonds on the international market to help fund the multibillion-dollar reconstruction of homes, roads and buildings destroyed by a powerful earthquake.

“It’s hard to imagine the magnitude of the tragedy,” Mr. Correa said.

Another quake, with a magnitude of 6.2, shook the coast before dawn on Wednesday. It terrified inhabitants and briefly hindered rescuers searching for the dwindling number of survivors from Saturday’s bigger 7.8-magnitude quake, which killed at least 525 people, according to a central government tally.

Mr. Correa said the disaster had inflicted $2 billion to $3 billion of damage and could knock two to three percentage points off the nation’s economic growth.

“We’re looking at the possibility of issuing bonds on the international market, but other measures have been planned, a tax reform is being discussed,” Mr. Correa said.

Ecuador had been saying before the quake that current high yields would make it too expensive to issue debt. Yields on its bonds are close to 11 percentage points higher than comparable United States Treasury debt, according to data from JPMorgan.

Mr. Correa’s leftist government in 2008 defaulted on debt with a similar yield, calling bondholders “monsters” and the value unfair. His government has since returned to work with Wall Street .

Mr. Correa on Wednesday also announced several short-term tax changes to help Ecuador recover.

He decreed a 2-point increase in the Valued Added Tax for a year, as well as a “one-off 3 percent additional contribution on profits,” although the fine print was not immediately clear.

Four days after the quake, some communities struggled without water, power or transportation, although aid was trickling in.

“I’m waiting for medicines, diapers for my grandson, we’re lacking everything,” said Ruth Quiroz, 49, as she waited in a long line in front of a makeshift pharmacy in the town of Pedernales.

On a highway outside the town, some children sat holding placards reading “Food, please.”


