


OTTAWA — After a politically charged trial, a Conservative member of Canada’s Senate was vindicated on Thursday of 31 charges of fraud, breach of trust and bribery. Among other things, the senator, Mike Duffy, had been accused of improperly using Senate expense money to travel to a dog show to discuss Kerry Blue Terrier puppies.

The case against Mr. Duffy, a former television reporter, attracted a high degree of news media attention and fueled criticism of the Senate, whose members are appointed and which has long been one of the country’s least admired institutions.

“This was a resounding ‘not guilty,’” Donald Bayne, Mr. Duffy’s lawyer, said outside court. He added that Mr. Duffy had endured “more public humiliation than probably any Canadian in history.”

By international standards, the amount of money involved was less than dazzling.

At the center of the case was a charge that Mr. Duffy had solicited a bribe from Nigel Wright, the wealthy chief of staff to Stephen Harper, the former prime minister. Mr. Duffy owed more than $70,000 for expenses that had been ruled improper, and, in 2013, Mr. Wright covered the amount from his personal funds.

Some of the charges related to Mr. Duffy’s declaration that his primary residence was a cottage on Prince Edward Island, the province where he was born and which he represents. That allowed Mr. Duffy to collect a variety of secondary residence expenses for his house in Ottawa, the place where he has actually lived for decades. It was those expenses that Mr. Wright, who was never accused of wrongdoing, repaid.

The prosecutors presented several witnesses, including terrier breeders, in a bid to show that Mr. Duffy and his wife had spent 698 Canadian dollars, about $550, of Senate money to attend a dog show in Peterborough, Ontario.

The case, along with accusations against other senators, embarrassed Mr. Harper, who crusaded against corruption in the rival Liberal Party and whose government projected an image of fiscal probity. Critics noted that it was Mr. Harper who had appointed Mr. Duffy to the Senate. According to testimony during the trial, he was chosen chiefly for his ability to attract crowds at fund-raising events.

Justice Charles H. Vaillancourt of the Ontario Court of Justice found that Mr. Duffy’s expense account problems were not criminal acts, and he dismissed 27 charges and found Mr. Duffy not guilty of the remaining four.

In a 308-page decision that took hours to present, Justice Vaillancourt said Mr. Duffy was a “credible witness” whose actions had “no hint of criminality.”

He also concluded that Mr. Duffy, who has been on a paid leave of absence, had been open and honest with Senate administrators on how to deal with expenses in a system that was confusing and short on definitions of what was legitimate.

The judge said testimony showed that it was the general practice of senators to mix personal and partisan business with Senate work when claiming expenses.

There is widespread agreement in Canada that the Senate is in need of reform. But any substantive changes would require a constitutional amendment.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, a Liberal who replaced Mr. Harper in October, moved in January 2014 to limit partisanship in the Senate by cutting his party’s ties to Liberal senators.


