


Any restaurant set directly on a harbor — where docked fishing boats and moored sloops bob just beyond the windows — makes certain implicit promises. The first, of course, is: Good Seafood Served Here.

However, an equally important assurance of a harbor-front spot is: Jolly Times Had Here. A harbor isn’t just any waterfront location, after all; it’s a gathering place for sailors, fishermen and boating families — salty types who like to spend their days reveling in the sun and spray, and like to celebrate afterward with a hearty meal and cold beer.

Set on a marshy point in Guilford, amid floating piers piled with lobster traps, Guilford Mooring has, for most of its 16-year existence, largely made good on both of those unspoken pledges. It has faced some serious challenges along the way, though — most significantly, by clinging to life after enduring two hurricanes, Irene in 2011 and Sandy in 2012.

“There wasn’t a wall standing,” said Mike Romei, a co-owner, recalling the aftermath of Hurricane Irene. Mr. Romei and his partners spent the better part of a year rebuilding and renovating the restaurant, only to get blasted again by the next storm just a few months after reopening.

“Let’s just say we got two dramatic opportunities to make improvements to the place,” Mr. Romei said, laughing.

Resurrected again in spring 2013, Guilford Mooring almost immediately regained its reputation as a good-times dockside destination. On a recent Saturday night, when my family and I showed up for dinner, we bypassed the slightly grim dining room (dun-colored floor tiles, walls painted an institutional green) and took a high table in the much larger, and far livelier, barroom. Here, a clearly fun-loving crowd hoisting beers and cocktails distracted from the plain décor, and windows offered broad views over the yachts and the docks outside. (The bar also has no fewer than nine wall-mounted television screens, apparently for multidirectional sightlines onto the latest ballgame scores.)

We ordered an array of seafood dishes from our charming young server, who somehow managed to make herself heard over the gradually escalating din. She also seemed to magically reappear, without summoning, whenever we needed something (more wine, a replacement for a dropped fork). Our choices ran the gamut from harbor-side classics, like fish and chips, to more creative preparations incorporating Caribbean, Asian and Mexican flavors.

Overall, we were happy with our meal, but we agreed that the simpler the dishes were, the better they tasted. My mother’s fish and chips arrived hot, crunchy and gargantuan (each nugget of fried cod was the size of a finger on a baseball mitt). And my lobster roll — made with steaming hunks of fresh meat, drizzled with melted butter and stuffed into the traditional split hot-dog bun — was so delicious that I ended up curling my arm around my plate to ward off my companions’ forks and fingers.

In other dishes, though, we found that the delicate flavors of the fresh seafood were overpowered by too much goopy seasoning. My father’s blackened cod, which was wonderfully enlivened by a topping of mango-pepper salsa, was also deluged with a cloying passionfruit sauce. My husband’s grilled salmon, though perfectly moist and flaky, was nearly smothered by a sticky barbecue glaze; and a shared crispy tostada topped with beautiful, ruby-colored cubes of yellowfin tuna tartare was glopped with sriracha aioli. Even a starter of fried calamari was made soggy by a dousing of Thai-style sweet chili sauce (a bowl for dipping would have worked much better).

A follow-up lunch visit on a sunny weekday, when a friend and I took an umbrella-shaded table on the restaurant’s breezy deck, affirmed my first impressions. Though the vibe was far more serene (only a few families and wine-sipping couples surrounded us, along with sea birds floating overhead), we discovered that a tried-and-true, crispy-then-chewy heap of fried clam strips was nearly faultless. Another dish, of seared jerk-spiced salmon tacos, would have been excellent, too — if not for being saturated with coconut-chipotle dressing.

Which brings me to my final, slightly contradictory assessment of Guilford Mooring: To get the most out of its jovial harbor-party atmosphere, hitting the sauce may certainly be in order. But to fully enjoy its seafood, consider asking for the sauce on the side.


