


Valerie Rose Villarreal and Cesar Diaz were married April 30 at the Old Mission Santa Barbara in Santa Barbara, Calif. The Rev. Mark Martinez, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony, with the Rev. Larry Gosselin, also a Catholic priest, taking part.

The bride, 30, is a vice president for product marketing and strategy in Los Angeles for Ticketmaster, a division of Live Nation Entertainment. She graduated from Stanford, from which she also received an M.B.A. She is the daughter of Demetrio Villarreal of Las Vegas and the late Diane D. Villarreal. The bride’s father is a truck driver for Anderson Dairy, a dairy farm in Las Vegas. Her mother was a receptionist in Whittier, Calif., for Sanford Photography Studios.

The groom, 34, is a director of planning for New Urban West, a real estate development firm in Santa Monica, Calif. He graduated from U.C.L.A., from which he also received a master’s degree in urban planning. He is a son of Maria Luz Diaz and Sergio E. Diaz of Mar Vista, Calif. The groom’s parents retired as the owner of Fratellos, a restaurant in Los Angeles.

The couple met in November 2013 while waiting in line for bagels at a weekend religious retreat for young adults at St. Monica Catholic Church in Santa Monica, where they are both parish members.

“She was a burst of energy,” Mr. Diaz said. “She was so bubbly and had such nice eyes and great hair, I was like, ‘Wow, who is this girl?’”

They began making small talk and learned that they had both sprouted from Mexican-American roots and graduated from Catholic high schools, but that they did not share similar tastes in music.

“She told me that the night before, she had gone to an Avicii concert at the Hollywood Bowl,” Mr. Diaz said, laughing. “I was like, you know, there probably aren’t too many girls on this religious retreat who were up all night partying to electronic dance music.”

They parted ways without exchanging contact information but crossed paths the next month at a church celebration — this time while waiting in line for tamales — where they resumed their initial conversation.

“I found him to be a very cool guy with a calm demeanor, but yet he was very confident,” Ms. Villarreal said. “I was very impressed with his character. He just seemed like the kind of person you could count on and trust.”

This time they exchanged phone numbers, but two weeks later, the supposedly confident Mr. Diaz — who said he found Ms. Villarreal to be “sweet and super-intelligent but very down to earth” — was sent reeling when she turned down his invitation to go ice skating.

“I was like, ‘Oh great, she just blew me off,’” he said.

Ms. Villarreal, who liked Mr. Diaz but had declined his invitation because she had not been not feeling well, waited for another call that never came.

“I thought to myself, ‘I guess he isn’t a very proactive guy,’” she said.

In January 2014, Ms. Villarreal attended the birthday party of a mutual friend at a Hollywood bar hoping to bump into Mr. Diaz, but he was not there. At about midnight, she decided to head home, but when she opened the door to leave, she was greeted by a familiar face who was just arriving.

“It was Cesar,” said Ms. Villarreal, her voice still laced with excitement. “I was so thrilled to see him, and I knew that my night had just gotten a whole lot better.” Indeed, they danced and chatted until the bar closed before heading out for breakfast at a 1950s-style diner in Hollywood, their impromptu first date ending with an impromptu first kiss.

“The next day, I went out with my mom and I was bragging about Cesar,” Ms. Villarreal said. “My mom told me that since I had been blessed with so many friends, finding someone who I thought was different than the rest of them must mean that I had found a real angel, someone who was very special and worth pursuing.”

Ms. Villarreal took her mother’s advice and began dating Mr. Diaz. But two weeks later, she was dealt a crushing blow when her mother, who had begun feeling ill, was told she had advanced-stage ovarian cancer. “Cesar hadn’t even met my mom yet,” Ms. Villarreal said. “It was devastating.”

In March, Mr. Diaz did get to meet Ms. Villarreal’s mother, several times in fact, during hospital visits. On what turned out to be his last visit, Mr. Diaz leaned over the hospital bed and whispered to Ms. Villarreal’s mother, “Don’t worry, I’ll take care of Val.”

That night, Ms. Villarreal’s mother died.

“My mom knew right then and there that she was right,” Ms. Villarreal said. “I had found my angel.”


