


When the Mets arrived back at Citi Field on Tuesday afternoon, they were confronted with several notable changes since the last time they were home.

To start, the outfield grass was discolored and cut up because of a series of Beyoncé concerts here last week. Manager Terry Collins and his players inspected the jagged triangles in the outfield where new patches of sod had yet to take root and tested how the ball might bounce off the seams.

The lineup was also conspicuously different. Kelly Johnson, acquired from the Atlanta Braves last Wednesday, moved back into his old locker in the corner of the Mets’ clubhouse and was playing second base. Neil Walker and Michael Conforto were on the bench because of injuries, a development that had General Manager Sandy Alderson fielding questions before the game about how active the Mets might be in upgrading their offense before the trade deadline.

Nature dictates that the grass should eventually grow into form. The Mets’ offense, however, showed no signs of a breakout, their bats silenced in a 4-0 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates.

“Our lineup is what it is because that’s what we have,” Collins said after the game. “I’m not going to sit here and complain about it. We’ve got to get it done.”

Jameson Taillon, in his second major league start, defused the Mets’ lineup, allowing two hits in eight innings. The Mets’ first hit did not come until Curtis Granderson led off the seventh with a single.

When Taillon woke Tuesday morning, he was a member of the Pirates’ Class AAA affiliate in Indianapolis. By dusk, a confluence of events had led him to the Citi Field mound.

After Juan Nicasio threw 44 pitches in relief Friday, effectively making him unavailable for his scheduled start Tuesday, the Pirates placed Gerrit Cole on the disabled list with a right triceps strain to make room for Taillon.

Tommy John surgery and a sports hernia had delayed Taillon’s major league debut until last Wednesday, when he threw six solid innings against the Mets at PNC Park.

In his first road start, Taillon looked much more like a can’t-miss prospect, even against a diluted Mets lineup.

“He pitched like a big leaguer,” Collins said.

Carried by a mischievous curveball and an active fastball, Taillon retired the first seven batters he faced. Kevin Plawecki was hit by a pitch, and Taillon walked Yoenis Cespedes in the fourth inning, but otherwise the Mets’ offense was neutralized. Of the 24 outs collected while Taillon was on the mound, only one came on a fly ball to the outfield.

Despite Taillon’s brilliance, a more distressing takeaway for the Mets was their inability to make solid contact in the game. Taillon was not overpowering — he struck out five — and after having pitched last week against the Mets, he was not a complete mystery either.

Taillon did not try to confuse the Mets early. He threw all fastballs in the first inning, but the Mets were muted nonetheless.

“It started out as establishing the fastball, and then they never really adjusted too well off of that,” Taillon said. “I was commanding it well. I was throwing a lot of two-seams, getting good movement, weak contact. I didn’t really need to get away from it.”

Jacob deGrom was almost as stifling, shutting the Pirates out for the first five innings. But with two outs in the sixth, he allowed a single to Starling Marte, and Jung Ho Kang sent a fly ball over the center-field wall for the first two runs of the game.

“Other than that, I felt good out there,” deGrom said. “I think that was probably the best I’ve felt on the mound. All my pitches were working. It’s kind of frustrating to feel that good and end up giving up two.”

Marte added a two-run homer of his own in the eighth inning off reliever Jim Henderson.

Taillon had only 91 pitches through eight innings, but he had not pitched past the seventh inning all season. Given Taillon’s injury history, Pirates Manager Clint Hurdle cautioned against letting him finish the game.

While the Mets struggle with the uncertainty of assembling a potent lineup in the near future, the Pirates hope that this is just the beginning for Taillon.

“If he doesn’t throw a complete-game shutout the rest of his career,” Hurdle said, “I’ll wear this one to my grave.”


