


FRANKFURT — The debate in Germany over Chancellor Angela Merkel’s open-door policy toward the flood of asylum-seekers in the past year has played out in street demonstrations, beer halls and on the floor of Parliament. Now, the curators of the country’s pavilion at the Venice Architecture Biennale are weighing in, with an exhibition focusing on ways to integrate and house migrants.

The show at the Biennale, which opens Saturday, titled “Making Heimat. Germany, Arrival Country,” makes a case for continuing Germany’s “welcome culture” by presenting case studies and success stories, as well as an inventory of projects to provide shelter for migrants in Germany and elsewhere. The word “Heimat” can be roughly translated as homeland, and the pavilion posits it as a fluid concept that must be established through policy, culture — and of course, architecture.

“Merkel’s selfie with a refugee in September was this iconic image of Germany’s openness, so this was our starting point for the pavilion,” said Peter Cachola Schmal, the director of the German Architecture Museum in Frankfurt, which was commissioned by the German Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety to curate the exhibition.

Featuring works from 37 countries and running until Nov. 27, this year’s Biennale is curated by the Pritzker Prize winner Alejandro Aravena under the theme of “Reporting From the Front,” which the Biennale describes as “bringing to a broader audience, what it is like to improve the quality of life while working on the margins, under tough circumstances.”

As a statement of intent, the architecture museum and the Berlin design firm Something Fantastic, which was responsible for the exhibition’s visual component, have knocked out large openings in the walls of the German Pavilion building, a piece of Nazi-era architecture that has long been a subject of contention.

“It’s an illustration of open borders, but it’s also about the changing of German society,” Oliver Elser, a curator at the museum, said at a preview last month in Frankfurt.

The curators worked with the Canadian journalist Doug Saunders, whose 2011 book “Arrival City” studied the effects of migration on 20 cities around the world, to develop eight theses on districts with large immigrant populations — the so-called arrival cities of Mr. Saunders’s book. The theses, declared in bold block lettering over brightly colored backgrounds, are illustrated with textual and photographic documentation of immigrant communities in Germany.

One thesis, “The arrival city is a city within a city,” explores how immigrants flock to areas of high population density, citing districts in Germany with large percentages of foreign-born residents, such as Bahnhofsviertel in Frankfurt (52.4 percent) and Neckarstadt-West in Mannheim (47.9 percent). Another, “The arrival city is affordable,” looks at ways to encourage inexpensive housing and discourage speculation. (The exhibition quotes a recent government forecast that found that Germany will need an additional 100,000 new housing units annually to meet demand from the wave of new arrivals — over a million and counting in the past year.)

“The arrival city is informal” argues for relaxed oversight of business practices, illustrated by photographs of the Dong Xuan Center in Berlin, a sprawling Vietnamese market where zoning, labor and licensing restrictions are largely ignored.

This call for unorthodox solutions continues throughout the exhibition. Building codes and construction regulations, the curators argue, should not necessarily delay housing solutions for migrants. They call on the government to repeal Germany’s contentious “Residenzpflicht,” or residency requirement, which limits asylum seekers’ freedom of movement while their applications are pending.

“We found that it’s important for them to have access to support networks and to live within a city, where they can for instance visit a mosque, which also serves as a community space,” said Anna Scheuermann of the architecture museum, the pavilion’s project coordinator.

Another aspect of the exhibition is the Refugee Housing Database, which lists existing projects to house asylum seekers. Many are prefabricated structures built quickly and inexpensively in rural areas or on the outskirts of cities. A three-story timber-frame structure in Lautzenhausen with a capacity of 200 residents, for instance, was planned in three weeks and constructed in four months.

Absent from the database are the voices of refugees or meaningful consideration of what it feels like to live in these spaces, something the curators acknowledge, but attribute partly to the fast-changing situation on the ground.

Also missing are models of what housing solutions might look like, projections or multimedia components, which Mr. Schmal said was partly because the new openings in the pavilion, which have no doors, cannot be secured at night.

“Now that we’ve opened the pavilion,” he said, “models, electronics, anything valuable like that could be stolen.”

It was a “very difficult and long process,” Felix Torkar, an assistant curator at the architecture museum, said of getting permission from heritage authorities in Venice to alter the historic structure. The four openings were cut out in April with drill hammers, and reinforced with steel beams.

The pavilion itself has been an active part of previous Biennales, both art and architecture.

Originally built in 1909 and designed by Daniele Donghi as the Padiglione Bavarese, or Bavarian Pavilion, the building received an austere spare neoclassical redesign by Ernst Haiger in 1938 under the Nazi government.

The structure has provoked varied artistic reactions over the years. Perhaps the most drastic intervention took place at the 1993 Art Biennale, when Hans Haacke hung a photo of Hitler and shattered the building’s marble floor plates, leaving them as rubble to be walked over by visitors and winning in the process the Golden Lion, the art biennale’s top award. In the refugee crisis and ensuing public discourse, the curators saw an opportunity to make a more permanent alteration to the structure. (The Venice authorities required them to close the openings with bricks after the show, but they are hopeful that future curators will reopen then.)

“It’s the gesture of opening, and also of not really being able to close it up again,” Mr. Elser said. “For the people who arrive,” he added, “their new Heimat might be Germany, but at the same time, they are changing Germany.”

Such a message, of course, is not necessarily a welcome one in Germany. Indeed, in recent months public opinion has shifted on how to handle the migrant influx, and the country is now bitterly divided. That has complicated efforts to find sponsors, the curators said.

In February, Hornbach, a home-improvement chain, expressed reservations about their involvement in the project.

“They were saying, ‘What happens if the politics change and we are on the wrong side?’” Mr. Schmal said. But Hornbach ultimately signed on as a sponsor, wrapping the pavilion in posters bearing pro-diversity messages that also served as a way to shield the alterations from the public eye.

“We want to present another picture of Germany,” Mr. Elser said. “The country’s changing, the society’s changing, and that’s exactly what we’re trying to express here.”


