


On television, as in life, comfort food comes in all sorts of flavors. There’s the tart apple pie of “NCIS,” the solid corned beef and cabbage of “Blue Bloods,” the wacky loco moco of “Hawaii Five-0.”

“Rizzoli & Isles,” which begins its seventh and final season on Monday night, is in the TNT section of the menu. Like those other shows, which are on CBS, it’s good reheated. But it’s lighter and easier to eat with one hand while doing other things. It’s the thin-crust pizza of prime time.

That makes it the type of show that doesn’t generally garner much attention when it announces that its run is ending. (The final 13-week season will bring the show to a more-than-respectable 105 episodes.) A lot of people will notice, though, when “Rizzoli & Isles,” a formulaic buddy-cop drama — with the twist that the buddies are women and one’s a medical examiner — goes away.

During its most recent run of episodes this spring, the show never finished lower than fifth among scripted cable series in the Nielsen ratings, and stayed comfortably above four million viewers a week. Last summer, when it wasn’t up against the cable-ratings monsters “The Walking Dead,” “Fear the Walking Dead” and “Game of Thrones” — there really are just those three — it often finished first in the cable rankings, with an average audience north of six million.

Of course, when you narrow your focus to viewers under the age of 50, it’s a different picture. “Rizzoli & Isles” — and other popular TNT stablemates like “Major Crimes” and “The Last Ship” — drop 10 or more places in the cable rankings when you go from all viewers to viewers ages 18 to 49. Many of the people who mourn its passing will be within a few decades of saying goodbye themselves.

Which brings us back to comfort food. In the television landscape, is “Rizzoli & Isles” disposable, just a non-brain-taxing easy pleasure for those too old or distracted to get with the peak-TV program?

Well, no, of course not. When six million people find their way to a cable drama, there’s a reason. (It’s different on the broadcast networks, where 6.6 million found their way to “The Price Is Right” last week.)

“Rizzoli & Isles” is conventional and predictable, except for its tendency to engage in baroque plot arcs like the one that extends into the current season: The lives of Detective Jane Rizzoli (Angie Harmon) and Dr. Maura Isles (Sasha Alexander) are threatened by a jealous police academy washout whose genius for manipulation and ambush combines the best elements of Dickens’s Fagin and Vincent Price’s Dr. Phibes.

But at the same time the show, like “Major Crimes” and their TNT predecessor “The Closer,” is generally credible in the moment, with dialogue that’s sufficiently natural and often has some comic snap. The rhythms of the storytelling and the action — first under the creator and head writer, Janet Tamaro, and then under Jan Nash, who succeeded her as showrunner — are unforced but engaging, pulling you along despite the occasional melodramatic excesses.

The real secret — well, not a secret at all — is the combination of Ms. Harmon (the pigheaded tomboy Rizzoli) and Ms. Alexander (the cerebral sorority girl Isles). It’s not a matter of chemistry, exactly, or of either actress’s range or depth. It’s about their ingrained knowledge, as television series veterans, of how to build and maintain appealing characters across seasons. And it’s even about the characters they’ve played before — Ms. Harmon’s steely Abbie Carmichael on “Law & Order” informs Rizzoli, and Ms. Alexander’s spunky Caitlin Todd on “NCIS,” shockingly killed off early in that series, comes to mind whenever Isles is in danger.

The season premiere, on Monday, picks up where Season 6 ended, with shots fired at a wedding. Rizzoli, ever fearless, takes off in pursuit of the shooter. She’s wearing a low-cut party dress, and in many other series the camera would pay more attention to Ms. Harmon’s décolletage. In “Rizzoli & Isles” the focus is on her bare feet, as she yanks off her heels, the better to run through Boston streets. The shows that endure know and respect their audiences, even if advertisers and critics don’t.


