


LONDON — The British Broadcasting Corporation is variously seen as a crown jewel of British culture, a producer of refined entertainment and reliable news coverage and as a cumbersome monolith, burdened by scandal and mismanagement.

But there is wide agreement that the BBC is at a critical moment in its nearly 94-year history. Challenged by the same forces that have upended traditional news media organizations elsewhere, including the technology-driven fracturing of its mass audiences, it faces intense budget pressures. Accused of using public funds to distort the market for programming, it is under constant assault by private-sector competitors. Criticized by some members of the governing Conservative Party as having a left-leaning institutional bias, it has been caught in political crosscurrents.

As the government prepares to set out on Thursday its plans for a new BBC charter — the document governing its operations, and the first revision in a decade — Britain is grappling with fundamental questions about what role the broadcaster should play in a world of streaming video, podcasts and proliferating news sites. Already, the BBC has put itself through a series of staff cuts and reorganizations in recent years intended to address its array of challenges, from the legacy of long-ago sexual abuse cases involving big-name stars to lapses in its journalism.

Any institution so central to public life and so huge — it receives 3.72 billion pounds a year, or about $5.4 billion, through the £145.50 license fee nearly all households pay, plus £1.3 billion in commercial and other income — is inevitably going to prompt questions about its scope, size and purpose.

And the last few years have made it clear that the way the BBC is now governed and overseen has serious design flaws that the new charter will try to solve, though not without controversy.

As the publication date for the government draft approached, the debate flared, with newspapers suggesting that the government would dictate BBC programming schedules (fiercely denied), that it would demand that the BBC publish the salaries of its stars (the BBC says it will not) and that it would ask the BBC to share some of its income with independent children’s television producers.

At the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards on Sunday, some winners gave speeches about the need to protect the BBC. Peter Kosminsky, who directed “Wolf Hall,” the much-lauded BBC drama about the court of Henry VIII, warned that the government was trying to “eviscerate” the BBC and turn it into a state broadcaster like those in Russia and North Korea.

John Whittingdale, the culture secretary in the Conservative government of Prime Minister David Cameron, is among those who have given the BBC a major scare as the government prepares to unveil the draft.

In a digital age, when the media world is rapidly changing, “we must at least question whether the BBC should try to be all things to all people,” Mr. Whittingdale told the news media. He has questioned whether the public should be funding commercial enterprises, whether the BBC should be competing so directly with commercial stations in popular entertainment, whether it should be concentrating more on “distinctiveness” than ratings, and whether its news website is damaging newspapers.

Mr. Whittingdale has also made offhand comments that have indicated a deeper animus, as he did recently to Conservative students at the University of Cambridge. He said that he was often “driven insane” by the way the BBC deals with complaints about impartiality, and by the way it treats those favoring a British exit from the European Union as “faintly mad.”

The current charter runs out at the end of 2017. “If we don’t renew it,” he told the students, “it may be that the BBC will cease to exist, which is occasionally a tempting prospect.”

Mr. Whittingdale has taken a much harder line on the BBC than has Mr. Cameron, who, along with his No. 2, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, calls the broadcaster a great national institution, if one with flaws. The difference in tone on the issue reflects the deeper split among Conservatives on a variety of topics, not least Britain’s membership in the European Union. Mr. Whittingdale, like many of the BBC’s toughest critics, favors a British exit from the bloc.

Mr. Whittingdale’s criticisms threw the BBC “into a completely juvenile reaction, accusing all critics of being part of ideological assault, and it has done them no credit,” said Steve Hewlett, an analyst who conducts a media show on BBC Radio 4.

For now the BBC appears to have escaped radical government-imposed changes, reflecting both the government’s preoccupation with the European Union vote and popular support for the broadcaster. Officials say that Conservatives remain uncomfortable with a publicly funded broadcaster skewing competition with the private sector, but that overall the mood within the government about the state of the BBC has improved.

The government’s current demand is that the BBC produce material that is “more distinctive” from the commercial market. No one has defined what that means, but the argument tends to center on “Strictly Come Dancing,” a major BBC prime-time success that could have been made by the commercial sector.

James Purnell, a former Labour Party legislator who is director of strategy and digital at the BBC, argues that “distinctiveness” means “that the BBC aspires to make the best possible program in any genre,” whether it is a soap opera or drama, and that the BBC must serve everyone, since nearly everyone is a license payer. And “Strictly” is a BBC production from start to finish.

But others, including Chris Patten, the former head of the BBC Trust and a fierce supporter of the BBC and critic of Mr. Whittingdale, say they wonder whether the BBC should have spent millions in bidding to buy the rights for “The Voice UK,” an adaptation of a Dutch show. “The Voice UK” is hugely successful on Saturday nights against a homegrown commercial show – but it is a program to which the BBC added little that is distinctive.

Part of the answer, the government concludes, is to increase the amount of material on the BBC that is produced independently or through competition, enlarging the “window of creative competition” from its current 25 percent. In response, Mr. Purnell said, the BBC wants to abandon its “in-house quotas” and open nearly everything to competition, while creating its own BBC Studio to compete in every market, including the commercial one.

Abroad, the government seems happy to let the BBC compete in the digital market against companies like Netflix and experiment with live-streaming and subscriptions. It has even provided additional money to the BBC World Service, which used to be funded by the Foreign Office and then only by the BBC, again raising questions about government interference.

The key question of the BBC’s finances appears to have been settled last July, when Mr. Osborne, needing to fill a hole in his budget, made a deal with the BBC director general, Tony Hall. The BBC agreed to bear the cost over time of free television licenses for subscribers over the age of 75 in return for linking the license fee — paid by every household for the right to receive television programs, either live or streamed — to the cost of living.

It will mean, however, a cost of up to £800 million to the BBC, Mr. Hewlett said, about 20 percent of license fee income.

Since 2009, the BBC has cut the number of senior managers and its wage expenses by a third, has moved a youth channel, BBC 3, online and has announced that an additional 1,000 jobs will be chopped, while selling property and aiming to cut costs by a further 20 percent over the next five years, Mr. Purnell said.

The proposed charter would also change how the BBC is governed, a shift that has ignited a fierce argument about how much influence the government would have on a newly constituted BBC board, in particular whether giving the government the power to appoint a majority of nonexecutive board members would effectively strip the broadcaster of its independence.

Even though the BBC gets billions in public money, said Alex Towers, the director of the BBC Trust, which oversees BBC management, “there needs to be independence, or it can’t do its job for democracy.”


