


Russell Westbrook had 29 points and 10 assists, and the Oklahoma City Thunder held on to beat the Spurs, 98-97, in San Antonio on Monday night, evening the teams’ second-round Western Conference series at one game apiece.

The Spurs failed to score on a wild sequence in the final seconds.

Kevin Durant added 28 points as the Thunder handed the Spurs just their second home loss of the season, rebounding from a 32-point beating in Game 1.

Oklahoma City’s Dion Waiters appeared to push Manu Ginobili while inbounding to start the final possession, and Danny Green stole the ball from Durant. Patty Mills missed an open 3-pointer, San Antonio’s LaMarcus Aldridge lost the ball after grabbing the air ball, and Kawhi Leonard was unable to gather the ball before the buzzer sounded.

Aldridge had 41 points in his second straight dominant performance, but the rest of the Spurs did not provide the same assistance they did in San Antonio’s 32-point victory in Game 1.

Game 3 is Friday at Oklahoma City.

Aldridge, an All-Star forward, had 13 points in the final quarter, including two 3-point plays. He made his second 3-pointer of the season to pull San Antonio to within 96-94 and then made three free throws after being fouled by Serge Ibaka to make it 98-97, setting up the final sequence.

CAVALIERS 104, HAWKS 93 LeBron James scored 25 points, Kyrie Irving added 21, and Cleveland withstood a strong comeback by visiting Atlanta to maintain its dominance over the Hawks in Game 1 of the teams’ second-round Eastern Conference series.

James converted a critical 3-point play with 2 minutes 9 seconds left for the Cavaliers, who fell behind in the fourth after leading by 18 points.

Cleveland swept Atlanta in last year’s Eastern Conference finals and has won eight straight over the Hawks. Cleveland also improved to 9-0 against Atlanta in the postseason.

Dennis Schroder scored a playoff career-high 27 and rallied the Hawks before they crumbled in the closing minutes. Atlanta’s offense bogged down in crunchtime, and the Hawks scored only two field goals in the final four minutes.

Paul Millsap added 17 points and 13 rebounds for Atlanta, which got just 8 points from Jeff Teague.

James’s 3-point play, which he punctuated by flexing his biceps, came after he stripped the ball from Schroder and the Cavaliers kept their possession alive with two offensive rebounds, one by Tristan Thompson, the other by J. R. Smith.

Game 2 is Wednesday night.

The Cavaliers did not show any rust of an eight-day break after the first round until the third quarter, when their offense slowed and the Hawks got hot. But when it mattered most, the defending conference champions made the big plays, and as always, James led the way.

Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue was not worried about his team being overly confident despite its success over the Hawks.

“This team has our team’s attention,” he said before the game. “They’re a good team. We know they’re capable of scoring the basketball and playing great defensively. We’re not going to overlook these guys.”

HOPEFUL ABOUT CURRY Stephen Curry was expected back on the court for more light shooting Monday to test his sprained right knee, still with the hope he could be ready to return for Golden State’s Game 3 of the Western Conference semifinals Saturday at Portland.

Coach Steve Kerr said Monday that Curry would not be available for Tuesday night’s Game 2 with the Warriors up by one game to none in the best-of-seven series after a 118-106 win Sunday in the opener.

Curry showed his face only briefly during the team’s shooting time Monday. He did not take any shots during the portion the news media could watch. Curry sprained the medial collateral ligament in his knee during a Game 4 first-round victory at Houston on April 24 when he slipped on a wet spot just before halftime.

With Golden State scheduled to take Wednesday off, Curry’s first chance to scrimmage in a five-on-five would most likely be Thursday.


