


PARIS — Paris experienced its worst floods since 1982 on Friday as the Seine River climbed to about 20 feet. It was not as bad as the catastrophic deluge of 1910 (26.2 feet), or the smaller but still destructive flood of 1955 (23.7 feet), but it prompted the hasty movement of masterpieces at the Louvre, created havoc for commuters and disrupted at least one wedding. South of the French capital, the heavy rains caused extensive property damage.

Why does the Seine, famous for its bridges, flood at all?

As one of France’s major commercial waterways, the river is closely monitored so it can accommodate a constant procession of barges and other commercial vessels. The river begins in Burgundy, in east-central France, and meanders 485 miles westward until it reaches its mouth, near the port city of Le Havre.

Dams and locks normally keep the water level consistent, particularly in the Paris region, where the Seine’s traffic is especially heavy, in part because of tourist and other recreational vessels. If the water level drops too far, the barges could scrape the riverbed and get damaged. If it gets too high, vessels cannot pass under the city’s lowest bridges.

Upstream from Paris, four large dams control the flow of the Seine and three of its major tributaries: the Aube, the Marne and the Yonne. According to Charles Perrin, a hydrologist at the National Research Institute of Science and Technology for Environment and Agriculture, in late spring the dams start stocking large reserves of water that can be released in the drier summer months.

The dams were already at 95 percent capacity when heavy rains started in late May, so their ability to take in the excess water was limited.

Another cause of the flooding was the exceptional swelling of the tributaries that meet the Seine downstream from the dams, before it reaches Paris. One tributary, the Loing, flooded the town of Nemours. Closer to Paris, smaller dams help regulate the flow through the capital, much like speed bumps on a road. But they were powerless to withstand the extraordinary swelling this week.

One traditional way to measure the rise of the Seine is to look at the Zouave, a stone sculpture of a soldier from Emperor Napoleon III’s army that stands in the river alongside the Pont de l’Alma. On Friday, water lapped at his waist; in 1910, it reached his shoulders. (The comparison is not exact, because the statue was moved when the bridge was reconstructed in the early 1970s.)

The scientific measure of the water level — and the one the authorities use — is taken farther east, at the Pont d’Austerlitz, via floating devices and ultrasound equipment. The Pont d’Austerlitz is also where the flow of the river in Paris is gauged. Because Paris’s riverbanks are built up, the Seine’s flow accelerates as it goes through the city.

The average flow is about 10,600 cubic feet per second. As of 4 p.m. Friday, the flow had risen to 60,000 cubic feet per second. For safety reasons, navigation was halted on Wednesday on the river and the Canal St.-Martin, the waterway that runs into Paris and meets the Seine just south of Place de la Bastille.


