


CLEVELAND — CLEVELAND — Late Saturday morning, about 10 hours after the Cleveland Cavaliers lost to the Golden State Warriors in Game 4 of the N.B.A. finals, dozens of workers in wine-colored shirts were stuffing trash bags and sweeping out the aisles inside Quicken Loans Arena.

They were getting the arena ready for a record crowd of 19,665 that, hours later, packed the place — but not to watch LeBron James. Instead, they were there to cheer on Cleveland’s minor-league hockey team, the Lake Erie Monsters, as they tried to nail down a title for a famously championship-starved city.

“We’re aware of what’s gone on here,” Ryan Craig, the Monsters’ 34-year-old captain, said during the team’s morning skate on Saturday.

As he spoke, the basketball nets and court, as well as a few thousand seats, had been stashed away, and the Monsters, in their first year as an affiliate of the N.H.L.’s Columbus Blue Jackets, has come out onto the freshly Zambonied sheet of ice for a laugh-filled and rambunctious morning skate.

The Monsters’ basketball counterparts, the Cavaliers, trail the Warriors by three games to one in the finals and few give them a chance of prevailing. But the Monsters were an entirely different story, especially for Cleveland.

As they skated Saturday morning, they knew they needed just one more victory to complete a four-game sweep of the Hershey Bears, the Washington Capitals’ top farm team, and capture the American Hockey League’s Calder Cup finals.

And with a goal by Oliver Bjorkstrand with just two seconds remaining in the first overtime on Saturday night, the Monsters did just that, the 1-0 victory giving Cleveland its first hockey title since the Barons won the same Calder Cup in 1964.

As everyone in Cleveland — and maybe the whole country — seems to know, 1964 was also the last year a team from the city won a big-league sports championship, with the Cleveland Browns beating the Baltimore Colts, 27-0, for the N.F.L. title on Dec. 27 at Cleveland Municipal Stadium, which was razed 20 years ago. (The Cleveland Crunch, it should be noted, won three National Professional Soccer League titles indoors in the 1990s.)

“I mean, if you’re a sports fan at all, and you come to Cleveland, you’re made aware of that stuff right away,” Golden State Coach Steve Kerr, a former Cavaliers guard, saidFriday.

The Monsters were not pretending that a Calder Cup equals a Stanley Cup — or, for that matter, the Larry O’Brien N.B.A. Championship Trophy, an oversized replica of which was placed smack-dab in the middle of the Fan Fest area at the Cavaliers’ gameFriday night.

But they said a trophy for Cleveland would be a significant accomplishment. The Monsters, who had been an affiliate of the Colorado Avalanche for eight seasons, were third in the 30-team A.H.L. in attendance during 2015-16 regular season, averaging 8,596 per game.

“It helps them get prepared for the next step — it’s not just a couple thousand people in an empty building,” said Jock Callander, a former forward for the International Hockey League’s Cleveland Lumberjacks who is now the color commentator on Monsters’ radio and TV broadcasts.

Game 3 of the Calder Cup finals had been played at Quicken Loans Arena and drew 12,935. Tony Brown, the Monsters’ play-by-play announcer, said: “The support has been great. This market is so hungry for a championship.”

Youth hockey here is big, and hockey is not new. The Cleveland Indians played in the I.H.L. from 1929 to 1933, when they were renamed the Falcons. The Falcons became the Barons in 1936 and won the Calder Cup nine times before moving to Jacksonville, Fla., in 1973.

The Cleveland Crusaders of the World Hockey Association opened in 1972, moving from Cleveland Arena to the suburban Richfield Coliseum in 1974. For two seasons in the mid-’70s, Cleveland had an N.H.L. team, also called the Barons, which drew poorly.

The Lumberjacks popped up in 1992 and lasted until the I.H.L. folded in 2001, and yet another iteration of the Barons, this time a San Jose Sharks’ farm team, played in the A.H.L. from 2002-6 until moving to Worcester, Mass.

A banner with Callander’s number with the Lumberjacks, 15, hangs in the rafters at Quicken Loans Arena, next to the No. 1 worn by Barons’ goaltender Johnny Bower, the No. 9 worn by Barons center Fred Glover and another banner commemorating the Barons’ Calder Cups.

With the Blue Jackets established 140 miles away and the Pittsburgh Penguins 150 miles away, it is unlikely that an N.H.L. team will return to Cleveland any time soon. But the Blue Jackets and the Monsters have benefited from their relationship.

“You’re not so far away that someone gets there every once in a while, so you can assess these guys as they grow,” said Bill Zito, the Monsters’ general manager and the Blue Jackets’ assistant general manager. “Our market gets to come up there and see the young guys play.”

Josh Anderson, a 22-year-old Monsters’ forward who played 12 games for the Blue Jackets this season, said of the parent club, “They didn’t have the year they wanted up there, and now they’re rooting for us to win for the whole organization.”

The arena, of course, is still the Cavaliers’ domain. The Monsters take up little space: Their dressing room is down a corridor, carpeted with the Cavs’ “C” logo, from the Cavaliers’ ornate locker room. Still videos pitching Monsters’ tickets are splashed on the big screen during Cavaliers’ games.

Work crews allowed giant N.B.A. playoff banners to hang from the rafters Saturdaynight, because the Cavaliers could avoid elimination by winning Game 5 of the N.B.A. finals on Monday in Oakland, Calif. Game 6, if necessary, would be here on Thursday.

The Monsters, meanwhile, are now champions, whatever fate awaits the Cavaliers They had even grown playoff beards. The veterans on the team had lush facial hair, with the promising young players trying to catch up.

“Some guys can grow them, some guys can’t,” said Craig, who has played most of his 13-year professional career in the minor leagues. “The good thing is that we’ve had two months to grow them.”

And now a whole summer to celebrate a championship, which is always remarkable in Cleveland.


