


Journalists from around the world were invited to North Korea to cover the ruling party’s first congress in 36 years on Friday. But while many were allowed to travel to Pyongyang, the capital of the reclusive country, they were then barred from the actual event.

So on Twitter and Facebook, journalists reported far from the proceedings taking place inside the convention hall where the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, is using the rare political gathering to consolidate his power.

In theory, the Workers’ Party, which governs North Korea, is supposed to hold a congress every five years. But this is only the seventh in the party’s 70-year history. The last one was held in 1980, before Mr. Kim was even born. Kim Il-sung was in charge then. It is not entirely clear why the event is happening now or what the government hoped to get with world news coverage. Reporters were working around the restrictions, with some improvisation on social media.

The press restrictions were not unusual for the country, which does not allow journalists to move freely. They are typically accompanied by government minders who monitor every step outside the hotel. Interviews with people on the street are overseen by the monitors as well.

News bureaus operated by foreign press organizations are rare. The Associated Press, for example, has been permitted to have an office, but without a full-time presence. The agency’s journalists are required to get government permission each time they visit, which they are allowed to do only for several weeks at a time. They are not allowed to move about freely when they do. (The New York Times was not granted visas to enter the country for the conference.)

This congress was not the first time that international journalists have been corralled far from the action. In 2012, more than 50 foreign journalists accepted coveted invitations to North Korea for celebrations exalting the centenary of the country’s deceased founder, Kim Il-sung, the ascension of Kim Jong-un and a rocket launching.

They were cloistered in a hotel’s press room, which North Korean government chaperones would not let them leave for hours. The reporters learned about the rocket launching via messages and telephone and Internet connections from people outside the country.

On Friday, as in 2012, as the congress proceedings got underway, foreign journalists on the scene reported at a distance. It was not immediately clear whether access to the event, which last several days, will change for the unusually large press corps in the country, which Reuters reported was 128 reporters from 12 countries.

So the visiting journalists found themselves out on Twitter and Facebook, with the rest of us.


