


Chris Colabello, the Toronto Blue Jays first baseman, whose rise from the independent leagues to the major leagues was an endearing story of perseverance, was suspended for 80 games without pay Friday after testing positive for performance enhancing drugs.

Colabello, 32, tested positive for dehydrochlormethyltestosterone, a steroid banned by Major League Baseball that had gained notoriety during the East German doping scandals. It is the same drug that the Philadelphia Phillies pitcher Daniel Stumpf tested positive for earlier this month.

In a statement, Colabello said he was informed on March 13 by M.L.B. that he had tested positive. Players who test positive for performance-enhancing drugs can request tests on a second sample and also appeal to an arbitrator.

“I have spent every waking hour since that day trying to find an answer as to why or how?” Colabello said in the statement. “The only thing I know is that I would never compromise the integrity of the game of baseball. I love this game too much!”

Colabello, who did not speak with reporters in Toronto, where the Blue Jays lost to the Athletics, 8-5, on Friday night, is one of the team’s more popular players — fluent in Spanish, he mixed easily with the Latin players as well as the team’s star Josh Donaldson, with whom they share the same private hitting coach.

Colabello, who was called up from the minor leagues last May, hit .321 with 15 home runs and 54 R.B.I. to help the Blue Jays reach the playoffs for the first time in 22 years.

It was an especially gratifying season for Colabello, who graduated magna cum laude from Assumption College near his home in Milford, Mass., and spent seven years playing in independent leagues, which are not affiliated with any of the 30 major league clubs. At age 28, he finally landed a spot in the Minnesota Twins’ minor league system and two years later made his major league debut.

“This hurts me as much as it hurts him,” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons told reporters in Toronto.

He added: “He’s been a big part of our team. There isn’t a guy in that room that doesn’t love him. He’s been through a lot to get here — ups and downs — and I’m sure he’ll fight this.”

ATHLETICS 8, BLUE JAYS 5 Chris Coghlan hit a three-run home run, Stephen Vogt had three hits, and Oakland won its sixth straight, beating host Toronto.

The Athletics ended a six-game skid at Rogers Centre and set season-highs in runs and hits (14). (AP)

WHITE SOX 5, RANGERS 0 Chicago pulled off its first triple play in nearly 10 years to secure Jose Quintana’s scoreless outing and beat visiting Texas.

Mitch Moreland drilled a ball down the right field line that Adam Eaton caught on the run as the runners took off. Eaton threw to first to get Ian Desmond, and the White Sox eventually got Prince Fielder in a rundown between third and home to finish the play. (AP)

INDIANS 2, TIGERS 1 Carlos Santana and Marlon Byrd homered off Justin Verlander, lifting Cleveland to a win over host Detroit.

Verlander (1-2) gave up four hits, but two were costly because they went over the fence in right field. He walked two and struck out 10. (AP)

NATIONALS 8, TWINS 4 Jayson Werth hit a home run and prevented one in left field, Gio Gonzalez pitched six-plus innings, and Washington defeated visiting Minnesota. Gonzalez (1-0) enjoyed offensive support for the first time in three starts while allowing three runs — two earned — on six hits. (AP)

CUBS 8, REDS 1 Anthony Rizzo homered for the third consecutive game, and Jon Lester gave a fitting follow-up to Jake Arrieta’s no-hitter by going seven innings and leading visiting Chicago to a victory over Cincinnati.

Rizzo hit a solo shot — his team-high sixth — off Jon Moscot (0-1) as the Cubs pulled ahead, 4-0, in the fourth inning. They are 12-0 this season when scoring at least four runs. (AP)

ROYALS 4, ORIOLES 2 Chris Young struck out 10 in six innings, Mike Moustakas homered, doubled twice and drove in three runs, and Kansas City beat visiting Baltimore. Young (1-3) gave up two runs and four hits. (AP)


