


Here’s a look at the week ahead.

ECONOMY

British voters go to the polls on Thursday to determine whether to remain part of the European Union or sever the relationship, kicking off fraught and complicated divorce proceedings. A vote for a so-called Brexit would sow uncertainty through the global economy and almost certainly slow Britain’s economy as it negotiated a new trading arrangement with Europe. But the “leave” camp has a real shot at winning the vote on the strength of electoral yearnings for tighter limits on immigration — something Britain can’t impose while part of the European Union. Peter S. Goodman

On Tuesday and Wednesday, the Federal Reserve’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, will be presenting her semiannual testimony on monetary policy to Congress. She will appear before the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday, followed by the House Financial Services Committee on Wednesday.

The Fed left rates unchanged when officials met last week. But Ms. Yellen’s testimony will be closely watched for any sign of when the Fed will decide to tighten monetary policy. Although Wall Street seems to think the next move may come in September, analysts will be looking for any hint on whether July remains an option, as well as any thoughts on the looming vote in Britain. Nelson D. Schwartz

____________

TECHNOLOGY

Facebook will hold its annual shareholder meeting in Silicon Valley on Monday, where its top executives, Mark Zuckerberg, Sheryl Sandberg and others, will field questions about the state of the company. Up for a vote is a proposed new stock structure, one that is intended to continue giving Mr. Zuckerberg majority voting control over the company even as he plans to sell off his stock in the coming years to donate much of his wealth to philanthropic causes. The proposal is expected to pass, since Mr. Zuckerberg already maintains strict control under current company bylaws. Mike Isaac

European politicians will decide on Monday whether to approve new rules allowing companies like Google and Facebook to transfer personal data back and forth across the Atlantic. The proposals, known as the E.U.-U.S. Privacy Shield, have been criticized by some for failing to fully protect Europeans’ rights, and the lawmakers may still ask for more concessions from their American counterparts to meet Europe’s strict privacy standards. Mark Scott

BlackBerry is no longer in danger of imminent collapse, as was the case when John S. Chen was brought in to lead the company in 2013. But as Mr. Chen prepares to run the company’s annual meeting in Waterloo, Ontario, on Wednesday and release first-quarter results on Thursday, his turnaround plan, which involves focusing on phone management and security systems for business and government, remains unproved. Despite adopting Google’s Android operating system, BlackBerry has not revived the smartphone business it once dominated. Last week, Maynard Um, an analyst at Wells Fargo, published a detailed case for finally shutting down the phone business. That would cut BlackBerry’s revenue almost by half to just over $1 billion, by Mr. Um’s estimates. But he forecast that without phones, BlackBerry could earn 27 cents a share this year rather than lose 10 cents a share. Ian Austen

General Electric’s software business is now a stand-alone unit, GE Digital. On Thursday morning, G.E. executives will present Wall Street analysts a progress report on the new unit. At the moment, G.E. Digital looks modest financially. The company has said it expects $6 billion in revenue this year, compared with total G.E. revenue of $117 billion in 2015. But G.E. has set aggressive growth targets for GE Digital. And the software unit’s new products including Predix, an operating system for the industrial internet, are vital to G.E.’s plan to become a “digital-industrial company.” Steve Lohr

____________

AUTO INDUSTRY

Volkswagen will hold its annual shareholders’ meeting in Hanover, Germany, on Wednesday. Members of top management and VW’s supervisory board are expected to get an earful from shareholders about the company’s slim profits and emissions misconduct. But there are unlikely to be any real consequences as almost all of Volkswagen’s voting shares are owned by members of the Porsche and Piëch families, the state of Lower Saxony and the sovereign wealth fund of Qatar. Jack Ewing

____________

BANKING

Finance officials from more than 40 founding countries of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which was organized by China in part to provide an alternative to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, will gather in Beijing next weekend for an annual meeting. China has tried to follow some of the international governance standards from the older multilateral institutions, partly in response to criticism from the United States, which remains unwilling to join the new development bank, and from Europe, where some countries have decided to join. The bank has 57 founding countries, but not all have ratified the necessary documents in their legislatures and so not all will have finance officials to participate fully in the meeting. Keith Bradsher


