


The Democratic race may already be over by the time the California polls open. According to The Associated Press, Hillary Clinton has already earned the 2,383 delegates needed to win the nomination. Yet in some ways California is still the most interesting contest between her and Bernie Sanders so far.

It’s hard to know how much the news may depress turnout, but it has easily been the closest contest in a big state, at least in the pre-election polls. And even though the election result won’t affect the outcome of the race, the stakes are nonetheless real: the chance for Mr. Sanders to continue making his case to change the minds of superdelegates heading into the convention.

Mrs. Clinton leads Mr. Sanders in all the polls. But the polls are close enough that he could win.

On average, she leads by six percentage points among the six surveys that have been conducted over the last month. Four of them show an extremely tight race, with Mrs. Clinton leading by two points. The other two show her with a double-digit lead among likely voters.

It’s worth noting that we have the benefit of two of the most reliable polls in the business: the Field Poll and the Los Angeles Times/U.S.C./GQR poll. They show Mrs. Clinton with a two- and a 10-point lead, respectively. The P.P.I.C. poll, which has her up by two points, is also very well regarded.

Three more familiar national pollsters have also surveyed the state: NBC/WSJ/Marist, SurveyUSA and CBS/YouGov. All three had solid results in primary seasons and have strong longer-term track records.

These six polls are also methodologically diverse — two use voter-file samples (Field and LAT/GQR/U.S.C.); two use random-digit dialing (NBC/WSJ/Marist and P.P.I.C.); one is the top online panel (CBS/YouGov); and one, SurveyUSA, is the most innovative poll still employing automated calls to landline telephones (it surveys people on mobile apps as well).

You can compare this to having a diversified stock portfolio. No method is perfect, and each has potential biases. My preference is for the voter-file-based sample (like Field and LAT/GQR/U.S.C.). But a diverse set of polls helps protect against the possibility that one of those potential biases is skewing our perception of the race.

This does not mean that Mrs. Clinton will win. But a diverse number of higher-quality polls is reason to be somewhat more confident in her edge.

The notion that California could be fairly competitive is not much of a surprise. In March, Mrs. Clinton had a six-point edge in the Upshot’s demographic-based estimates. The same model, updated to include the primary results since then, gives her a seven-point edge.

Mrs. Clinton had an edge in our estimate for a simple reason: diversity and affluence. She has tended to do best among nonwhite voters and wealthy white voters. California is full of both. White voters without a college degree — a strength of Mr. Sanders — represent a decided minority of the Democratic electorate there.

But the polls showing a close race — including Field, P.P.I.C., CBS/YouGov and NBC/Marist — suggest that Mrs. Clinton isn’t taking advantage of the state’s huge population of nonwhite voters to quite the same extent that she has in other contests. According to the surveys, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders are basically splitting both the white and nonwhite vote.

This is surprising but not inexplicable. Most of the state’s nonwhite voters are Asian-American or Hispanic. Mrs. Clinton has always excelled among black voters, but the leanings of other nonwhite voters are somewhat less clear. Mrs. Clinton has generally won the Hispanic vote — including in Florida, Texas, Arizona and New York — but she lost it in Illinois. We have very little data on Asian-American voters because they represent such a small share of the population outside California.

The big reason for the lack of a decided advantage for Mrs. Clinton, it seems, is voter age. Mr. Sanders is hugely popular among the young, and the nonwhite electorate in California is pretty young. Hispanic voters are generally young everywhere in the country, but contests in Florida, Arizona and New York that were open only to registered Democrats have resulted in a somewhat older Hispanic electorate than what you would get in an open contest like California. Texas and Illinois are probably the two better comparisons, and there the results were a split decision.

What’s obvious is that turnout among young nonwhite voters is pretty important to Mr. Sanders’s chances, and it’s a big question mark.

Mrs. Clinton is accumulating a significant lead in the early absentee voting that’s already underway.

All of the polls show her with a lead among voters who have already cast ballots. Data from Political Data’s Paul Mitchell makes it very clear why: 69 percent of the vote that has been tabulated so far (2.7 million ballots for all primary races) has been from voters over age 55, while just 10 percent has come from voters ages 18 to 35. In comparison, 25 percent of registered voters are ages 18 to 35, and 41 percent are ages 55 and over.

Part of this is inevitable. Older voters send in their ballots early, and young people vote closer to the deadline.

But there’s another catch: “No Party Preference” voters (as opposed to registered Democrats) had to specifically request Democratic ballots to participate in the primary. Many did not. Mr. Mitchell’s data indicates that just 15 percent of No Party Preference voters requested a Democratic ballot; the rest did not receive a ballot with the Democratic contest.

This creates a big burden for Mr. Sanders. Many of his voters — including those who usually vote by mail — will need to vote in person on Election Day to receive a ballot. Mrs. Clinton’s base of registered Democrats, on the other hand, will receive the right ballot in the mail. This will contribute to a higher turnout among registered Democrats.

To win, Mr. Sanders is going to need to get a very high turnout from these voters. It can happen — the polls show a close enough race. But there’s as much downside as upside here for him: You could imagine that pollsters are giving the self-reported vote intention of Mr. Sanders and Mrs. Clinton’s supporters equal weight, even though his voters have more hoops to jump through.

Mrs. Clinton’s big early vote lead has another advantage: it helps insulate her against the possibility of lower turnout in the aftermath of many news networks calling the Democratic race for Mrs. Clinton.

Mrs. Clinton’s lead in the early absentee vote poses another problem for Mr. Sanders: the vote count.

Whether he ultimately wins or not, she is probably going to have a lead in the early count. That’s because the ballots that were received ahead of the election will be counted first, and those votes will be disproportionately composed of older registered Democrats.

Mr. Sanders could then steadily erode Mrs. Clinton’s margin — first with the votes cast on Election Day, then with the late mail ballots. These late ballots tend to be from younger voters, and should be stronger for Mr. Sanders.

A similar phenomenon happened in 2008: Mrs. Clinton opened with more than a 20-point lead in California; she ultimately won by just eight points (though in 2008, some of the early vote was for John Edwards). In Oregon, where elections are entirely by mail, Mr. Sanders opened with a six-point lead and ultimately won by 13 points.

This process will not happen fast. In general, only about 70 percent of the California vote is tabulated by noon the next day. That’s in part because ballots don’t have to arrive on Election Day.

On balance, this is bad news for the winner. It makes it very hard for the networks to make a quick projection, unless someone wins by a clear margin.

But this is a bigger problem for Mr. Sanders. If Mrs. Clinton wins by, say, five points in the end, my guess is that she will probably be the projected winner on election night. She may hold an early double-digit lead, which would make her look even stronger than her ultimate standing.

But I’m not sure Mr. Sanders will get an election night projection of victory if he’s on track to win by five points. He could easily trail for hours after the polls close and potentially for days in a particularly tight race, while she will most likely be declared the New Jersey primary winner, and her status as the presumptive nominee will be confirmed.

A long count in California might not be the sort of show of strength he needs to push back against the presumptive nominee.


