


A federal judge sentenced a Navy commander to 78 months in prison for providing classified ship schedules in exchange for the services of a prostitute, theater tickets and other gifts from a Malaysian contractor who overbilled the Navy more than $34 million. The commander, Capt.-select Michael Misiewicz, 48, was sentenced Friday in San Diego on one count of conspiracy and one count of bribery. His sentence is the longest one in the bribery scandal. He pleaded guilty to providing classified information to Leonard Glenn Francis, whose Singapore-based Glenn Defense Marine Asia used it to beat out competitors and overbill the Navy by submitting fake tariffs and port fees. (AP)

Houston’s efforts to use local clean air laws to regulate pollution by the nation’s largest petrochemical complex were halted Friday by a Texas Supreme Court ruling in favor of energy and chemical companies that claimed the city had overreached. ExxonMobil and other companies with nearby refineries and plants had sued the city in 2008 after it passed ordinances that required businesses to pay registration fees based on the number and type of pollution sources on each site. The ordinances also made it unlawful to operate a facility inside Houston unless it was registered with the city. Houston argued the ordinances were a local expression of state laws regulating pollution, that they did not make an “end-run” around state regulations. But the state’s all-Republican Supreme Court ruled 8 to 1 that the ordinances were inconsistent with the Legislature’s intent that favored statewide consistency in enforcement. (AP)

A judge on Friday sentenced Dynel Lane, 36, of Longmont, to 100 years in prison for cutting a nearly 8-month-old fetus from a stranger’s womb. She was convicted of attempting to kill Michelle Wilkins, whom she lured with an ad for maternity clothes. She also was convicted of assault and unlawful termination of a pregnancy. Prosecutors said they were unable to charge her with murder because a coroner found no evidence the fetus lived outside the womb. (AP)


