


LONDON — Time, and the record books, still divide the city of Madrid when it comes to soccer. It is written that Real is the imperious one, the club that since 1955 has won the European Cup or the Champions League an unprecedented 11 times, while its neighbor, Atlético, has never worn that crown.

Sports, like life, isn’t always fair.

Atlético fans call themselves and their team “El Pupas,” the Cursed Ones, and that remains their fate after Saturday’s Champions League final in Milan.

Real Madrid did not win that final; it won the penalty shootout that even Cristiano Ronaldo, the man who struck the last decisive kick, has said is always a lottery.

Not far away, silent and spent, stood Juanfran. The Atlético defender was the only man to miss in the shootout, the fall guy whose shot hit the base of a post and failed to cross the line.

That “miss” — a failure in accuracy by just three inches, from a player who had run all night in the heat and humidity — decided the showcase final of soccer’s biggest and richest club contest.

How has it come to this? How, in a sport that has been played since the 1880s, has soccer become traduced by a lottery of penalties? Neither goalkeeper got a hand on any of the nine kicks Saturday, or 10 if you count Antoine Griezmann’s penalty shot for Atlético, which hit the crossbar shortly after halftime.

All that effort, as players ran the equivalent of 10 miles while trying to score proper goals in regular and extra time, came down to a three-inch error. Ronaldo was hailed (again) as the hero, and Juanfran as the wretched failure.

If we are not careful, we might overlook entirely the fact that Luka Modric, Real’s diminutive Croatian playmaker, was consistently the most creative talent on this long and energy-sapping night.

His measured passes to Ronaldo and Gareth Bale and Karim Benzema distinguished the final, but he wasn’t called upon for the test of nerves in the shootout, the kick at 12 paces that has all the subtly of a firing squad.

“We showed great character to the end,” Modric said on television after the game, standing on the field with his five-year-old son, Ivano, atop his shoulders. “We were calm on our penalties, everything is about mentality then, and this is the trophy of Real Madrid.”

His eyes were blazing with the joy of winning. Juanfran’s were wet with tears of regret. And in less than two weeks, these players will be expected to go at it again, this time scattered around France for the 2016 European Championship or around the United States for the Copa América Centenario, an extra tournament that has been squeezed into the already overcrowded calendar.

The winner-take-all end to Europe’s club season saw Zinedine Zidane, Real’s manager for just half a season, win promotion to the pantheon of those who have won the Champions League or European Cup both as a player and a coach.

Six others did it before Zidane. The first to accomplish that double was Real Madrid’s own Miguel Muñoz, who won the European Cup three straight times as a player in the ’50s, then twice again as a manager in the ’60s.

After him came Giovanni Trapattoni of Italy; the Dutchman Johan Cruyff; the Italian Carlo Ancelotti; the Dutchman Frank Rijkaard; and the Spaniard Pep Guardiola, who won as both a player and manager of Barcelona.

Even though he was not able to make his imprint by signing a single player after taking over, Zidane did very well guiding Real after the owners fired Rafael Benítez in January.

And though no one on Saturday could approach what he did by winning the Champions League final for Madrid in 2002 with his memorable volley, Zidane matched up with Atlético Coach Diego Simeone in building a game plan around hard work and attrition.

Real went toe-to-toe, bludgeon-to-bludgeon with Atlético in a game that was more about work ethic than beauty, one that was neither won nor lost over 120 minutes.

So the penalty drama was the only way to finish it?

At least it was better than drawing straws or flipping a coin, a process that actually happened at the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City to decide a tie in the quarterfinals between Israel and Bulgaria, with Israel coming out the unlucky loser.

An Israeli then proposed to FIFA that the way to settle a tie should be penalty kicks, and that has been the way ever since.

There was a short period in which an equally contrived ending was tried: playing on until one side or the other scored a “golden goal” but that was abandoned as too unfair a way to end a stalemate.

The truth is that soccer, like many sports, has become beholden to television and has a schedule far too busy to fairly decide a tie. But there is a better way.

I was privileged to see one in 1971, when Chelsea beat Real Madrid to win the Cup Winners’ Cup trophy in Piraeus, Greece, the port city near Athens.

The first game on May 19 ended in a tie, 1-1. The replay, two nights later, was settled by Peter Osgood, a center-forward of such virtuosity that he scored in both games.

Chelsea won that second game, 2-1. Athens was a wonderful place to stay for two extra days in the sunshine, and justice seemed to have been served.

No time for that any more. We settle these things in one night, no matter how capricious the means. El Pupas, indeed.


