


DHAKA, Bangladesh — A Hindu store owner was hacked to death in his shop in northern Bangladesh on Wednesday morning. A social media account linked to the Islamic State later said that the killing was carried out by the group’s fighters, but the police said they had arrested a suspect who had a financial dispute with the victim.

The victim, Debesh Chandra Pramanik, was alone in his shoe store shortly after 6 a.m. when he was attacked by unknown assailants, the police said.

His wife, who had stepped out to get flowers, returned to find him dead with wounds on his neck, said Ashraful Islam, the police superintendent in Gaibandha district.

Mr. Islam described the shoe salesman as “a totally innocent person.” Mr. Islam said he hesitated to ascribe any motive in the killing, because, as he put it, “killing by hacking is an old style of killing people in our country.”

The police later arrested a local man, Nripen Chandra, who is also Hindu, as a suspect in the killing. It was believed that the two men had a dispute over money, said Mozammal Haque, the officer in charge at the Gobindoganj police station.

A message posted by the Amaq News Agency, which is linked to the Islamic State, said Islamic State fighters had killed “a Hindu businessman by stabbing,” according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist websites.

The Bangladeshi authorities have dismissed claims on social media that representatives of Islamic State and Al Qaeda have been behind recent killings, saying that the international jihadist networks have no organizational presence in Bangladesh.

In recent weeks, a cluster of assaults have been carried out in the country, often with machetes in public places during daylight hours.

For years, Islamist extremist groups have singled out atheist bloggers and intellectuals for attacks, but they have expanded their targets in the last year to include Hindus, Shiites, Christians, gay-rights activists and foreigners.

Last Friday, unidentified assailants riding a motorcycle cut the throat of a doctor who practiced homeopathic medicine and wounded a university professor known for espousing secular views.

Other victims in May included a Buddhist monk who was found dead in his temple in a remote region of southeastern Bangladesh, his neck apparently slashed with a machete; a Sufi Muslim leader who was found dead in a mango grove with deep cuts to his neck; and a Hindu tailor who had been briefly jailed over accusations that he made an unfavorable remark about the Prophet Muhammad.


