


In the elegiac drama “Last Days in the Desert,” Ewan McGregor portrays a holy man headed for Jerusalem: a wandering prophet variously addressed as “rabbi” or Yeshua who’s seeking spiritual awareness but who sheepishly describes himself as “a bit lost” to those he encounters.

Shown fasting and praying, weeping in solitude and shivering through frigid Judean Desert nights, he’s the embodiment of Jesus Christ in everything but name. “Father, where are you?” he cries out in the film (which arrives in theaters Friday, May 13). “Father, speak to me!”

The movie implicitly takes up where the Gospels of Matthew, Luke and Mark leave off. But the film’s writer-director, Rodrigo García (“Mother and Child” and “Albert Nobbs”), is quick to point out the existentially fraught father-son relationship depicted onscreen is all poetic license and appears nowhere in the New Testament.

“I liken it to a literary conceit: You take a person from history or mythology — for example, Napoleon while he was a prisoner at Elba or Pocahontas before the Europeans arrived — and invent a few days for yourself,” Mr. García explained.

“In the figure of Jesus, everyone knows his origins and his destiny,” he continued. “I’m freed because I’m not talking about episodes that are in the Gospel.”

Mr. Garcia is hardly the only moviemaker these days to find a certain freedom by using Scripture as a springboard. In the last few months, a spate of faith-based films including “Risen” (released in February) and “The Young Messiah” (from March) has come to present never-told or newly imagined chapters of Jesus’ existence, offering biblical back stories aimed at an audience of roughly 200 million Americans who self-identify as Christians and attend church at least once a month.

What’s more, several other such films are in Hollywood’s pipeline. Sony Pictures Animation recently announced it would release an as-yet untitled Nativity movie in December 2017 that presents the story of Christ’s birth from the perspective of animals in the manger. And later this year, Universal Pictures International and Film4 are scheduled to produce a biopic about Mary Magdalene — who is believed to have seen Jesus on the cross and later resurrected — offering what its producers describe in a statement as “an incredibly powerful new perspective on one of the world’s most well-known origin stories.”

In the past, big-screen biblical adaptations have provoked an outcry over historical inaccuracies or perceived distortions of holy Scripture — “The Last Temptation of Christ” (the 1988 drama featuring Jesus in a dream lovemaking sequence), the 2014 mega-budget “Exodus: Gods and Kings” (which depicts Moses leading the Israelites out of Egypt) and the director Darren Aronofsky’s “Noah” (also 2014) among them. But these new movies are intended more as spinoffs or even prequels to the Bible than straight-ahead cinematic translations.

“It’s almost a new genre,” said Mickey Liddell, a producer of “Risen.” “Audiences feel they’ve seen the biblical stories in movies. But what if we showed what else was going on at the time? That makes it more interesting, because you get a fresh perspective on the oldest story in the world.”

“Risen” stars Joseph Fiennes as a Roman centurion dispatched by Pontius Pilate to investigate rumors that a Nazarene prophet called Yeshua — the Hebrew name corresponding with Jesus — has risen from the tomb. The officer must attempt to quell an uprising as word of the messiah’s resurrection spreads across the realm but finds his own faith awakened in the process. Equal parts police procedural and biblical epic (with cameo appearances by St. Bartholomew, Joseph of Arimathea and Mary Magdalene), the $20 million film was christened “New Testament noir” and “CSI: Jerusalem” by critics en route to its surprisingly robust box-office returns. “Risen” was the third-highest-grossing film over its opening weekend in theaters and has taken in $45 million worldwide.

Mr. Liddell attributed the film’s success to the faith-based audience’s growing sophistication as moviegoers. “Twenty years ago, I think they were happy with whatever came out — if someone took the time to talk about their faith,” he said. “But that audience has matured. Our film connected because of the originality of the material.”

“The Young Messiah,” based on Anne Rice’s 2005 novel “Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt,” envisions a kind of biblical prequel: Jesus at the age of 7 traveling with his parents from Alexandria to Nazareth. Pursued by Roman assassins sent by King Herod to massacre Jewish children, the boy awakens to his power as a healer and his celestial parentage. “How do we explain God to his own son?” Joseph asks Mary.

“It was an opportunity to go inside the holy family in a way that hasn’t been done in other films,” said the director and co-writer of “The Young Messiah,” Cyrus Nowrasteh. “You’re seeing them as parents. You’re seeing them face daily struggles and problems, the burden and blessing of raising this very special child.”

The film grossed a lackluster $6.4 million, however, and faced complaints from critics like Rick Dack of Defending the Bible International, who cited “obvious scriptural, archaeological and chronological problems” with “The Young Messiah.” For one: depicting the preteen prophet raising a fictional bully character from the dead. “The thing people found most objectionable was the performing of miracles as a child,” Mr. Nowrasteh said. “Because Jesus’ first recorded miracle is the wedding where he turns water into wine.”

As Mr. McGregor described it, “Last Days in the Desert” aims to explore the human side of Jesus but was never intended as a faith-based film per se. As conceived by Mr. García — a son of the Nobel Prize-winning Colombian novelist Gabriel García Márquez — the film uses biblical inspiration (like Jesus’ conversations with Satan, also played by Mr. McGregor) to flesh out a family dynamic left largely unexplored in Scripture.

“This is the ultimate father and son story: Jesus in the desert trying to get some communication, some sort of answer, some sort of solace from his father,” Mr. McGregor said. “And his father is God! We get to see a very personal Jesus.”


