


ALBANY — Agents from the state attorney general’s office conducted a search at the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute here on Thursday, scouring an office once used by a lobbyist as part of an inquiry into possible bid rigging.

Agents arrived with search warrants and looked through an office used by Todd R. Howe, who has past ties to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat. Mr. Howe had worked as the president of the lobbying arm of Whiteman Osterman & Hanna, a prominent Albany law firm which had SUNY Polytechnic as a client. Agents also served a warrant to examine communications from Alain E. Kaloyeros, the school’s president.

Mr. Howe and Mr. Kaloyeros have recently emerged as central players in a multipronged federal investigation led by the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, Preet Bharara, surrounding the Buffalo Billion, the governor’s signature upstate economic initiative. Mr. Howe was fired from Whiteman after news of the federal investigation broke last month.

The search — conducted by several agents, who looked into electronic files and removed at least two boxes of material — focused in part on a plan to build a dormitory near the university’s sleek campus. But according to an official with knowledge of the investigation, agents were also looking into other projects connected with SUNY Polytechnic, as well as several developers who had worked with the school.

“SUNY Poly cooperated fully today with the N.Y. A.G.’s office request to search an office previously used by Todd Howe at our Albany campus,” a spokesman for SUNY Polytechnic said in a statement. “We continue to cooperate fully with their investigation.”

The SUNY Polytechnic inquiry by the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, focuses in part, the official said, on whether the 2015 proposal was drafted in such a way as to eliminate all developers except one: Columbia Development Companies, which worked on another major project at the university. Such coordination would violate state antitrust laws.

SUNY Polytechnic has served as a linchpin of Mr. Cuomo’s efforts to stimulate growth upstate, distributing millions of dollars for nanotech-related developments. The school has been under scrutiny since last year, when it was subpoenaed as part of an investigation into the highest profile project of the Buffalo Billion — a factory to be used by SolarCity. The state has promised $750 million to the project, which is being built by LPCiminelli, a Buffalo developer whose chief executive has been a generous campaign contributor to Mr. Cuomo.

In addition to Mr. Howe, the federal inquiry is said to be investigating Joseph Percoco, Mr. Cuomo’s longtime aide and confidant.

Mr. Cuomo has opened his own investigation into possible fraud and improper lobbying, appointing a former prosecutor, Bart M. Schwartz, to investigate and review all decisions related to the Buffalo Billion.

Mr. Kaloyeros, a charismatic physicist, had served on the boards of two nonprofits that manage real estate developments for the university, but he resigned this year. Those nonprofits, Fuller Road Management Corporation and Fort Schuyler Management Corporation, have also drawn the interest of investigators.

Calls seeking comment from Columbia Development were not immediately returned. It worked on Zero Energy Nanotechnology, a glittering $191 million building that opened in 2015.


