


LOS ANGELES — At a time when his early work was attracting few believers, the radical choreographer Merce Cunningham and his dance company made a triumphant three-week tour of the West Coast in 1955, just two years after the company’s founding. Following their appearances in San Francisco, the Cunningham dancer Marianne Preger wrote to her parents, “And do you know, Margot Fonteyn did ‘Swan Lake’ the same night and we got all the critics!”

So it’s fitting that the L.A. Dance Project, founded by Benjamin Millepied in 2012, has made Cunningham choreography a recurrent part of its repertory. Cunningham is the only dead choreographer whose work this troupe includes; he’s also the greatest and, it’s fair to say, the most divisive, choreographer it programs. His “Winterbranch” (1964) proved as abrasive in the Los Angeles company’s 2012 opening program as it had been when new.

This February through April, as part of the Hammer Museum’s edition of the “Leap Before You Look” exhibition of Black Mountain College avant-garde art, the Los Angeles troupe has been dancing anthologies culled from Cunningham’s 1950s choreography.

The exhibition’s performance space is small. Audience members have been turned away from several performances. Already, dance and music were mutually independent in all the choreography performed here. (Another radical aspect, not on display here, was the use of chance — throwing dice, for example — to select and arrange aspects of dances.) And the dance style, featuring extraordinary juxtapositions and oppositions, is compelling and startling. Decades on, thanks to the committed skill of these Dance Project performers, the choreography’s actions stay cool, intense, suspenseful.

A duet from “Suite for Five” (1956) begins with a woman perched on a man’s shoulder. Her legs are stretched back into the air behind her. Her torso arches up to present her face and shoulders to the front. This is a heroic lift you can see in several ballets — but the resemblance stops beneath the waist. The difference here is that the man is kneeling. The effect is weird, truncating, fascinating.

As that number develops, you can’t miss its complete independence from music or the exploratory drama it creates by setting its dancers forth on separate routes. A trio from “Suite” keeps changing in structure. Now it’s a duet and a solo; now a tight-woven trio; now three separate solos in different paths and meters that nonetheless connect in overlapping orbits.

The special element of these performances is a rarity, a duet from “Springweather and People” (1954), originally danced (like the “Suite” duet) by Cunningham and Carolyn Brown. This duet was lost for decades until, two years ago, the researcher and filmmaker Alla Kovgan found a 1958 film of it. Part of it was danced again, beautifully, by Boston Conservatory students in the October-January edition of this “Leap Before You Look” exhibition at Boston’s Institute of Contemporary Arts. But it’s only now, with these Los Angeles performers, that the whole duet has returned to the stage. And now we can feel the complex structure of it, with its couplings and solos, its intimacies and its distances.

Though some still use the word “abstract” to describe plotless choreography, Cunningham, like the choreographer George Balanchine before him and Mark Morris today, observed that humans dancing cannot be abstract. Cunningham, more than any other dance-maker, created works that operated on multiple levels. Sometimes there’s nothing but this movement; but the sheer physics of it make for drama. With the “Suite” excerpts, that’s continually true. This remains extraordinarily fresh: Dancers switch angles and routes, and present jumps and floor work, as if we were in the laboratory with them.

Sometimes, as often in the “Springweather” duet, we can’t help seeing imagery, character and narrative. Is this movement for its own sake or is it a window to meaning? The ambiguity is essential to Cunningham dance theater. I love a moment in this dance where the woman, in profile to us, holds a formally pure arabesque. The man, approaching her from behind, places a protective hand around her torso to support her hip. She stretches her neck tenderly back toward him; we’re close here to the narrative of “Swan Lake.” But then, still holding that arabesque, she hops softly away. The story changes.

Each of the performances I saw began with Silas Riener, the former Cunningham company member, in the 1957 solo “Changeling,” another of the long-lost Cunningham dances. This was among Ms. Kovgan’s discoveries. He gave his first performance of this in Boston in October and on May 18 he will dance it at the Baryshnikov Arts Center in New York. It’s known that Cunningham once told Ms. Brown that he felt he must have been a changeling because he was so unlike his family in temperament and pursuits. But he was also fond of puns and ambiguities in words (as in movement). And the title “Changeling” surely is connected to the protean nature of this solo: He’s constantly changing shape and character.

It’s striking to find how important a part dance plays in the “Leap Before You Look” exhibition, which surveys the years 1933 to ’57 at Black Mountain College. Though Cunningham was not the only choreographer and dance teacher to visit this home of avant-garde experimentalism, he was he was already noted as a great dancer, admired by and in harmony with several of the most advanced artists in music and art of the day.

Black Mountain became part of his history. His dance company gave its first performances there in 1953 and the college brought him and his colleague John Cage into contact with (among others) Robert Rauschenberg – who between 1954 and 1964 was the small troupe’s resident designer.

This past weekend, you could see the performers exploring different moods within the choreography. This is an impressive company, amid which the quiet, tall elegance of Morgan Lugo makes an outstanding impression.


