


FRONT PAGE

An article on Wednesday about pressure that Democratic officials are putting on Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont to rein in his supporters after they disrupted a weekend Democratic convention in Nevada misidentified, in some editions, the Senate leadership job held by Harry Reid. He is the minority leader — not the majority leader, the post held by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on Wednesday about the Obama administration’s lifting of sanctions on Myanmar rendered incorrectly part of the name of one company in which the Burmese business tycoon Steven Law owns a majority stake and which the Treasury Department will blacklist. It is the Shwe Nar Wah Company, not the Shew Nar Wah Company.

•

A picture on March 22 with an article about the way in which Salah Abdeslam, the lone surviving suspect from the Paris terror attacks in November, managed to elude capture for months afterward was published in error. It showed Najim Laachraoui, believed to have made the bombs used in the Paris and Brussels attacks — not Mr. Abdeslam. The error was pointed out shortly after publication, but editors failed to follow through with a print correction.

NEW YORK

An article on Monday about a mechanic who sued the Town of East Hampton over the forcible clearance of his cluttered yard misstated the surname of one of the town’s lawyers. He is Mark Radi, not Nadi.

BUSINESS DAY

Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the International Monetary Fund’s push for debt relief for Greece misstated the dollar equivalent of 300 billion euros, the nation’s current debt. It is $340 billion, not $340 million.

•

An article on the DealBook page on Wednesday about the value of Lending Club to some high-risk borrowers erroneously included one state among those that have no cap on interest rates. While South Dakota and Utah are among them, Delaware is not.

THE ARTS

A Critic’s Notebook article last Thursday about New York City Ballet misidentified the composer of “Explosions-Polka,” one of the pieces used in the George Balanchine ballet “Vienna Waltzes.” He was Johann Strauss II — not Franz Lehar, who composed another piece used in the ballet.

SCIENCE TIMES

A headline on Tuesday with a report in the Observatory column about a study of forests’ ability to absorb carbon dioxide misstated, in some editions, the location of the forests studied. As the report correctly noted, they are in locations throughout Latin America, not just in Brazil.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Tuesday about the architect Romaldo Giurgola misstated the number of branches of government based in Parliament House, Australia’s seat of government, which he designed. It is two — the legislative and executive branches — not all three. (The Australian judiciary is in a different building.)

THURSDAY STYLES

The Unbuttoned column last Thursday, about politicians who dress more informally at official events, referred imprecisely to John F. Kennedy’s inaugural attire in 1961. While the president was hatless for his inaugural address, he wore a top hat to the ceremony.

•

An article last Thursday about an art installation created for Hermès by the director Robert Wilson to mark the debut of its new furniture and housewares line misstated, in one instance, the surname of a deputy artistic director of Hermès Maison Universe. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, he is Alexis Fabry, not Alexis Aubry.

•

An article on May 5 about the plus-size model Zach Miko misidentified the position held by Ivan Bart, whose agency represents Mr. Miko. Mr. Bart is the president of IMG Models — not of IMG, its parent company.

•

An article on May 5 about the decreasing number of gay dance clubs in Manhattan misstated the reason the club Escuelita closed. The club owner, who could not be reached before publication, later contacted The Times to say he closed the club because of declining attendance, not because of a liquor license dispute.

•

The Boîte column on May 5, about the Market Hotel, a rock club in Brooklyn, misstated the types of drinks sold there. The club sells Soju cocktails; it does not have a full bar.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


