


Actually, Conor McGregor has not retired.

McGregor, who had sent out a Twitter message on Tuesday saying that he was stepping away from a lucrative mixed-martial-arts career, took it back on Thursday. In a statement, he explained that he had been upset with the promotional demands being made on him by the Ultimate Fighting Championship.

“I am just trying to do my job and fight here,” he wrote. “I am paid to fight. I am not yet paid to promote.”

McGregor seemed to blame the promotional load for his recent upset loss to Nate Diaz, writing: “50 world tours, 200 press conferences, 1 million interviews, 2 million photo shoots, and at the end of it all I’m left looking down the barrel of a lens, staring defeat in the face, thinking of nothing but my incorrect fight preparation. And the many distractions that led to this.

“With the right adjustments and the right focus, I will finish what I started in that last fight. I will not do this if I am back on the road handing out fliers again.”

McGregor said a request to lighten his promotional load had been denied. "Just for this one, where I am coming off a loss, I asked for some leeway where I can just train and focus,” he wrote. “I did not shut down all media requests. I simply wanted a slight adjustment. But it was denied.”

After McGregor’s retirement message, Dana White, the U.F.C. president, said that McGregor had been removed from the U.F.C. 200 card in July, when he was to have had a rematch with Diaz. “Conor did not want to come to Las Vegas and film the commercial or be a part of any of the marketing,” White told ESPN.

McGregor said that he was still willing to fight on that card.

“I am still ready to go for U.F.C. 200,” he wrote. “I will offer, like I already did, to fly to New York for the big press conference that was scheduled, and then I will go back into training. With no distractions. If this is not enough or they feel I have not deserved to sit this promotion run out this one time, well, then I don’t know what to say.”

McGregor has taken the U.F.C. by storm, with his fists and his mouth earning him popularity, especially among Irish and Irish-American fans. Before his loss to Diaz, he had beaten the longtime featherweight champion Jose Aldo — at the time ranked as the best pound-for-pound fighter in the U.F.C. — in just 13 seconds.

McGregor’s statement ended with a declaration to his fight promoter, his business partners and the United States Anti-Doping Agency:

“For the record also — for Usada and for the U.F.C. and my contract stipulations — I am not retired.”


