


SHANGHAI — While the reigning world champion, Lewis Hamilton, had another discouraging result early in the Formula One season, his Mercedes teammate, Nico Rosberg, extended his dream start with a third victory in a row.

Rosberg led from pole position to checkered flag at the Chinese Grand Prix on Sunday, dropping the lead only briefly at the start, as he captured his sixth consecutive victory over all, dating to last season.

The victory was Rosberg’s second in China; his first here, in 2012, was also the first of his 17 career wins.

“It was a great weekend for me in China — I got my first pole here, my first win here,” he said. “It was a really good car today, so I’m feeling great.”

In a chaotic race for just about everyone behind Rosberg, his German compatriot Sebastian Vettel finished second for Ferrari while Daniil Kvyat finished third for Red Bull.

But much of the focus was on Hamilton, who has won the drivers’ title the last two years. Even racing at his favorite track — Hamilton has won a series-best four times at the Shanghai International Circuit, including the last two seasons — he had his third disappointing race in three races this season.

Hamilton, of England, started in last because of a penalty for changing his gearbox early and a bad qualifying session. He then drove one of the most difficult races of his career, making five pit stops for tire changes and other problems, including a change of his front wing after a collision on the first lap. Most drivers made two or three stops.

“That’s racing,” said Hamilton, who finished seventh. “It happens sometimes, and at least I still managed to get a few points on the board. I’ll just have to do what I can to make it up over the next few races.”

The event used Formula One’s previous system for qualifying after the new elimination-style format drew criticism and failed to mix up the grid order at the season’s first two races. The qualifying order for Sunday’s race was basically normal, with the exception of Hamilton’s being at the back of the grid and Daniel Ricciardo’s starting in second for Red Bull, ahead of the Ferraris of Kimi Raikkonen (third) and Vettel (fourth).

Still, the race provided the excitement that series organizers had sought.

With the exception of Rosberg’s nearly perfect drive, all the leading contenders ran into problems that forced them to the back of the pack, giving spectators the opportunity to see the fastest cars battle their way back to the front.

Ricciardo, who jumped into an early lead, blew out his left rear tire after two laps and dropped to 18th. The two Ferraris collided at the first corner after Kvyat made a risky pass between them, with Vettel swerving to avoid him and hitting Raikkonen.

Raikkonen dropped to 20th, and Vettel to 15th after a pit stop on Lap 4 to replace his damaged front wing.

“Kvyat came like a torpedo, and there was nothing I could do,” Vettel said. “I had to react.”

Vettel apologized to his team, saying that Kvyat’s move was “suicidal.”

Kvyat, though, defended his move, saying, “You see the gap, and you go for it.”

He added, “It was a risky move, but we are both here on the podium.”

Rosberg waltzed into the lead and stayed there from Lap 3 onward, but after him, the race was a mad tangle of the Ferraris, Ricciardo’s Red Bull car and Hamilton’s Mercedes as they sought to move up. It was precisely the recipe that Formula One had been unable to create with devices specifically intended to spice up the show.

Vettel finally reached second place by Lap 37 of the 56-lap race. He finished in that position, but a huge margin — 37.8 seconds — behind Rosberg.

Ricciardo ended up fourth and Raikkonen fifth.

Rosberg now leads the series with 75 points. Hamilton, who started from pole position in the season’s first two races but dropped to seventh at the start each time, is second but 36 points behind Rosberg.

The question remains whether Hamilton can close that gap.

“With 21 races, it’s the longest season in history,” Rosberg said, declining to display much optimism about his chances to win the title. “Lewis is not far behind, and he never gives up.”


