


SYOSSET, N.Y. — Alan Quine is such a newcomer to the Islanders that he is still without a locker room cubicle at the team’s practice rink. A folding chair in the middle of the cramped room will have to suffice.

That does not worry Quine, 23, who has burst on the playoff scene with a double-overtime goal in Game 5 and assists on game winners in Games 1 and 6 against the Florida Panthers as the Islanders won a playoff series for the first time since 1993.

Summoned from the Sound Tigers — the American Hockey League team in Bridgeport, Conn. — for the last two games of the regular season after forward Anders Lee sustained a broken leg on April 7, Quine has been an instant fit thanks to his speed and tenacity at both ends of the ice.

As the Islanders prepare to visit the Tampa Bay Lightning on Wednesday night for a second-round opener, Quine is ready to continue his early magic while trying to absorb the sudden swirl of interest around him.

“I’m happy to be part of it, and I just want to contribute any way I can,” said Quine, a soft-spoken native of Belleville, Ontario, who had 19 goals for Bridgeport this season after scoring 23 in 2014-15. “Whatever stage you’re on, hockey is hockey.”

Quine was selected by the Detroit Red Wings in the third round of the 2011 draft. But after the Red Wings made no effort to sign him, Quine said, he hardly paid attention to the draft two years later, when the Islanders selected him in the sixth round. Grateful for a team showing interest, Quine put in three seasons with Bridgeport and even played seven games for the Islanders’ former E.C.H.L. affiliate, the Stockton (Calif.) Thunder, during his first year with the organization.

He scored in his N.H.L. debut against the Buffalo Sabres on April 9, and against Florida, he centered a line between Shane Prince and Ryan Strome, who scored the winning goal in a 5-4 victory in Game 1.

But when an underperforming Strome was benched by Islanders Coach Jack Capuano for Game 5, Quine was suddenly skating on left wing with the captain John Tavares at center and Kyle Okposo on the right. Quine’s sample size with the Islanders may be small, but Tavares — who led the Islanders with five goals and 9 points in the opening round — is impressed.

“It’s his composure, and his ability to play his game at this stage shows a lot of potential,” said Tavares, whose double-overtime winner in Game 6 set off a frenzy at Barclays Center. “It’s amazing how a guy not around all year comes up and plays so well.”

Quine also has an Islanders pedigree in his life. His grandfather Gary Craig, known as Stump, is a longtime friend to Brian Kilrea, an Islanders assistant coach in the mid-1980s. And Quine has played golf with the Hall of Fame defenseman Denis Potvin, an Ottawa native who captained the Islanders to four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983.

“I was really surprised and happy when the call came from the Islanders,” Quine said of his draft selection in 2013. “After that, I went to work.”

Quine’s coach with Bridgeport has been Brent Thompson, a former assistant on Capuano’s staff who took over the Sound Tigers two years ago. Thompson strives to get players ready for the N.H.L. grind, and sharing an organizational philosophy with Capuano is vital because players arrive ready. Thompson said he had no doubt Quine would excel when the call came.

“Alan has been working a lot on his game away from the puck, his defensive awareness and wall battles,” Thompson said. “His offensive instincts and awareness have always been there. He’s worked really hard.”

Capuano has shuffled lines in recent weeks because of injuries and the subpar play of forwards Josh Bailey and Brock Nelson.

Quine’s play has been a welcome revelation. His one-timer on a pass from defenseman Marek Zidlicky to win Game 5 in Florida 16 minutes into the second overtime period ended the second-longest game in Islanders history. Quine cannot quite believe his name is already etched in the team’s record books. Being part of the team’s celebration still seems surreal.

“It’s a feeling I never had before,” he said. “There was a lot of happiness when it went in, then seeing the guys come over.”

For Capuano, a relentless preacher of nose-to-the-grindstone dedication and perseverance from his players, the success of a fresh arrival like Quine justifies his approach.

“He is finding a way to move his feet and get to those open areas and play to the strengths of his team,” Capuano said of Quine, who has moved from his natural center position to play left wing. “He is a young player that is playing with confidence.”

The Islanders hope the results will continue against the Lightning, who defeated the Detroit Red Wings in five games. Tavares and Okposo said the page would quickly have to turn beyond the emotional win over the Panthers for the team to focus on the Lightning, who reached the Stanley Cup finals last spring, falling to the Chicago Blackhawks.

“We just have to continue to play the way we can,” said Okposo, who had a goal and five assists against the Panthers. “It definitely adds to your confidence, knowing what it takes to win.”

This month, Quine was still skating with the Sound Tigers, who have had to find a replacement for him in the opening round of the Calder Cup playoffs. It is a challenge Thompson is willing to accept.

“One guy leaves and another guy steps up,” he said. “That’s much like the opportunity Alan has, that he can step up and do it in the N.H.L. I’m very proud and happy for him. I feel like we had a hand in it, too.”


