


“Builders get their way” is not news in New York City.

The news is when they do not. And in a couple of cases recently, they have not.

The venue was the Board of Standards and Appeals, a little-known body that can seem to outsiders — fairly or not — like a card game with a stacked deck, where developers’ lawyers and lobbyists, some of them former board members, smoothly navigate regulatory arcana in seeking variances from zoning and building rules.

Last Thursday, the board turned down a developer’s plan to convert the landmark former First Church of Christ, Scientist, on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, into a 34-unit luxury apartment building.

A few weeks earlier, the board made life more difficult for a proposal by Congregation Shearith Israel to build a community house and condominium behind its landmark synagogue on Central Park West.

Gale A. Brewer, the Manhattan borough president, lives around the corner from the former Christian Science church and opposes the conversion project. She said she was heartened by the board’s decision.

“I said to all my neighbors: ‘See? It’s possible.’”

Hours after the decision, Ms. Brewer said, she attended a meeting on the Upper East Side about the future of the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Peace, which was closed last year.

“I was able to give some hope to that community,” Ms. Brewer, a Democrat, said. “We won. We won something. When people see glass-and-steel condos everywhere, this felt like it was certainly a victory.”

There was even an impromptu celebration outside the hearing room when the board rendered its decision on the former Christian Science church.

“For a few minutes, I felt like I was in the ’60s,” said Michael S. Hiller, a lawyer representing opponents of the project. “It was cathartic.”

He was retained by the Central Park West Neighbors Association, a group led by Susan Simon, a designer.

“We were up against tremendous odds — David versus Goliath,” Ms. Simon said. “We wondered if this was not just a pro forma exercise. But we believed that we had to fight for what we understood to be right. In the end, we felt the B.S.A. commissioners were very concerned about this project, and made the right call.”

The commissioners rejected arguments by the developer, Joseph Brunner, that the waivers he sought from zoning rules and apartment-building laws were the minimum necessary to earn a “reasonable” return. They covered such issues as the distance between the windows and the lot line, and the amount of light and air reaching the apartments. The project had been approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.

Mr. Brunner bought the building, at Central Park West and West 96th Street, from Irene Shapiro for $42 million. She purchased it in 2014 for $26 million from the Crenshaw Christian Center East, which bought it 10 years earlier from the First Church. The building, designed by Carrère & Hastings, was completed in 1903.

“We were profoundly disappointed in the B.S.A.’s vote last week,” said Mitchell A. Korbey, a partner in Herrick, Feinstein, which represents Mr. Brunner. “Our client’s major goal from the start was to preserve and protect this special property.”

Mr. Korbey said Mr. Brunner was “exploring multiple ‘as-of-right’ options” — that is, plans for reusing the building that would not require waivers or other discretionary city approvals.

Landmark West, a preservation group that opposed the conversion of the Christian Science church, celebrated a separate “quiet victory” at the board a few weeks earlier, its president, Kate Wood, said. This involved Congregation Shearith Israel and its longstanding plan for the community house and condominium on West 70th Street.

The board’s staff determined that recently revised plans for the development showing modifications to classroom space and mechanical systems did not substantially comply with those approved by the board in 2008.

Louis M. Solomon, the parnas (or president) of Shearith Israel, said the congregation’s engineers had since found a design solution. “We are confident the updated plans will be approved by the B.S.A.,” he said.

Another victory for grass-roots preservation advocates came in late March, in a case argued by Mr. Hiller at State Supreme Court. Justice Lynn R. Kotler ruled that the city — contrary to its own assertions — had the power to require the owners of a landmark building, 346 Broadway, to maintain its mechanical tower clock. The developers are planning a penthouse apartment in the tower and had hoped to remove the works.

The landmarks commission approved the plan. The city plans to appeal the ruling.

Meanwhile, Mr. Hiller is savoring his second victory in less than three months.

“In an environment where there is so much tumult over the privatization of public assets,” he said, “a win like this is a message to people that if they stand together, they can win.”


