


A track and field athlete tried to smuggle in a clean urine sample for drug testing, concealing a container inside her body and offering a bribe when her scheme failed. Sports officials refused to provide a list of the athletes who were present at a boxing training camp, revealing the names after stalling for a full hour. Armed federal police officers threatened drug testers who showed up to collect athletes’ urine, and packages containing doping samples sent from abroad were tampered with by customs workers.

All of this happened in Russia, the World Anti-Doping Agency said Wednesday, and it happened recently — in the seven months since the country was accused of government-sponsored doping. The boxing episode took place only last week.

On Friday, global track and field officials are expected to decide whether Russian athletes will compete at the Rio Olympics, which begin Aug. 5. The allegations made Wednesday by WADA, the global regulator of doping in Olympic sports, suggested that little had changed since November, when an independent commission detailed a state-run doping program in Russia, with details like an antidoping officer climbing out of a window to avoid the police and abscond with athletes’ doping samples for testing.

Russian athletes have repeatedly given the antidoping authorities false information about where they were in recent months, WADA said, dodging drug testers at competitions or failing to show up entirely for fear of being tested. At the Russian National Walking Championship in Sochi this year, 15 athletes did not show up, withdrew or were disqualified.

From February to May, WADA said, 455 doping tests of Russian athletes were conducted by Britain’s antidoping agency, which stepped in to conduct testing in Russia this year after WADA withdrew its recognition of the Russian agency. But 73 athletes who were supposed to be tested were unavailable, the antidoping agency said. In the face of repeated testing attempts, two cyclists retired from competition altogether, WADA said.

The Russian sports ministry has admitted to doping problems in recent months but has emphatically denied a government-supported program.

Ahead of Friday’s vote, Russian sports officials have sought to win back the confidence of world track and field officials. The sports ministry has retained an American public relations firm to assist its campaign. Natalia Zhelanova — the antidoping adviser to the Russian sports minister, Vitaly Mutko — took to Twitter this month to advance the country’s message, a mix of contrition and determination.

“We are working tirelessly to reform our antidoping program,” Ms. Zhelanova wrote last week, the day before the boxing training camp at which WADA said sports officials stymied spontaneous drug testing. “We’re doing everything possible to regain trust.”


