


I like lettuce cooked.

That wasn’t always extraordinary. In the beginning, any pot near an herb garden had a head of lettuce burbling in it. In Apicius, from imperial Rome, we come by: “Cook the lettuce leaves with onion in soda water, squeeze the water out, chop very fine; in the mortar crush pepper, lovage, celery seed, dry mint, onion; add stock, oil and wine.” Cooked lettuce appears in medieval Platina as both physic and nutriment: “The divine Augustus, having fallen ill, was saved by eating lettuce. ... Put cooked lettuce, with the water squeezed out, in a dish when you have dressed it with salt and oil and vinegar, and serve it to your guests.”

Nearer, in time and place, there was lettuce à la crème (Downtown Club, 1900), lettuce à la reine (New York Athletic Club, 1900), lettuce demi-glace (St. Regis, 1905). You might have eaten lettuce braised there, or at the Plaza, the Pierre or the Yale Club on any day in the 1930s. Cream of lettuce Bostonienne streamed from a ladle at the Hotel Commodore in 1933; a velouté of lettuce from a larger one aboard the Paquebot Liberté, during a trans-Atlantic voyage in 1959 — after which you might have lunched on cream of lettuce at Harrods and floated home buoyed by a velouté of lettuce Sévigné. The last (braised) evidence I’ve found is at the Yale Club in 1979.

Then what? I can’t say for certain. Basically, I think, with nutritionists and biochemists on our side — or us on theirs — we determined that lettuce was good for us. We settled on that as its central quality, such things becoming more black-and-white as time passes, and decided that, when transformed by heat, lettuce was worse health food — less elixir, more supper. (This matter, like many in nutritional science, is gray: water-soluble vitamins may degrade in heat, fat-soluble ones may not; some vitaminic compounds are more digestible when heated. Less data exist for hot and cold lettuce than for carrots and broccoli, because lettuce is less often cooked. Regardless, any vegetable you eat is better for you than one you don’t, even if its vitamin C is diminished.)

The practical hurdle to lettuce cookery is finding good instruction. The recipes are almost all old. They are quaint ... but useless. Cream-of-Lettuce Soup from The Boston Cooking School Magazine (1904-5) produces a thick white substance, sure to taste of flour, butter, milk, cream and little else. A year later, the magazine offered a recipe for Stewed Lettuce that torments the poor vegetable, for over an hour, into pulp. Even Julia Child’s Braised Lettuce, comparatively recent (1961), overcooks lettuce to exhaustion, demanding a boil, an hourlong simmer and then a final saucing with reduced broth and more butter.

I know only three or four good specimens. The first is soup à la Dauphine, from Alexandre Dumas père, which calls for wilting lettuce, spinach, leek, onions, sorrel, purslane and edible flowers in butter, adding vegetable stock and serving over toast. Another honest approach — as found in Elizabeth David’s Laitue au Jus and in M.F.K. Fisher’s “spoonful of this hot juice” — involves pouring the buttery juice left in a pan of roasted meat into a bowl of lettuces. There are serviceable recipes for petits pois à la Française — spring peas, onions, bacon, lettuce — though I usually change their details to match my habits.

I love cooking lettuce because, like most people, I have lettuce, and cooking gives it a different manner — making the predictable “salad ingredient” into an elegant hot soup or snack. Out of step with my era on this practice, I follow a rule that makes sense to me: I stay conscious of how quickly lettuce wilts, and of how innately it shrinks in heat, aiming to let warm fat make its changes, while leaving lettuce its fresh crispness — even if the lettuce is long-distance romaine from across the country, fresh only from the crisper drawer.

For lettuce soup, I wilt onions in butter, then add whatever soft herbs, like parsley, chervil, savory, tarragon, mint, I have — the more the merrier — then lettuce leaves and barely enough water to cover them. I cook it just as long as it takes to really get hot, then purée it, with a little more butter or a drizzle of good olive oil. The whole operation is quick, and the result is simple and good, and even better the next day.

For braised lettuce — especially ambrosial if, as suggested here, a discreet anchovy or 10 are permitted — everything is fast and minimal. I put thin wedges of lettuce to quickly and lightly wilt in warm butter and broth and spoon it over hot bread. That’s all.

Any buttery sauté, or even a short stay on a hot, carefully oiled grill, will underline the pleasures of hot lettuce, which are so many, so ancient, so innocent and so plain that ... oh, but better just to try it for yourself. And be so happy that you will toast your table with Seneca’s old words: “When shall we live if not now?”

Recipe: Braised Lettuce on Anchovy Toast


