


SEATTLE — Microsoft and Google agreed on Friday to withdraw complaints against each other with regulators around the world, as the two American tech giants continued recent efforts to settle the once-bitter conflicts between them.

The two companies also said they would try to resolve future squabbles before complaining to regulators, as they have in the past.

“Microsoft has agreed to withdraw its regulatory complaints against Google, reflecting our changing legal priorities,” said Jennifer Crider, a Microsoft spokeswoman. “We will continue to focus on competing vigorously for business and for customers.”

In recent years, Microsoft battled on many fronts to draw greater scrutiny of Google’s dominance in Internet search, including complaining to European regulators that Google used its position to stymie search competition.

The armistice between the companies was no surprise after other moves by both in the last year. In September, the companies dropped about 20 patent lawsuits that they had filed against each other in the United States and Germany. Microsoft later withdrew its financial support for two groups that have lobbied against Google.

“Our companies compete vigorously, but we want to do so on the merits of our products, not in legal proceedings,” said Rob Shilkin, a Google spokesman.

The move away from legal and regulatory confrontations followed changes in the senior leadership of both companies. Since taking over as chief executive of Microsoft in early 2014, Satya Nadella has shown a willingness to collaborate more closely with companies that were once bitter rivals.

Sundar Pichai, the chief executive of Google, was named to that position last August, after a major reorganization that formed a new holding company, Alphabet, to oversee Google and other divisions.

Despite the detente between the tech giants, Google still faces powerful adversaries, particularly in Europe where local publishers and telecom operators, among others, remain wary of its powerful role in how people in the 28-member bloc gain access to digital services.

Some of those companies have filed complaints that have led to two formal documents of accusations against Google from Europe’s competition authorities.

The latest charges, published on Wednesday, claim that Google used its sway over its Android mobile operating system to favor its digital services like online search over those of rivals. The previous charges relate to its dominant online search business. Google denies any wrongdoing.

Several American tech companies, including Oracle, Yelp and Expedia, also claim that Google has broken antitrust rules in Europe, the United States and elsewhere.

At Microsoft, the previous target of multiple European regulatory investigations, the focus has shifted in the last 18 months from attacking Google to lobbying over privacy regulation — important rules that underpin its fast-growing cloud computing business.

Microsoft has been a vocal supporter of Europe’s tough privacy rules — often positioning itself in contrast to Google and Facebook — repeatedly highlighting how it has complied with the region’s strict stance on data protection to a greater degree than its rivals.


