


A federal judge in Manhattan on Thursday rejected a request that a gold trader from Turkey be granted an unusual form of release pending trial that would have allowed him to sign a $50 million bond, secured by $10 million in cash, and to live in a kind of self-financed gilded cage.

Judge Richard M. Berman, in denying bail to the trader, Reza Zarrab, said his proposal to live in a recently leased apartment under 24-hour armed guard and GPS monitoring, all at his own expense, “is unreasonable because it helps to foster inequity and unequal treatment in favor of a very small cohort of criminal defendants who are extremely wealthy, such as Mr. Zarrab.”

Judge Berman said prosecutors had shown that Mr. Zarrab, 32, posed a risk of flight and that no conditions, “including privately funded armed guards, will reasonably assure his appearance at trial.”

Mr. Zarrab, who was born in Iran and moved to Turkey as an infant, was arrested in March during a trip to Florida with his wife and daughter, and sent to Manhattan to face charges that included conspiring to violate the United States sanctions on Iran. Mr. Zarrab has pleaded not guilty.

His lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, had asked that Judge Berman grant Mr. Zarrab the special bail conditions, arguing that he was not a flight risk.

Prosecutors in the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, had objected vigorously, arguing that Mr. Zarrab’s proposal was “an attempt to use his tremendous wealth to obscure the flight risk through a facade of security that is beyond the reach of all but a small subset of fabulously wealthy defendants.”

The government has said that Mr. Zarrab had amassed “a considerable fortune,” which included ownership in about 20 properties, seven sea vessels, horses, luxury automobiles, a private airplane and more than $10 million worth of artwork.

The case had fueled a continuing debate in the United States over the disparity in how rich and poor defendants are treated in the criminal justice system.

The proposed bail conditions were unusual but not unprecedented in New York, where a few extremely wealthy defendants have been allowed to await trial in a form of home confinement, including electronic monitoring and round-the-clock armed guards, with the costs covered by the defendant.

Mr. Brafman said in a statement: “We are deeply disappointed by Judge Berman’s decision, but are intent on continuing to vigorously defend Mr. Zarrab, who we believe to be innocent. We are also carefully reviewing the court’s decision on bail to see if an appeal is appropriate.”

Mr. Bharara’s office had no comment.

Mr. Zarrab is being held in the Metropolitan Correctional Center, a federal detention facility in Lower Manhattan. His case has been watched closely in Turkey, where three years ago Mr. Zarrab was detained by the Turkish authorities as part of a wide-ranging corruption investigation of businessmen with ties to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who was then the country’s prime minister and is now its president.

Judge Berman said that while he was not reaching any conclusion about Mr. Zarrab’s guilt or innocence, “the evidence against the defendant appears strong” for the purpose of setting bail.

“The court concludes that undermining U.S. sanctions against Iran may well pose a threat to the United States,” the judge added, “and that Mr. Zarrab’s release may exacerbate that threat by, for example, enabling him to communicate with business associates or others at or from his New York City apartment.”

The judge said that in deciding the bail issue, he found “most persuasive” Mr. Zarrab’s “lack of ties to the United States, his significant wealth and his substantial resources, his extensive international travel and his strong ties to foreign countries, including countries without extradition.”

Such factors, the judge wrote, provided him “with the incentive and the wherewithal to flee and render him a flight risk.”

The judge also noted that the use of private security raised “serious issues of liability surrounding the use of force” to restrain Mr. Zarrab, if he were to try to flee.

Quoting a judge in another such case, Judge Berman wrote, “What more compelling case for an order of detention is there than a case in which only an armed guard and the threat of deadly force is sufficient to assure the defendant’s appearance.”


