


A New Jersey mother who used what one of her seven children called “divine intervention” to choose the numbers for a Powerball ticket last week was introduced to the public on Friday with her family as the sole winner of a $429.6 million jackpot.

The mother, Pearlie Mae Smith of Trenton, is a church pastor who rarely gambles, according to Powerball officials. The numbers popped into her head, she said, and she felt compelled to act on them, so she bought a ticket at a 7-Eleven store in Trenton.

The family learned on May 7 that it had won.

At a news conference on Friday, one of Ms. Smith’s daughters, Valerie Marie Arthur, recalled getting a call from one of her sisters, Marsha-Ann Rebecca Smith.

Told by her sister that the family had won the Powerball jackpot, Ms. Arthur said she responded, “‘Stop April fooling me and get off of my phone.’”

It was not until she spoke to her mother, Ms. Arthur said, that she was convinced that the family had indeed won. Together, they chose a lump sum payout valued at $284 million that will be split eight ways.

“It was a big shock when we first learned we were Powerball winners,” Ms. Arthur said. “It was a bigger shock when we learned we were the only ticket holder.”

Ms. Arthur said the family did not play the lottery regularly, buying tickets only when the jackpot reached a sizable payout. She said the family members had pooled their money and left the buying of the ticket to Ms. Smith, who described being inspired by “divine intervention” to pick the winning numbers: 5, 25, 26, 44 and 66. The red Powerball number was 9 and the multiplier number was 2.

“It was like affirmation from God because we each have dreams that we want to fulfill in this life, and do for our community and do for each other and for our families and we have been funded to do that,” said Ms. Arthur, who retired last year as a prison administrator.

She said that another of her sisters, Katherine Nicole Nunnally of Newark, has for 15 years been leading a program to mentor young women and will now have the money to fully underwrite it.

The family — six sisters and one brother — consulted with a life coach and met with previous jackpot winners to learn from their experiences. They plan “on tithing 10 percent of their winnings to God,’’ according to a news release. “Friday the 13th is now a blessed day,” Ms. Arthur said.


