


DHAKA, Bangladesh — A man suspected of being an Islamist militant was killed in crossfire on Saturday while in police custody, a police chief said, just days after he was accused of critically wounding a Hindu college teacher in the latest in a series of attacks in Bangladesh.

The man, Ghulam Faijullaha Fahim, 19, was shot when police officers took him with them to help capture his associates, said Sarwar Hossain, the police chief in Madaripur, 44 miles south of the capital, Dhaka.

“He was caught in crossfire that erupted after miscreants started shooting at the police,” Mr. Hossain said. He added that Mr. Fahim had been pronounced dead on arrival at a hospital.

The college teacher, Ripon Chakraborty, was attacked on Wednesday by Mr. Fahim and two other knife-wielding assailants when Mr. Chakraborty answered the doorbell at his home in Madaripur, according to the police account.

Mr. Fahim was caught by people who rushed to help the teacher and his family, and he was handed over to the police. He told them that members of the banned militant group Hizb ut-Tahrir had planned the attack.

Militants have killed more than 30 people in Bangladesh since early last year, including atheist bloggers, liberal academics, gay-rights campaigners, foreign aid workers, and members of minority Muslim sects and other religious groups.

The Islamic State or groups linked to Al Qaeda have claimed responsibility for most of the killings, but the government denies that either group has a presence in Bangladesh, a majority Muslim country of about 160 million people.

The police blame homegrown militants from groups like Jamaat-ul-Mujahedeen and the Ansarullah Bangla Team.

At least 11 people suspected of being militants have been killed in shootouts since November, including five this month, as the authorities step up a hunt for Islamists to stop deadly attacks.

More than 100,000 Islamic scholars and clerics on Saturday issued an edict against militancy in the name of Islam.

Also on Saturday, the police recovered a large cache of firearms and ammunition, including 108 pistols and 1,000 bullets, from a canal on the outskirts of Dhaka.

More than 11,000 people, including 194 believed to be linked to militant networks, were detained in a weeklong crackdown on Islamists that ended on Friday.


