


OAKMONT, Pa. — Third-ranked Rory McIlroy, the 2011 United States Open champion, equaled his worst start in eight appearances in the event with a seven-over-par 77.

McIlroy, who finished his opening round on Friday morning, found five fairways and eight greens and had 34 putts (seven more than the Englishman Lee Westwood, who finished 10 strokes better).

McIlroy did not try to hide his disappointment after matching the 77 he shot in the first round of the 2012 tournament at the Olympic Club in San Francisco, where he missed the cut.

“I think for me the toughest thing is just trying to stay positive and not get too down on myself,” he said.

Lacking confidence in his driver, McIlroy hit irons off the tee on the first three holes.

“And missed three fairways,” he said. “So that doesn’t help either.”

He added, “I don’t need to swing perfect, but I just need to be able to play one shot and know that I know where it’s going to start and I know where it’s going to finish and just try to go from there.”

A Long Wait to Play Late Danny Lee completed his rain-interrupted first round at about 9 a.m. Friday. With a one-under par 69, he was tied for fifth.

But Lee, 25, was troubled that his scheduled tee time to start his second round was Friday at 8:34 p.m. He did not know when he was going to have dinner and he was worried about getting to sleep.

“That’s way past my dinnertime and I should be in bed, rolling around about to fall asleep,” Lee said. “I know I’ve never swung the golf club at that time.”

Lee added that he customarily eats a hefty dinner, usually around 6 or 7 p.m.

“So this one is going to be a problem for me,” Lee said.

Other players were puzzled about the wisdom of having groups tee off so late that they would only play a few holes before returning early Saturday morning to resume their rounds.

About 90 minutes after Lee left the grounds, tournament officials announced that those golfers who started their first rounds on Thursday morning – most did not finish until Friday morning — would not begin their second rounds until Saturday morning. BILL PENNINGTON


