


American workers are reaping fewer of the gains of a growing economy in the form of pay and benefits. Shareholders are reaping more in the form of corporate profits. That shift has been one of the most important economic stories of the last several decades, and it is the key to understanding stagnant wages for middle-class workers and a soaring stock market in the last quarter-century.

Here is what is less widely understood: That trend appears to be reversing itself.

It is early and the reversal may not last. And it certainly hasn’t fully undone the shift underway since the 1980s. But the numbers are quite clear that in the last couple of years workers have claimed a bigger piece of the economic pie and shareholders a smaller one.

The evidence available so far in 2016 — steady growth in wages and weak earnings for publicly traded companies — suggests that the reversal is continuing this year.

At the start of 2013, for example, 61 percent of national income went to pay and benefits for workers. But by the end of 2015, that had risen to 62.6 percent. (That said, in the early 1990s, that figure was around 66 percent.)

If the proportion of national income going to workers in early 2013 had stayed constant, there would now be $251 billion a year less flowing into Americans’ paychecks than is the case. That is about $1,900 a year per household.

At the same time, corporate profits’ share of national income has fallen, from 14.2 percent in the middle of 2014 to 12.1 percent by the end of 2015. That translates to $328 billion less in annual corporate profits than there would be if the earlier proportion had held.

You can pick different numerators and denominators to get at the same concept — using just wages and salaries instead of total compensation, for example, or dividing by gross domestic product instead of the related concept of national income — but the same basic pattern reveals itself.

And there is plenty of other anecdotal information and data consistent with the shift. Among the companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500, first-quarter earnings are on track to be 7.6 percent lower than a year earlier. Weak earnings growth, and lately an outright contraction in corporate profits, are a culprit in a stock market that has largely moved sideways for more than two years.

A big part of the story is a steep decline in the profitability of the energy sector, reflecting a much lower price of oil and natural gas. Total corporate profits were $64 billion lower in 2015 than in 2014. A fall in the profitability of the petroleum and coal products sector accounted for $40 billion of that.

There may be something broader going on that is holding back corporate profits beyond simply cheap oil. You might expect that the hit to profits in the energy sector caused by cheaper fuel would be counterbalanced by higher profits in sectors that use fuel, like airlines and trucking firms.

That is where the other side of the equation — higher worker compensation — comes into play. Part of the reason corporate profits are falling appears to be that companies are having to pay their employees more.

Hiring has been quite strong over three years, with millions of Americans getting jobs. That has pushed the unemployment rate steadily downward, to about 5 percent. Very gradually, a labor market that was very much tilted in favor of employers is tilting the other way.

That means companies are having to work harder to attract good employees. They do that by paying higher wages and salaries (up 10 percent in 2015 compared with 2013) and more generous benefits package (up 6 percent over the two-year period).

It is worth noting that this doesn’t necessarily mean that pay is rising by that much for the typical worker. After all, the pay for chief executives and other highly paid people counts in those compensation numbers.

Still, paired with other evidence, it doesn’t look as if this is solely a phenomenon of the highest-paid workers making more. For example, average hourly earnings for nonmanagerial private sector workers rose 2.56 percent in 2015 in a year of very low inflation. That number was only 1.69 percent in 2012, when inflation was higher.

It is hard to say definitively what has driven these trends, but here’s a try:

The shift of national income toward shareholders and away from workers since the 1980s was driven in part by a decline in union power and a rise in shareholder-driven capitalism that made managers more ruthless than their predecessors in seeking to minimize salary expense. (That includes refusing to give raises and laying off employees.)

That long-term trend, along with a cyclical downturn during the 2008 recession and its aftermath, left workers with very little bargaining power and shareholders with the upper hand.

In the last two or three years, as the economy has firmed up, workers have regained some of that bargaining power they lost in the recession. But they have not, at this point at least, gained the power they lost over the last three decades.

In the meantime, workers celebrate getting a little bit bigger piece of the economic pie, and shareholders bemoan their smaller piece.

It would be better if the pie were bigger to begin with. If overall national income were rising rapidly (it decidedly isn’t), there would be room for both workers and shareholders to be fat and happy. One of the great questions for the economic future is what it would take to make that happen.


