


John Smoltz prepares for broadcasts with the same care he once took for his starts. He pulled a notebook from his bag on Wednesday to show a visitor the meticulously researched, handwritten numbers he would use to make a point about the Mets.

“I wish I was better at technology and looking them up faster; it took a long time,” said Smoltz, the Hall of Fame pitcher, who was at Citi Field for MLB Network. “But some of the numbers that came out of this were staggering to me.”

In the columns of Smoltz’s pages were lists of young pitchers who had worked through the World Series, with their statistics the following year. Almost always, Smoltz found, the pitchers’ effectiveness declined in the follow-up season.

So it should be no surprise, he said, that the Mets’ young starters — with the very loud exception of Noah Syndergaard — have not been quite as overpowering this season as they were last fall. Matt Harvey has been the most persistent riddle.

“I’ve said this: Be careful what you wish for last year,” Smoltz said. “All the fans, the excitement of going to the World Series — they emptied the tank.”

Shortly after Smoltz spoke, Harvey allowed a career-high nine runs, in a career-low two and two-thirds innings, in a 9-1 thrashing by the Washington Nationals. Nobody talked much later about the defense that had betrayed Harvey in the grisly third. An old friend, Daniel Murphy, had already blasted a hanging curveball, on an 0-2 count, for a two-run homer in the first.

“There’s two types of people in this game: ones who’ve been humbled and ones who will be,” Manager Terry Collins said. “And if you’ve never been humbled, you don’t know how to get through it.”

That is where Harvey now finds himself. He has a 5.77 E.R.A. and has not pitched more than six innings in a start all season. Collins would not even commit to starting him next week, when his turn comes up again at Nationals Park. He said Harvey’s confidence was sapped.

“I’m not happy about it,” Harvey said of his performance. “I know nobody else is.”

He said he felt fine, physically, but had “no idea” why he has struggled. He stated the obvious — that he has not executed pitches — and said he wanted to start in Washington.

“It’s my job to go out there and keep working and try and figure this thing out,” Harvey said. “That’s all I’m going to do, is start over tomorrow, keep working hard and do everything I can to fix this.”

Catcher Kevin Plawecki said he doubted confidence was the problem, sticking to the caricature Harvey has cultivated of a brooding superhero, the Dark Knight, incapable of nuance. How could Harvey, of all people, have a crisis of confidence?

“The Matt Harvey I know is not one that loses confidence,” Plawecki said, adding later: “You look at Matt Harvey and his history, it’s been pure dominance. But this game’s hard. There are times in this game you’ve got to learn from bad times.”

Harvey is not given to public introspection; his interview session lasted 98 seconds before a media relations official ended it. Harvey did not sound irritated. He sounded defeated — which he was, for the sixth time in nine starts.

Harvey was matched on Thursday with Stephen Strasburg, whose team has won his last 13 starts, dating to last season. Armed with a new seven-year, $175 million contract, Strasburg — who had Tommy John surgery in 2010 — is finally a consistent force: 7-0 with a 2.80 E.R.A., and 75 strikeouts in 61 innings.

“When you give people that kind of comfort and those big pillows — oh, my God,” Scott Boras, the agent for Strasburg and Harvey, said by phone on Thursday afternoon. “We’ve already seen the dominance of Matt Harvey. But I’m not sure we’ve seen the optimal dominance of Stephen Strasburg. I’ve seen it — I’ve seen it big — but I think we’re going to see more and more of it.”

Boras was right about Strasburg, who struck out 10 Mets in six overpowering innings. But Harvey’s dominance has been missing since Game 5 of the World Series, when he carried a shutout through eight innings before everything unraveled in the ninth. The Kansas City Royals clinched the title that night, but Harvey had proven his point: Not only did he pitch in the postseason in his comeback from 2013 Tommy John surgery; he thrived.

Harvey’s fastball velocity and strikeout rates have fallen this season, but not drastically. He has given up an unusually high batting average on balls in play — .379 coming into the game — suggesting he might be unlucky.

But as Thursday’s fiasco played out, Collins said, the pitching coach Dan Warthen noted that Harvey had not been the same since he was treated for a blood clot in his bladder in late March. How that would affect him now is anyone’s guess. Collins said Harvey would “most likely” see a doctor, but added: “I don’t know. We haven’t gotten there yet.”

No one has an answer, but everyone has the same memory: Harvey sprinting to the mound for the ninth inning last Nov. 1, bold and bulletproof, a picture of focused aggression with the season on the line.

“This kid went above and beyond last year,” Collins said, “and I’m not sure he’s recuperated from it.”

Be careful what you wish for, indeed.


