


Collective Design

First-rate examples of vintage 20th-century design from an international group of dealers, as well as cutting-edge creations. This year, there will also be an exhibition celebrating the influence of the Tokyo firm Nendo and a new feature called Collective Concept, with presentations by talents like Apparatus, Lindsey Adelman and Fort Standard.

Through May 8 at 550 Washington Street; collectivedesignfair.com.

Voutsa Pop-Up

The wallpaper company Voutsa opens an immersive pop-up space with its exuberant patterns applied to walls, furniture and clothing, with collaborators like Sasha Bikoff, Tzelan and Paul Marlow.

Through May at 179 Mott Street; voutsa.com.

Downtown Design Festival

A 12-day series of events at the South Street Seaport (now called the Seaport District) will include conversations with prominent designers, an exhibition by Parsons School of Design and family workshops on animation (May 7) and architecture (May 14) sponsored by the Children’s Museum of the Arts, as well as a design market presented by WantedDesign.

Through May 17 at 19 Fulton Street (the Parsons show is at 117 Beekman Street); southstreetseaport.com/seaport-culture. The design market continues through June.

The Annex by Material Lust

With a dark heavy-metal aesthetic that riffs on pagan and alchemical symbolism, the founders of the design firm Material Lust know how to turn heads. Their new permanent installation presents their own work along with that of other designers and artists.

195 Chrystie Street; material-lust.com.

Bklyn Designs

The proliferation of design studios in Brooklyn is no secret, and Bklyn Designs was founded in 2003 as a place to showcase that boundless creativity. For those who want to bring some of it home, there’s also a pop-up shop organized by the American Design Club.

Through May 8 at 72 Noble Street, Brooklyn; bklyndesigns.com.

The Future Perfect

This trendsetting store presents an exhibition of new American design, including furniture by Christopher Stuart of the Indiana firm Luur, and lighting by Ladies & Gentlemen Studio and the glass artist John Hogan.

Through June at 55 Great Jones Street; thefutureperfect.com.

WantedDesign Brooklyn

The popular WantedDesign fair, which started in Manhattan, added a Brooklyn satellite last year. This year’s Brooklyn edition includes a workshop with international design schools and a range of exhibitions, among them a survey of designers from Western North Carolina and the Transatlantic Creative Exchange project, pairing designers and institutions from the United States and France on collaborative products.

Through May 17 at 220 36th Street, Brooklyn; wanteddesignnyc.com.

Design Pavilion

A group of structures known collectively as Design Pavilion will take over the newly renovated Astor Place Plaza. Highlights include an installation by Snarkitecture for the condominium development 125 Greenwich Street; a structure designed by Harry Allen with the biomaterials company Ecovative; the DuPont Corian Blur Bar by Joe Doucet; and Growth, a show of new objects curated by the American Design Club.

Through May 11 at Astor Place between Lafayette Street and Cooper Square; design-pavilion.com.

Catellani & Smith Hallucinations

Light projections by the designer Enzo Catellani and the glass artist Giuliano Gaigher.

Through June 12 at ABC Carpet & Home, 888 Broadway; abchome.com.

Jens Risom’s 100th Birthday

In honor of the Danish-American furniture designer’s 100th birthday, Design Within Reach is producing a side table from his first collection and selling it for $100 for one week only (after that, it will be $195). Ralph Pucci will also honor the designer with a permanent exhibit of Mr. Risom’s newly reissued designs from the 1950s and 1960s, opening May 16. (The show will also include the new Gabriella bronze chair by Vladimir Kagan, who died last month.)

Design Within Reach, dwr.com; and Ralph Pucci, 44 West 18th Street, ralphpucci.net.

Kips Bay Decorator Show House

Now in its 44th year, the annual show house demonstrates what’s possible when top interior designers let their imaginations run wild. Participating firms this year include David Kleinberg Design Associates, Drake/Anderson, Sawyer Berson, Suzanne Kasler and Timothy Whealon Interiors, among others.

The opening night cocktail party is May 11, and the show house runs from May 12 to June 9 at 19 East 61st Street; kipsbaydecoratorshowhouse.org.

The Collections Two at Colony

Colony, a cooperative showroom of independent designers, presents an exhibition celebrating the color pink and a host of activities in conjunction with it, including a drink-and-draw session with nude models (May 14), Design Dim Sum (May 15) and movie night (May 16).

Through May 17 at 324 Canal Street; goodcolony.com.

New Danish Design at Patrick Parrish Gallery

Emerging Danish design outfits Pettersen & Hein, Anne Dorthe Vester and Maria Bruun, and Kasper Kjeldgaard present minimalist conceptual pieces.

Through June 4 at 50 Lispenard Street; patrickparrish.com.

Tribeca Design District Night

TriBeCa galleries and showrooms — David Weeks Studio, Uhuru, R & Company, Stillfried Wien, Oly and others — stay open late with exhibit openings and cocktail receptions.

Information: tribecadesigndistrict.com.

Lee Broom Pop-Up Store

The British designer Lee Broom has a reputation for innovative presentations; during last month’s Salone del Mobile in Milan he turned a roving delivery van into his showroom. Broom Off Broome, his pop-up space in New York, will offer some 50 products for sale, including a new lighting piece exclusive to the United States.

Through June 10 at 63 Greene Street; leebroom.com.

USM Mix It

The modular furniture company USM partnered with three noted mixologists to create custom bar carts from the components of its Haller system. The carts will be on view following a cocktail party from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m.

28-30 Greene Street; usm.com.

Designjunction and Dwell on Design

The United Kingdom-based organization designjunction introduced a New York satellite of its London show last year; it’s back again this year, in partnership with Dwell on Design. Presentations by Artek, Muuto, Dyke & Dean and others offer a tastefully pared-down sense of European modernism, accompanied by an extensive program of talks organized by Dwell magazine.

Through May 15 at 540 West 21st Street; thedesignjunction.co.uk/new-york.

Sight Unseen Offsite

The online publication Sight Unseen presents a selection of emerging designers on the cusp of doing bigger things. Expect provocative pieces from across the United States, along with offerings from little-known designers from countries like Canada, Germany and Russia.

Through May 16 at 1114 Avenue of the Americas; offsite.sightunseen.com.

WantedDesign Manhattan

Since it was founded in 2011, WantedDesign has become one of the most vital design events outside the International Contemporary Furniture Fair. Exhibitors include established brands like Alessi and Cappellini as well as new studios presenting for the first time.

Through May 16 at 269 11th Avenue; wanteddesignnyc.com.

Neri&Hu at 12 Warren Street

The Future Perfect presents a complete apartment designed around new furniture by the Shanghai firm Neri&Hu for De La Espada, in a new condominium building developed by DDG.

Through May 17 at 12 Warren Street; thefutureperfect.com and ddgpartners.com/12warren.

Ronan and Erwan Bouroullec at Vitra and Axor

The three-level space shared by Vitra and Axor will be given over to a celebration of the French design phenoms Ronan and Erwan Bouroullec, with products the brothers designed for Vitra, Axor, Artek and Nanimarquina.

Through May 17 at 29 Ninth Avenue; vitra.com and hansgrohe-usa.com/axor.

Ernest Showroom

The new Ernest showroom holds an open house presenting its indoor and outdoor furniture and products from D’Apostrophe, Royal Botania, Renson and Delta Light.

Through May 15 at 255 Fifth Avenue; ernest-ny.com.

International Contemporary Furniture Fair

This is the main event, the trade fair around which the rest of NYCxDESIGN developed. The first three days are for design professionals only; the final day, May 17, is open to the public. Browse design from more than 750 exhibitors from across the world or buy products on the spot at the Milk Stand, a pop-up shop presented by the blog Design Milk in a space designed by the Brooklyn firm Bower.

Through May 17 at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 655 West 34th Street; icff.com.

NYCxDESIGN Awards

Winners of the annual NYCxDESIGN Awards, presented by Interior Design magazine and the ICFF, will be announced at a 6 p.m. event at the Museum of Modern Art, followed by the ICFF opening night party.

Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53rd Street; icff.com.

SoHo Design District Night

Starting at 6 p.m., the streets of SoHo will take on the look of a block party, as various showrooms – Luceplan, Artemide, Blu Dot, Blackbody, FLOR, Flos, Fritz Hansen, Nanimarquina, Ingo Maurer, Moroso and others — remain open for special events and cocktails.

Information: sohodesigndistrict.org.

Roll & Hill Showroom

The New York lighting company that helped catapult American lighting design to international prominence opens its first showroom, a 4,000-square-foot space in SoHo, where it will present large-scale creations from designers like Bec Brittain, Karl Zahn and Jason Miller, the company’s founder.

3 Mercer Street; rollandhill.com.

Apparatus Studio

Apparatus opens its new 10,000-square-foot combination showroom, design studio and production space, presenting a new collection that includes light fixtures and monolithic marble tables.

Open house through May 17 at 124 West 30th; apparatusstudio.com.

Best of Found Muji

The Japanese retailer Muji, long prized by designers for the thoughtful simplicity of its products, also sells like-minded objects from other companies — a collection called Found Muji. Favorites from that collection will be on display and for sale.

Through mid-June at 475 Fifth Avenue; muji.com/us.

Yabu Pushelberg

The interior design firm opens its studio to present its new furniture collection for Linteloo.

6 to 9 p.m. at 88 Prince Street; yabupushelberg.com.

Matter

The cutting-edge furniture store presents new work by Aelfie and Studio Proba, John Hogan and Vonnegut/Kraft.

Through May 17 at 405 Broome Street; mattermatters.com.

Anabela Chan at Les Ateliers Courbet

The London-based jewelry designer Anabela Chan will present her nature-inspired creations, including sculptures made from butterfly wings, painted crystal candy dishes for Lobmeyr and fabrics for Bernhardt Textiles.

Through June at 175-177 Mott Street; ateliercourbet.com.

New York Design Center

Numerous showrooms – Desiron, Global Views, Cliff Young, Tucker Robbins, CF Modern, Currey & Company, Metropolitan Lighting, Theodore Alexander, Raul Carrasco and others — will host evening events.

200 Lexington Avenue; nydc.com.


