


BEHSUD, Afghanistan — The first time Noor ul-Haq died, his Afghan Army outpost was completely cut off by the Taliban on a bleak southern battleground. Hundreds of insurgent fighters swept in, and all that was left for the government to do was ship the corpses home.

His wife and their 10 children buried the body, piling rocks into a mound over the grave in a cemetery rapidly filling with other war dead here in Behsud District, in eastern Afghanistan. Like others, they were handed a $2,300 government payout — roughly a year’s salary for a soldier — to pay for the burial and see them through for a short while.

No one knows whom they put in that grave, but it was not Mr. Haq. He and another member of his unit, Imamuddin Ibrahimkhel, were among a very few soldiers who were taken prisoner by the Taliban last August and eventually freed by the Afghan Special Forces.

Their families went through the trauma of the death notification, the sadness of burying bodies too damaged to be identifiable, then the sudden high of hearing their men had somehow lived.

Then came another blow: The government wanted the compensation money back. The men were told that they could always take another stint in the army to help, they said.

“They put us through doomsday,” Mr. Ibrahimkhel said. “My heart is crying because of what is going on here — what we went through, where we served, and all they care about is the funeral money.”

The families of Mr. Haq, a 39-year-old enlistee on a three-year contract, and Mr. Ibrahimkhel, a 31-year-old with three children, are among the thousands who have been caught up in the dire turn the Afghan war took last year. The men’s survival was first reported by the Afghan channel 1TV.

In Helmand Province alone, where both men were stationed, at least 3,000 members of the Afghan Army and National Police have been killed in the past 11 months, Afghan officials say — nearly the total American toll through the entire war.

Mr. Haq’s eldest son, Zia ul-Haq, 23, was working as a day laborer in Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan last summer when he got the call saying his father had been killed. Accompanied by two older relatives, Zia rode a bus to Kabul, the capital, and picked up the body from a military hospital.

On the coffin were the official details of Mr. Haq’s life: Noor ul-Haq, son of Said Amir Jan. Artillery Company, Second Battalion, Third Regiment, 215th Maiwand Corps.

Date of martyrdom: Aug. 28, 2015.

The elder relatives opened the drab green bag within to check the body, which they said had been badly damaged with little of the head remaining — in too bad shape even to be washed and dressed in a white shroud, as is the tradition here. They would not let Zia see, afraid that the young man might collapse.

The body was loaded onto a van paid for by the government, and a crowd of mourners was waiting as it arrived at the family’s three-room adobe home in Behsud District of Nangarhar Province. The body was laid down for just a few minutes at the packed women’s quarter. The coffin reeked, and it was swiftly transferred to the cemetery. More than 300 mourners offered the final prayer, and the man was laid to rest.

“We were afraid that we would lose our mother also,” Zia said. “It took her six or seven days to start eating again.”

The family of the other soldier, Mr. Ibrahimkhel, was not so lucky. A day after the body arrived in the family’s home district of Charbolak, in northern Balkh Province, Mr. Ibrahimkhel’s mother died of a heart attack. Three of her four sons had served in the army, all largely in Helmand Province, and now, the family thought, she would join one of them in the family cemetery.

In the days after the funeral for Mr. Haq, his son Zia returned to Kabul to pick up the government compensation payment in cash — 162,000 afghanis, the equivalent of $2,300. One-third of the money was parceled out in small bills, 10 bundles of them. Some of the larger bills were so worn out that the bank refused to deposit them. The bank also refused the small bills, saying it had too much petty cash already.

The first twist came one morning three months after the burial. Zia received a phone call from a man with a southern accent, asking if he was Noor ul-Haq’s son. At first, Zia thought it was a prank. But the man had real information: Noor ul-Haq was not dead, he said, but in a Taliban prison in the Now Zad District of Helmand.

“My mother was baking bread in the oven, and I said, ‘Dad is found!’ ” he recalled. “Everyone all of a sudden started crying again, from happiness.”

When Zia shared the development with male relatives and told them that he wanted to go to Now Zad to find his father, they were not convinced. Someone is trying to fool you to get the death payment, they told him. Or what if it is a Taliban trap?

But he had to find out. Both he and his younger brother Abdul had been haunted by dreams in which their father visited them, still alive.

Zia’s 15-day journey to find his father took him deep into Taliban territory, in the opium poppy belt in the south. He had to wait outside a Taliban court in a mosque in Now Zad, as land disputes and robberies were settled by a portly insurgent leader, before he could get his visit approved.

After pleading, Zia was allowed to briefly visit his father at the old school building the Taliban had turned into a prison. Noor ul-Haq was stooped, and barely able to walk. But hundreds of miles away from his grave in the Behsud cemetery, there he was, breathing, talking to his son.

The Taliban would not let him go, and Zia went home alone.

After the soldiers’ base was overrun, in the Musa Qala District of Helmand, Mr. Haq and his comrade Mr. Ibrahimkhel were among 10 soldiers who were taken captive by the Taliban, Mr. Ibrahimkhel said in a phone interview.

The new captives joined other prisoners from the security forces, 87 in all, Mr. Ibrahimkhel said. Every month, they would be moved to a different prison, sometimes in a different district, out of fear of a government raid.

After four months in captivity, when the world believed them dead, Mr. Ibrahimkhel gave a phone number to a visitor who had come to see a civilian prisoner. The visitor wrote the number on his leg, under the cuff of his pants, and later used it to call Mr. Ibrahimkhel’s family to let it know that he was alive. One of Mr. Ibrahimkhel’s brothers made a trip and finally found the prison in Now Zad.

“They didn’t let us meet up close — just from 20 meters, to show that I was held by them and alive,” Mr. Ibrahimkhel said.

When the Afghan Special Forces raided the prison in Now Zad in December, Zia held out hope that his father had been freed. He made calls, but the news was not good: His father was not among the rescued. He was told that Mr. Haq may have been shot dead by the Taliban before the raid.

Noor ul-Haq was lost to his family again. But this time his relatives did not have to wait as long for the twist.

A month later, another Afghan Special Forces raid in an adjacent district freed Mr. Haq, Mr. Ibrahimkhel and about 60 others. The two men would later learn the details of the ordeal their families had been put through.

The army demanded that the two men return the death money. Both were insulted, and crushed.

Army officials say no one is to blame, really. The embattled outposts are remote, and sometimes it takes months before bodies can finally be shipped back, badly damaged and decomposed. It can be impossible to sort out who died, who deserted and who might have been taken alive.

Gen. Dawlat Waziri, a spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense, described the cases of Mr. Haq and Mr. Ibrahimkhel as the “misery of the ongoing war.” He insisted that Mr. Haq and Mr. Ibrahimkhel would meet the minister of defense soon so the minister could praise their bravery and provide assistance.

“They don’t have to pay anything,” General Waziri said.

But now both men are back in Helmand Province, trying to recover the back salary that was seized to repay the death compensation. In phone interviews, both said they saw no signs that their debt had been erased.

“It’s been 17 months that I have not gone home,” Mr. Ibrahimkhel said. “My youngest child was 7 or 8 months old when I left. Now he probably won’t recognize me.”

Mr. Haq’s family had already spent most of the compensation payment on a painful cycle of wakes and celebrations.

“Guests were coming and coming — at first, when we heard that he was killed and the body arrived,” Zia said. “Then, again, when we heard he was alive, people came to celebrate. Then, when we heard that he may have died again, people came again. And when he finally arrived, such big crowds came that I didn’t even know most of them.”

Every time, they all had to be fed.

On his third day home, Mr. Haq walked to the cemetery with the help of one of his sons. The strip was crowded with graves of soldiers and policemen, many of whom had died in Helmand, the Afghan flag hoisted on their graves. He crouched by the headstone of what was supposed to be his own grave, offering a prayer for the unknown man buried there.

But two months later, Mr. Haq was back in Helmand, trying to get his remaining salary released and, perhaps, to sign up for another three years in the army.

Trying to explain his father’s new absence, Mr. Haq’s 4-year-old son, Helal, put it this way: “My father went to bring rice.”


