


Two and half months into the season and Matt Harvey remains an enigma. His improvement over past two weeks offered a glimmer of hope that he had solved the problems behind his wretched start. But Friday, in a 5-1 loss to the Atlanta Braves, Harvey lapsed.

In Harvey’s previous 20 innings entering Friday’s start, he had allowed only two runs. His velocity, breaking balls and demeanor were better. But facing the second-lowest scoring offense in the major leagues, Harvey gave up four runs on seven hits over six innings. His shrinking E.R.A. skipped up to 4.76.

“We’ll continue to make sure he stays positive, because I don’t think it should affect him,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “He’s been pitching too good.”

Harvey did maintain strong velocity, a reassuring sign for the Mets. But his command and his slider were not consistently sharp. He walked two batters and gave up four doubles — all on pitches up in the strike zone or over the heart of the plate.

“It’s one of those things where you’re up in the zone and leave balls over the middle of the plate, and sometimes you get away with it and sometimes you don’t,” Harvey said.

In the three innings in which Harvey allowed runs, he undermined himself. He walked the leadoff batters in the third and the fifth. He gave up a leadoff double to Jace Peterson in the fourth. Each runner eventually scored.

“Maybe that’s guiding the ball,” Harvey said of the walks. “When you go up against a team that is super aggressive, you might try and change some things. I think that kind of got the best of me.”

One subpar start does not quickly erase three previous stellar games, but Harvey has walked a fine line of uneasiness since the start of the season. Some Mets fans remained unsatisfied, offering a smattering of boos after Harvey gave up a run-scoring single to Nick Markakis in the fifth that gave the Braves a 4-1 lead.

The pitching matchup was an intriguing pairing. Harvey’s pitching remains at the core of the Mets’ concerns. The Braves’ rookie starter John Gant is tied to the Mets’ magical 2015 season.

The Mets used Gant and Robert Whalen, both lower-level prospects, to pry Juan Uribe and Kelly Johnson from the Braves. The two veterans helped inspire the Mets’ second-half surge last season. On Friday, with a funky and halting delivery, Gant kept his former organization off balance.

“I was here once, for a predraft workout,” said Gant, who was picked by the Mets in the 21st round of the 2011 draft. “This was a little more intense than that.”

Gant allowed only one run on two hits over six and two-thirds innings. The Mets scored first, scratching out a run in the first with groundouts after Curtis Granderson’s leadoff double. But they did not notch their second hit until Asdrubal Cabrera’s two-out double in the sixth inning.

The Mets’ inconsistent offense has offered sporadic support to the pitching staff, creating little margin for error. Earlier in the week against the Pittsburgh Pirates, the much-injured lineup piled up 17 runs on 30 hits in a two-game stretch. But the Mets could barely string together a rally against the rebuilding Braves’ pitching staff.

Even one of the Mets’ hottest hitters could not rescue a fruitful opportunity. Wilmer Flores, David Wright’s short-term replacement at third base, did not start because of a bruised left hand. Flores was hit by a pitch in Thursday’s game, so Johnson started at third base on Friday instead. But when the Mets loaded the bases in the seventh with two outs, pinch-hitter Flores struck out.

“We just didn’t have very good swings,” Collins said.

The game ended on a strange play. James Loney was called out by the umpires, according to Collins, for making contact with Peterson above the knees at second base on a double-play attempt, a violation of the new slide rules.


