


A lavish show of Meissen porcelain opens today at the Frick Collection — but don’t expect formal arrangements of Chinese vases, bird-shaped cruets and Rococo figurines. In a first, the Upper East Side museum has invited a contemporary artist to curate and design an exhibition of centuries-old objects with her own Meissen-inspired works alongside — and stacked on, leaning against and placed in other heretical and seemingly precarious positions in relation to it. The New York sculptor Arlene Shechet selected 130 pieces from the famed Arnhold Collection, a promised gift to the Frick, which is devoting its Portico Gallery to “Porcelain, No Simple Matter,” a radical and rowdy rethinking of the precious. In the slide show above, Shechet shares the thought processes behind five of the matchups on view.

The show, organized by the Frick curator Charlotte Vignon, follows Shechet’s 2014 similar recontextualization of the Meissen collection at the Rhode Island School of Design Museum. There, the galleries were painted black; here, filled with natural light from the Frick’s Fifth Avenue garden, the space glows. At the end of the portico, home to Hudon’s life-size figure of Diana, are two bouquet-like arrays of plates, freed from vitrines and cleverly attached to the curved walls. On shelves and in Lucite cases styled after traditional furniture in the Frick mansion, bowls rest facedown, figures stand with their backs to us, tiny containers display their detailed and usually concealed interiors, overturned saucers are as meticulously painted below as they are above. Unencumbered by formality, the pieces come alive.

In 2012–13, Shechet had residencies in the Meissen manufactory, during and after which she made three-dimensional porcelain collages by splicing together scavenged factory molds, semi-functional fragments and dissociated wholes: In “Idol,” 2012, an asparagus dish, a kiln brick, the figure of a lamb crowned with a broken eggshell and a rosebud glazed in 24-karat gold. “Their pieces weren’t as experimental as that, but you can see the artists’ sense of play and attempts to push the envelope,” Shechet says. (One polychrome Meissen fantasia: a laughing Chinese figure astride a rooster-shaped mustard pot.) Blurring the line between old and new is part of her gambit. “Where one becomes the other — I’m interested in that confusion.”


