


ATLANTA — Since becoming the presumptive Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump has changed little at his rallies, often building on his caustic comments from the primary campaign.

In an hour-plus speech here on Wednesday, Mr. Trump stuck to that script, touring through his foreign policy proposals and occasionally offering positions at odds with decades of American diplomacy. He said he would “accept” a visit to the United States by the North Korean dictator as part of “opening a dialogue,” and focus on the heritage of the shooter in the Orlando, Fla., massacre, as a possible source of radicalization.

He also reiterated his desire to temporarily bar immigrants from Middle Eastern countries from entering the United States.

Mr. Trump, who was frequently interrupted by protesters, continued to make the Orlando shooting a major focal point, building upon fear of Muslims and threats abroad.

“He was born here, but his parents weren’t, and his ideas weren’t,” Mr. Trump said of the shooter, Omar Mateen. “His ideas were born somewhere else.”

(Mr. Trump had said previously, incorrectly, that Mr. Mateen was born in Afghanistan; he was born in New York, in 1986.)

Mr. Trump also said that “we have to go and we have to check, respectfully, the mosques,” a more explicit position regarding surveillance that he proposed last year after the Paris attacks.

He also continued to predict that there would be more terrorists attacks in the United States.

“I’ve been saying it’s going to happen,” Mr. Trump said. “And I hate to say it again, but it’s going to happen again and again and again.”

Mr. Trump has used the attacks Sunday in Orlando to further sharpen his immigration positions, continually calling for a “temporary ban for certain people” from “where you have tremendous terrorism.” He also sought to contrast himself with Hillary Clinton, who he said was too welcoming of refugees and immigrants from Middle Eastern countries.

“As to whether they assimilate or not, you make the decision,” Mr. Trump said. “But assimilation has not been exactly a positive factor.”

Mr. Trump, who last month said he would be open to negotiating directly with Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, went further on Wednesday in his commitment to being open to talk to anyone.

“I wouldn’t go there, that I can tell you,” Mr. Trump said of North Korea. “If he came here, I’d accept him, but we wouldn’t have a state dinner like we do for China and all these other people who rip us off.”

He tried to clarify his position on NATO, which he has called obsolete, saying that was so only in regards to terrorism and member states paying their fair share.

He also said that NATO had “the wrong countries,” and praised President Vladimir V. Putin’s stewardship of the Russian military.

“Frankly, Putin has built up their military again and again and again,” he said. “Their military is much stronger. He’s doing nuclear, we’re not doing anything. Our nuclear is old and tired, and his nuclear is tippy top from what I hear.”


