


The wedding guests sat on bales of straw lined up evenly in rows. Heads of wheat served as boutonnieres for the groomsmen. Two flower girls, actually cows named Mona and Lisa, were led by their handler.

The bride walked down the aisle to John Lennon’s “Imagine.” A glittery headband held her platinum blond hair in place while a so-called cowboy preacher, flown in from Colorado, began a prayer.

The wedding, at a farm near the town of Nassau in upstate New York in May 2014, was beautiful, according to witness accounts. And though the event may also have been a bit unusual, it would seem an unlikely candidate to draw the scrutiny of the federal government.

This week, though, federal prosecutors filed a civil complaint against the bride’s father, J. Felix Strevell, 54, an official in the administration of Gov. George E. Pataki, and the bride herself, Nicole Strevell-Childrose, 30, saying the wedding was paid for with money that belongs to the state.

Mr. Strevell, a deputy New York secretary of state from 1997 to 1999, pleaded guilty to fraud in 2007 for diverting money from a nonprofit institute that the state had created to help small businesses and entrepreneurs and that he ran. Mr. Strevell spent the money on himself and family members, including buying airplane tickets for Ms. Strevell-Childrose and paying her and her boyfriend wages as “interns,” according to the civil complaint.

After entering his plea, Mr. Strevell was ordered to pay restitution of $111,500 in monthly installments of $100, or 10 percent of his income, whichever was greater. Under the order’s terms, he was to pay the full amount if he became able to at any time.

Mr. Strevell instead diverted money to his daughter to pay for her wedding and to satisfy a tax debt on a property she owned, according to the civil complaint.

The complaint says Mr. Strevell had transferred $157,646 to his daughter from 2012 to 2014, while paying only $6,750 in restitution during the same period.

In March, Mr. Strevell was charged with five felony counts of making false declarations under oath, stemming from his misrepresentations of what he could pay to the government, according to a federal indictment filed in the Northern District of New York. (The indictment says he spent another $75,000 as a down payment on the farm where the wedding was held.)

The civil complaint accuses Mr. Strevell of transferring $28,000 to his daughter’s checking account for the wedding. He also paid for three wedding gowns ($1,400 to $2,500 each), a wedding tent, tables and chairs ($10,435.75 in cash), a wedding photographer ($2,246) and the couple’s honeymoon at the Four Seasons Hotel, in Santa Fe, N.M., the complaint says.

“I remember the wedding because I really loved it,” Trisha Millier, the photographer hired by Ms. Strevell-Childrose, said. She recalled the tables at the reception having a horseshoe motif, and invitations hand-sewn onto handkerchiefs.

“I have certainly done more extravagant weddings,” Ms. Millier said. “It seemed down to earth.”

Except, perhaps, for the multiple dresses, she added.

The civil complaint seeks payment of Mr. Strevell’s restitution, in part by voiding transfers from him to Ms. Strevell-Childrose. While testifying under oath in 2014, according to the criminal indictment, Mr. Strevell said he had given his daughter a couple of thousand dollars for the wedding and no wedding gift.

“If people try to avoid their restitution obligations, we will investigate,” Thomas Spina, the assistant United States attorney supervising the civil case, said in an interview this week. “We will take whatever steps necessary to repay the victims.”

Ms. Strevell-Childrose, according to her Facebook profile, is an assistant professor of history at Columbia-Greene Community College, where she has lectured on topics such as how to envision a more just, compassionate world. Under the pen name N. C. Childrose, she wrote a children’s book, “Mona and Lisa Come Home,” about a father and daughter who buy two cows for their farm.

Mr. Strevell still owes the state just over $102,000 on his restitution judgment as of June 14, according to the civil complaint. His criminal lawyer, Paul Evangelista, declined to comment.

Matthew Kelly, a lawyer for Ms. Strevell-Childrose, said the government was “grossly overreaching” in its lawsuit.

“While the government has a right to enforce the judgment, I think it’s beyond the pale for them to seek to enforce it against the daughter,” Mr. Kelly said. “I think it’s a way to try to punish the daughter for the sins of the father.”

Ms. Strevell-Childrose declined through Mr. Kelly to comment herself, but her appreciation for her father was evident on the wedding program.

“TO OUR DADS,” it read. “Thank you for your love. You have given us all you have.”


