


“A Bronx Tale” is Broadway bound.

Chazz Palminteri’s largely autobiographical story, made famous in the film featuring Robert De Niro, will arrive at the Longacre Theater this fall, with performances beginning Nov. 3 and an opening Dec. 1. Set, as the title suggests, in the Bronx, the story is about a boy who witnesses a killing and is then torn between two potential mentors, his father and a mobster.

“It’s a morality tale — a fable,” Mr. De Niro, who directed the film and will co-direct the musical, said in a telephone interview. “I always thought it would be a wonderful musical, and here we are.”

Mr. Palminteri, who witnessed a killing from his family stoop when he was a boy, initially wrote the story as a one-man play. He starred in an Off Broadway production in 1989. Mr. De Niro shepherded the film version, in which he co-starred with Mr. Palminteri, in 1993, and then Mr. Palminteri performed the solo show on Broadway in 2007 and 2008.

“It’s about the triumph of the human spirit, and about not wasting your life,” said Mr. Palminteri, who is writing the book for the musical. “A Bronx Tale” had a pre-Broadway production earlier this year at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N.J.

Mr. De Niro, who has won two Oscars, will co-direct with Jerry Zaks, who has won four Tonys; the show will feature doo-wop music by Alan Menken (a Tony winner for “Newsies the Musical”), lyrics by Glenn Slater (a Tony nominee this year for “School of Rock the Musical”), and choreography by Sergio Trujillo (a Tony nominee this year for “On Your Feet!”). One of the producers is Tommy Mottola, the longtime music industry executive, and the show is expected to star Nick Cordero, a Tony nominee for “Bullets Over Broadway” and a member of the current cast of “Waitress.”

Mr. Mottola, who is co-producing the musical with the Dodgers and TriBeCa Productions, said he first encountered the material when he worked on the soundtrack for the film. He said the creative team would spend the next few months making changes in response to lessons they learned from the run at Paper Mill.

“We have great hopes and expectations, and now we’ll see,” he said. “I’ve learned that on Broadway you have to be really good, have a little bit of luck, and hope that people care about and see the things that you do.”


