


ATLANTA — Starter Jacob deGrom and the Mets’ offense each demonstrated a capacity to adapt on Sunday, showing plucky sides that contrast with their emerging reputations for being overpowering.

DeGrom, who had missed two turns through the rotation because of a stiff back and a family medical emergency, was not able to dominate the Braves with his 93-mile-per-hour fastball, but he still lasted five and two-thirds innings and allowed just one run. As if they were synchronized with their pitcher, the Mets became situational hitters instead of home-run thumpers in a 3-2 victory over Atlanta before 32,085 at Turner Field.

The Mets (10-7) have won eight of 10 games and will begin a nine-game homestand on Monday against Cincinnati.

DeGrom (2-0) made his first start since April 8. He rejoined the team on Saturday after a 12-day absence to be with his newborn son, who had a breathing problem.

The pitcher allowed eight scattered hits, using his curveball a little more than usual, and did not walk a batter. He said his wife had sent him a picture of their son, Jaxon, watching him pitch.

“Getting back in the game was a little strange,” deGrom said. “Missing two turns and getting back out there, there were a little extra nerves.”

DeGrom, who struck out three, had been pulled from his first and only start of the season with some pain in the latissimus muscle in his back. He said he had no pain on Sunday.

DeGrom was on an 85-pitch limit, Manager Terry Collins said, and he was efficient through four innings, throwing 45. The Braves were eager to jump on his fastball, but deGrom and catcher Kevin Plawecki mixed in some off-speed pitches.

“I kind of went to the curveball a little more than I usually do,” deGrom said. “I feel like that’s my fourth-best pitch. Plaw did a good job back there keeping them off balance. We noticed some guys were hacking early, so we wanted to flip up some breaking balls early and throw off their timing a little bit.”

DeGrom did not have to shake off any rust. He commanded the curve, Plawecki said, which allowed him to get ahead and use his full repertory. All eight of the Braves’ hits off deGrom were singles.

“I didn’t expect anything else — I knew he would be ready to go,” Plawecki said of deGrom. “He’s been through a lot, and he was anxious to get back out on the mound.”

DeGrom left with one out in the sixth after throwing 82 pitches. He had a 3-1 lead thanks to another productive game from the leadoff hitter Curtis Granderson, who reached base twice and scored two runs after going from first to third on singles.

Michael Conforto’s sacrifice fly in the first scored Granderson to make it 1-0. Conforto’s fly was shallow, and when left fielder Jace Peterson had to dive to make the catch, Granderson alertly raced home.

Conforto had a ground-rule double in the sixth to score Granderson again, and Lucas Duda had a sacrifice fly in the sixth.

The Mets entered the game with 23 home runs in eight games, the most in a span of that length in franchise history. But it was situational hitting with runners on third with fewer than two outs that carried the offense on Sunday.

“I think a lot has been said about us getting runs on home runs, and I think we always expected to manufacture runs and be a team that can move guys and execute in those situations with a man on third and less than two outs,” Conforto said. “I think we knew we were going to be able to do that. We just didn’t start off that way.”

Granderson was on third and Asdrubal Cabrera was on first when Conforto went to the plate with the game tied, 1-1, in the top of the sixth inning. Braves starter Aaron Blair, a highly regarded right-hander making his major league debut, threw Conforto an off-speed pitch, which he lined to right field. The ball bounced over the fence for a ground-rule double, and it was 2-1.

Conforto said he had been expecting the changeup Blair threw him.

“He wanted to get the double play, so he wanted me to roll over that changeup a little bit,” Conforto said. “He left it up a little bit, and when you have that anticipation it’s easier to stay back on.”

The Mets got superb work from the bullpen in the three-game sweep. Their relievers allowed just two runs in 11 innings.

“They stepped up when we needed them,” Collins said. “They stepped up and got big outs against some good hitters.”

The Mets led by 3-1 in the ninth and asked closer Jeurys Familia to finish off Atlanta. The Braves got three singles and a run before Daniel Castro grounded out with the potential tying run on second.

Inside Pitch

Center fielder Yoenis Cespedes missed a second straight game after aggravating a leg bruise Friday night. Terry Collins said Cespedes would be examined Monday in New York.


