


The University of Chicago’s student body president said he would be allowed to receive his diploma and march in the university convocation ceremony Saturday, after a hearing on misconduct charges for allowing protesters into the school’s administration building to conduct a sit-in.

But the student leader, Tyler Kissinger, 21, of Lewisville, N.C., said he was told by a university disciplinary committee that he would be placed on probation, which would expire when he leaves the university. He said he was also told he would be able to graduate only if he did not break any rules for the rest of his time on campus.

Mr. Kissinger had faced penalties ranging from a warning to expulsion, on the eve of graduation.

“It’s a relief for a lot of people — it is for me, it is for my family,” Mr. Kissinger said, after emerging from the hearing.

The school did not confirm the decision to discipline Mr. Kissinger, citing confidentiality rules, but a spokesman said it did not punish expression. Mr. Kissinger admitted he passed through security at the administration building by saying he was on official business, then let in other students.

Another 200 protesters massed outside the building, but Mr. Kissinger, who said he was accused of dishonesty and creating an unsafe condition, is the only one known to have been charged.

After the charges became known on Wednesday, more than 3,000 people signed a student-led petition and 187 faculty members had signed a faculty petition demanding that the charges be dismissed, petition organizers said.

“The university’s hands were really tied,” Spencer McAvoy, another student, said jubilantly after Mr. Kissinger was allowed to graduate. “The whole world was watching, and we pressured them to make the right choice.” Mr. McAvoy also participated in the sit-in, where students aired demands like a $15 minimum wage for campus workers and more access to campus police records.

The outcry highlighted the tension between the promise of free speech on campus and the search by administrators for a way to minimize the disruption that can be caused by demonstrations.

The University of Chicago has been lauded for its free expression policy, receiving the highest rating for its speech code from FIRE, the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education, a nonpartisan free-speech group. Yet it also has a history of being tough on demonstrators, dating back to suspensions and expulsions during the Vietnam War era.


