


New York City officers shot and killed a 32-year-old man in Queens in the early hours of Sunday after the police said he reached for a gun in his waistband during a chase.

Two plainclothes officers approached the man, George Tillman, around 1:30 a.m. as he stood beside his double-parked sport utility vehicle after a family party in the South Ozone Park neighborhood, the police and witnesses said. His wife and a friend were inside the car; they were making plans to go out.

The police said Mr. Tillman was holding an open bottle of alcohol and, as the officers moved closer, they saw a firearm in his waistband.

Mr. Tillman ran, and the officers briefly pursued him on foot as they gave him “verbal commands,” the police said. Not far away, near the corner of 135th Street and 116th Avenue, three more officers in an unmarked car came upon him.

Mr. Tillman reached for his gun, the police said, and four officers fired. He was hit several times in his torso, the authorities said.

The police said they could not yet answer questions about what exactly the officers told Mr. Tillman, who was visiting from Maryland, or the precise number of times he was shot.

The friend of Mr. Tillman who was in the S.U.V. disputed the police account, saying Mr. Tillman had not been holding an open bottle of alcohol. The friend declined to give his name because he was dealing with an unrelated police matter.

“I saw him run,” the friend said. “Did he try to pull the weapon out? No. He didn’t attempt to grab his weapon.”

The friend said that about 30 seconds passed between the police’s approaching Mr. Tillman and the shooting. He said he did not hear officers give Mr. Tillman any warnings before they fired at him from about 10 feet away. The friend had ducked behind a car door.

“I felt like I was in a movie,” he said. “It was unreal and it happened so fast.”

Then he heard a gut-wrenching yell from Mr. Tillman’s wife. He said she ran toward her husband, who was lying in the street. Officers held her back.

“She was screaming, ‘Oh no, please, please God, no,’” the friend said.

Mr. Tillman was pronounced dead at Jamaica Hospital Medical Center. The officers were not hurt, but they were taken to Long Island Jewish Medical Center for evaluation. The police did not release their names. They were all assigned to the 106th Precinct.

Officers recovered a Hi-Point .40-caliber firearm at the scene, the police said.

Neighbors poured out of their homes, many of them puzzled by the chaos in what they described as a typically quiet neighborhood. One woman screamed about having video cameras that captured the shooting, said a neighbor, Eric Machicote.

Evidence markers dotted the pavement on 135th Street. Just behind Mr. Tillman’s S.U.V., a gray Ford sedan appeared to have stopped mid-drive.

Anthony Seegobin, 26, who lives near 135th Street and 116th Avenue, said he initially thought the gunshots had come from an action movie he was watching, and then possibly from cars backfiring outside. Only when ambulances arrived and he saw shell casings was he sure that someone had been shot — a sign, he said, of how safe people feel in the area.

Mr. Seegobin’s sister and her husband, who were in the basement, told him they heard an officer yell, “Get down,” and then, after a couple of seconds, three or four gunshots.

Mr. Tillman had recently married, and was helping raise five children — three of his own and two of his wife’s, said another friend, who identified himself as J. Washington. He said Mr. Tillman was a licensed electrician.

“Life was just starting to go good for him,” Mr. Washington said.

Mr. Washington said he was coming back from the corner store when he heard gunshots.

“He was trying to run through the block,” Mr. Washington said. “I hear boom, boom. I’m thinking, ‘Who’s shooting?’ I just hear the echoes: shucka, shucka, shucka, shucka.”

Around 10:45 a.m., a woman who identified herself as Mr. Tillman’s aunt was stopped by the police as she tried to cross the crime scene tape. She and another woman said they were trying to get to a house down the block to visit with relatives, including Mr. Tillman’s wife.

“We just want answers,” the aunt said.

The women eventually made a call and then drove off.

“They won’t let us through,” the aunt said, shaking her head. “Unbelievable.”


