


Yesterday, Dior Beauty’s creative director Peter Philips wanted to juxtapose the richness of the 2017 cruise show show with a graphic beauty look. “In this historically rich venue, we didn’t want the girls to look like they were visiting a museum,” he said, referring to Blenheim Palace, a sweeping 18th-century home just outside of London. The clothes — shown in the Palace’s famously long library, which houses 10,000 books and portraits by Joshua Reynolds and John Singer Sargent — didn’t shy away from opulence either. “The collection is very elaborate so we wanted to do something on the face that was calm and linear to balance it out.” He applied a dark, reddish-chocolate eye shadow from the Dior 5 Couleurs Skyline Edition n°506 Parisian Sky palette, and packed it up to the eyebrows. (The brown shadow was a nod to the collection, which featured the same tone.)

He kept the skin radiant and glowing with Diorskin Forever Foundation, and sculpted the face with Diorblush Light & Contour Sculpting Stick Duo, keeping the edges soft by blending it into the foundation. “I wanted beautiful, glowy skin and intense dark eyes,” he said. Lips were kept natural with just a hint of sheen. “We wanted to do something really graphic on top, then it stops and becomes natural.”

And in a well-timed move, it was announced yesterday morning that the model Bella Hadid, who walked in the show, had been appointed the new ambassador of Dior Beauty. “What I like about Bella isn’t only that she’s a gorgeous girl but when you look at her, she has this diva attitude on the red carpet,” Philips said of Hadid. “But at the same time she has this spontaneity with social media that doesn’t look forced. Give David Beckham a football and it’s the same as what she does with social media. It comes natural — it’s a talent.”

In keeping with that idea, the hairstylist Guido Palau slicked the hair back on top with Redken Hardware gel, and then let it fall naturally. “As it was a resort collection, we decided the girls should look like they just combed their hair back after a shower or swim,” he said. “It’s a little masculine but in a very elegant way.”


