


Immigrant enclaves often acquire nicknames that are meant to distinguish them from the surrounding geography, as if not quite belonging to it. Dearborn, Mich., has several of these neighborhoods, with names like Little Iraq, Little Syria and Little Lebanon. Occasionally, on certain talk radio shows, the city in its entirety is referred to as Dearbornistan.

For a brief period about a decade ago, I taught English in the city’s Southend neighborhood, in an area known as Little Yemen. Each morning, I exited the freeway and drove down the dusty stretch of Dix Avenue, watching the chimneys of the industrial sector morph into a stretch of halal butchers and Arab groceries. Men sat outside playing backgammon, and women walked down the sidewalk in full niqab, a black gown with an attached veil that covers everything except the hands and a small rectangular opening for the eyes. These were the women I would teach.

I had recently returned to Michigan after dropping out of a fundamentalist Bible college where, until the year before my acceptance, women were required to wear skirts in the classroom. Students were forbidden to go to the movies and dance, and could be expelled for being gay or engaging in premarital sex. I left of my own accord, after struggling with a series of doubts.

I privately renounced my faith one night in my dorm room, yet I kept reneging, worried that my decision was driven by sin. I returned home without a degree and spent most evenings quarreling with my parents about the direction my life was headed. Beyond theological exegesis, I didn’t have any skills to speak of.

A family friend put me in touch with a Dearborn multicultural organization that offered classes in English as a second language. I was hired as a teacher without much fuss about credentials.

Before my class each morning, I drove the pickup van, retrieving the students from their homes. The houses were low brick duplexes, the kind of buildings that could be found in midcentury suburbs anywhere in America. It was always a shock when the women emerged in their niqabs, often in twos or threes, floating elegantly down the sidewalk.

The women spoke varying degrees of English, and I knew no Arabic, so our conversations were aided by an elaborate construct of symbols and gestures. Over time, I learned their names: Dalia, Nadeen, Warifa, Aisha. Most of them had migrated from Yemen within the last five years with their husbands, who had come to work at Ford.

I ran a somewhat loose classroom. I was supposed to be teaching tenses and vocabulary, but the women wanted to talk about their lives, and mostly I permitted the digressions. Once the door was shut, they removed their veils and took off their head scarves. Mostly they spoke of their concerns about the community: that the schools were overcrowded, that Southend was polluted and subject to overpolicing.

“People in America are afraid of the hijab,” one woman said. It was a fear I had observed myself. More than once, I’d overheard the other teachers fretting, in hushed tones, about how the younger generation in town was not assimilating: “How are they supposed to become American?” The implication was that fundamentalism was a relic of the old country that should have been made obsolete by life in the West.

One of my students was Maryam, a 19-year-old who spoke better English than the others. She was one of the few unmarried women in the class, and the older women were always teasing her — in Arabic, though I gathered that the jokes were about men. They would turn to her to confirm that she was blushing. Whenever this happened, Maryam gave me an impatient smile, the look of a serious young person seeking distance herself from the frivolity of her elders.

I had heard from the other teachers that Maryam’s mother died when she was young and that her father was ill. As an only child, she was his primary caretaker. It must have been a hard-won luxury for her to attend these classes, and she understandably wanted the time to be used efficiently.

After class one day, I asked Maryam if she would prefer to meet with me for one-on-one lessons. Her English was advanced, and I said she could benefit from private tutoring. After some hesitation, she agreed.

For several weeks we met in an attic room that was just large enough to accommodate a table and two chairs. I brought an English textbook, and sometimes we read newsmagazines together, wading through reports about the Iranian election and the Northern Ireland peace process.

There was a sadness about her, a palpable distress that made me eager to help her — though I wasn’t sure what to do. I sometimes felt the urge to evangelize her, an impulse that arose almost against my will, like the itch of a phantom limb. I no longer believed in God, but then again, it was possible that I was wrong, and it pained me to think that I might be responsible for the state of someone’s soul. As I drove home each afternoon, my mind drifted into a familiar hive of anxieties. Were these women going to hell? Was I? I sometimes wondered whether Maryam was thinking the same of me.

As the summer wore on, she began to speak more candidly about her life. She said she liked school very much and would like to possibly go to college to become a dentist. She had a cousin who was in school for this occupation, a woman her age who lived, she was careful to note, “on the west side” — code that the relative was more liberal.

That night, I looked up the educational requirements for dental school and printed the information from my parents’ computer. Though my efforts had no claim on her eternal destiny, I confess that there was a certain questing vigor, a missionary zeal, to my assistance. I would be her steward into secular life, a handmaiden to her hegira. When I gave her these documents at our next meeting, she stared at them for a long time without saying anything. Then she thanked me and slipped the papers into her bag.

Soon after that day, Maryam stopped coming to school. She gave no notice and no reason. After a few days, one of the other teachers confirmed what I already suspected: She had been betrothed, to a man almost twice her age. She would travel back to Yemen during Ramadan to be married. It wasn’t uncommon for girls to drop out of classes once marriages were arranged for them. They would be housewives and mothers; education was no longer necessary.

Throughout my tenure at the school, several more bright young women disappeared from the classroom, and it was difficult for me to avoid becoming discouraged about the purpose of my work. On some days, it was unclear what function the language I was teaching would serve.

Unlike the other teachers, I didn’t believe that fluency in English would grant these women access to the freedoms of Western liberalism. I knew from experience that fundamentalism is a system with deep roots, that it persists despite education and often defends itself with the vocabulary of rationalism. Possessing a language is not, in the end, the same as having a voice.

But each day that I pulled up in the school van, the women continued to appear at their front doors, eager to come to school. Perhaps the classes were a respite for many of them, a space set apart from the demands of their daily lives. It was my job to teach them, and so despite my doubts I, too, continued to show up.


