


You’re a senior editor at The Federalist, a relatively conservative publication, but you’re no fan of Donald Trump. In March, you wrote about the bad ways that people are opposing his campaign; you didn’t like that ad with women reading the horrible things he’s said about women. Is there an effective way to oppose him? Trump and his campaign are perfectly positioned to exploit every weakness we have in the electorate. If the Republican Party didn’t want to have this opposition, they should have picked literally any type of policy and just made it happen, even as late as last summer. If voters could have seen that the Republican Party was capable of doing something big and dramatic, and communicated that to the people, I don’t think that you would have had the hunger to blow up the system like with the Trump movement.

You identify as a libertarian, right? The national convention just happened at the end of May. I’m probably best described as classically liberal, which is neither libertarian nor conservative. Frankly, I find some of the antics that were on display down in Florida to be utterly delightful. I don’t really think they’re behaving that much worse than either the Democratic Party or the Republican Party.

I haven’t actually heard that before: They’re not behaving any less immaturely than the other parties. I will point out that someone did a striptease onstage. In libertarian circles, you can almost present any idea, and people will let you make your case. There is a spirit of debate that is really healthy.

You used to write a sex column for a libertarian magazine, which is a little unusual, but you did it while you were writing for GetReligion.org, a site that focuses on how religion is covered in the mainstream press. For someone on the right, you talk pretty openly about sexuality. I could blame everything in life on my parents. They raised us to think of sex as a positive thing. We were raised Lutheran, and I think there’s something about the Lutheran tradition that is much more open to talking about things.

You occasionally refer to “natural marriage” in your political writing. What does that mean? I’m referring to the idea that marriage is the union of a man and a woman in sexual congress.

Do you think that the government should privilege those relationships, now that same-sex marriage is legal? There’s an order toward procreation, and I think there’s a reason societies throughout all place and time have privileged the family. The norms associated with marriage and family life are built on certain things that are distinct in heterosexual relationships.

I think the usual criticism of conservative Christians is not that they hate sex, it’s that they disapprove of certain types of sex. A lot of people have this understanding that Christians do hate sex. Everybody has a sexual ethic and sexual mores. If you don’t talk about it from a Christian moral perspective, you’re just letting other people have complete domination of the subject, and it weakens the overall conversation.

To borrow the terminology of the Dan Savages of the world, conservatives should be more sex-positive, because if they don’t talk about sex, then it’s going to be left to people like Dan Savage. I think people should be positive about sex because it is such a positive thing! When you do things that are wrong, when you abuse the relationship or use it for power, it causes so much damage. It’s important that people think about sex, and how to do it, and how to do it right.

You sound a little bit like a feminist in talking about sex that way. Really? ’Cause every time I hear feminists talk about sex, it seems to be this thing of pain and domination. I don’t get a lot of happy feelings from feminists when they’re talking about sex.


