


On Memorial Day weekend, the Surf Lodge will kick off its beachside series of summer fashion and beauty pop-ups, which includes Topshop and Studio One Eighty Nine, the Rosario Dawson and Abrima Erwiah fashion line that is ethically sourced and sewn in Ghana. First up is Milk Makeup, the paraben-free, 60 percent vegan cosmetics line from the Milk Studios co-founder Mazdack Rassi and his wife, the fashion editor Zanna Rassi. They have curated a summer product edit that includes a balm tint with SPF that can be used on the lips and cheeks for a dewy flush. At 183 Edgemere Street, Montauk.

From June 2 to Labor Day, Gurney’s Montauk Resort & Seawater Spa will host the Fashion Collective at Gurney’s, a rotating series of weekend events for established and up-and-coming fashion and lifestyle brands like Mara Hoffman and the crochet swimwear line Kiini. Situated on the spa roof deck, which also has activities like life-size chess and shuffleboard, the space will offer exclusive products from a number of designers, including Edie Parker canvas pouches with whimsical motifs like flamingos, rainbows and cheeky words, and La Vie Rebecca Taylor T-shirts made in collaboration with the illustrator Wayne Pate. At 290 Old Montauk Highway, Montauk.

The Sunset Beach Hotel on Shelter Island is also getting into the pop-up game, with an Oliver Peoples cocktail party and pop-up on June 18 and a mobile trunk show from the rugged-luxe accessories line Kempton & Co., which will be selling beach bags, pouches and sunglasses from the trunk of vintage Land Rover on June 25. At 35 Shore Road, Shelter Island Heights.

The aptly named POP Collective in Southampton, opening Memorial Day weekend, will offer Tata Harper skin care, Mi Ola bikinis and C.F. Bronfman fine jewelry. It will be a one-stop shop for items like espadrilles embellished with anchors and elephants from House of Pom, and whimsical tabletop decorations, with napkins, tablecloths and place mats featuring lobsters, crabs and coral prints from Pomegranate. At 42 Jobs Lane.

Tory Burch will open her second Tory Sport store in East Hampton on Memorial Day weekend, a clean space with white flooring painted with blue stripes, inspired by the casual vibe of a 1970s surf lodge. Located in proximity to the area’s boutique fitness studios, it will have gear for very sport, including running, tennis, swim and golf — and bar and spin, of course. At 47 Newtown Lane.

Club Monaco will open an East Hampton shop on Memorial Day weekend with a vintage focus. Among the finds: antiques, including candlesticks and sterling silver frames. On June 10, the company will release a Club Monaco x Dannijo capsule collection of more than 40 one-of-a-kind goods like 19th-century lace camisoles, dresses, skirts and wraps in varying shades of summer white sourced from around the globe. At 17 Newtown Lane, East Hampton.

Joey Wölffer, founder of the Styleliner mobile shopping truck and co-owner of Wölffer Estate Vineyard, has opened a brick-and-mortar store in Sag Harbor. The Styleliner by Joey Wölffer, in a 19th-century artist’s studio kitted out with hanging whaling lanterns and boat rope, offers finds from Ms. Wölffer’s travels, including Katerina Psoma carved stone earrings from Greece and vintage African Fulani textiles. Ms. Wölffer’s own range of fringed and embroidered leather handbags are exclusive to the store. At 25 Madison Street, Sag Harbor.

Armarium, the Trisha Gregory and Alexandra Lind Rose destination for luxury fashion and accessories on loan, will be at Baron’s Cove in Sag Harbor in mid-July with a pop-up showroom. It will feature Missoni summer cocktail dresses and palazzo pants, brightly hued Sara Battaglia x Ferragamo clutches and vintage pieces from La Double J. — all perfect for a summer night out. At 31 West Water Street, Sag Harbor.

The baker Carissa Waechter of the Amagansett Farmers Market staple Carissa’s Breads will join forces with her florist friend Missi Bullock on Bread & Flowers, a flower and artisanal-bread home-delivery service offering essentials (a loaf of salty soured pickled rye and a bouquet of garden roses, say) from a ’61 vintage Citroën van that will make its way from Wainscott to Montauk.

The men’s swimwear label Orlebar Brown, known for its colorful trunks, including artist editions created with images from the Hulton Getty archive, will reopen its store in the Hamptons this summer at a new location. At 55 Newtown Lane, East Hampton.

Tony Melillo has opened a pop-up for his luxe basics line ATM featuring the label’s signature supersoft tees and special summery offerings like French terry sweats and a slub jersey beach cover-up. There will be accessories, including sneakers from the Paris label Camille Tanoh. At 48 Newtown Lane, East Hampton.

Greg Ammon (son of the investment banker Ted Ammon, whose 2001 East Hampton murder was the subject of a Lifetime movie and a documentary) has opened a shop for Big Flower, a resort lifestyle brand. It includes summer wardrobe stables like breathable button-downs and unlined suiting, along with a women’s wear capsule with relaxed tunics and beach dresses designed by his wife, Stacy. The gallery space showcases vintage photos of the landscape and community, including some of Mr. Ammon’s own family, as well as the work of local artists. At 23 Newtown Lane, East Hampton.


