


An inmate on the verge of parole eligibility was on the run on Thursday after escaping from a prison in southern New Jersey, prompting residents to stay in their homes, local schools to lock down and dozens of law enforcement officers to fan out in a manhunt, the authorities said.

The inmate, Arthur W. Buckel, 38, was last seen on Tuesday during a 6 a.m. bed check at a minimum security satellite unit of Bayside State Prison on the grounds of Ancora Psychiatric Hospital in Hammonton, officials said. Mr. Buckel is serving a three-year sentence on charges that included aggravated assault and burglary, and would have been eligible for parole on May 21, officials said.

The State Corrections Department said it was investigating how Mr. Buckel had escaped.

Mr. Buckel was previously convicted of aggravated manslaughter in 1996 in the beating death of his girlfriend’s 10-month-old daughter in Jersey City. He was sentenced to 25 years in prison, without the possibility of parole for 12 ½ years, and was released in June 2010.

On Wednesday, a man the police said was Mr. Buckel could be seen on surveillance video entering a CVS store in Barnegat, a township on the Jersey Shore about an hour’s drive northeast of the prison unit from which he escaped.

A stolen Chevrolet Silverado was found outside the CVS, and officials said they believed Mr. Buckel had used it during his escape.

But by Thursday evening, the Barnegat Police Department said on its Facebook page that it had received information from state officials that Mr. Buckel was no longer in the area. The police said officers would be present at all Barnegat schools on Friday.

Mayor Jon Novak of Barnegat, speaking at a news conference on Thursday, cautioned township residents to keep their doors locked and their eyes open for anything unusual.

Mr. Buckel was 18 when he admitted to hitting his girlfriend’s baby when she would not stop crying at a Labor Day party in 1995, according to news accounts from the trial.

Later that day, the girl’s mother realized that her daughter had stopped breathing and brought her to Jersey City Medical Center, where she was pronounced dead. An autopsy showed that the girl’s skull had been fractured.

Mr. Buckel is thought to have at least one relative who lives in the Barnegat area, the police said. The woman whose child he killed lives in the township.

“We have hard links, and we have speculation,” Arthur P. Drexler, the Barnegat police chief, said.

Mr. Buckel is 5-feet-9 inches tall and has light blue eyes, a mustache and beard and a small tattoo under his left eye, according to the Corrections Department. It was not clear what he was wearing when he escaped, but the CVS video shows him in a bright yellow jacket and khaki pants.

Mr. Novak noted that Mr. Buckel looked considerably different in the CVS surveillance video than he did in other available photographs, including those from the State Motor Vehicle Commission. Mr. Buckel appears to be a good deal heavier in the video than he does in earlier pictures.

Mr. Novak said large numbers of law enforcement officers would be assigned to local schools and along bus routes while chasing down every lead.


