


PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — Jordan Spieth was standing over his ball on the 10th tee at T.P.C. Sawgrass when Rickie Fowler fished a bottle of water from a cooler and tossed it over Spieth’s head to Justin Thomas on the opposite side of the tee box. Spieth did not flinch.

After a four-week break from competitive golf, Spieth appeared to be in midtournament form Tuesday during a practice round ahead of this week’s Players Championship.

For his first 18-hole round in front of a paying public since his meltdown on the Sunday of the Masters last month, Spieth assembled the same group that had helped him shake off that closing 73.

Two weeks after he surrendered a five-stroke lead on the back nine at Augusta National Golf Club to finish the Masters tied for second, Spieth took a vacation in the Bahamas. He was accompanied by Fowler, Thomas and Smylie Kaufman, who reunited with him Tuesday for a low-key practice round.

The Bahamas trip, organized a month in advance of the Masters, was just what the sports psychologist would have ordered. Each player arrived with unwanted baggage from Augusta National. Kaufman had carded a final-round 81 while paired with Spieth, Fowler had missed the cut after an opening 80, and Thomas had not broken par until the final round.

Spieth’s collapse included bogeys on Nos. 10 and 11 and two balls in the water on the par-3 12th, leading to a quadruple-bogey 7. Buried in the carnage from that stretch was the fact that Spieth rebounded with birdies on two of his next three holes. He gave himself a shot at an improbable comeback victory in defense of his title, but he ran out of holes to catch Danny Willett, who won by three.

On a teleconference call last week, the NBC analyst Johnny Miller said the 2016 Masters was going to haunt Spieth “for a long time.” On Wednesday, Spieth sounded as if he begged to differ.

Speaking at a pretournament news conference, Spieth said he had already put the Masters behind him.

“After a month off, it felt like a bit of an off-season,” he said, “so it’s almost like a new year starting this week.”

He said he was not bothered by the water hazards on several holes of the Stadium Course, including the 17th, with its island green, which affords ample cause for sweat-inducing flashbacks to Augusta National.

“I’ll just tell you that I’m not affected by it,” Spieth said. Referring to this week, he added, “I mean, if I hit a good shot and it catches a gust and goes in the water, it’s not because of the Masters.”

Like wheat from the chaff, Spieth separated the last six holes of his final back nine at the Masters from the first three when dissecting his round. From the 13th hole on, he said, “there was a lot of pressure there with a lot of tough shots, and we pulled them off.”

He added: “Not sure how it’ll feel if I work into contention again. I imagine thoughts won’t come up because it was just one bad hole.”

There were no bad holes at the Baker’s Bay Golf and Ocean Club in the Bahamas, where Spieth, 22, and the rest of the gang that could not shoot straight at the Masters hit the reset button. Their daily itineraries included a lot of fishing and some golf when it was too choppy offshore to while away the day on a boat. On the course, they divided into teams and played alternate shot, which halved the pressure and doubled their enjoyment.

“It wasn’t hitting that many balls or being that serious,” Thomas, 23, said. “For myself, I hadn’t really had too much fun playing golf lately, so it was good for that.”

When Fowler, 27, was not hitting shots, he was taking them with his smartphone for posting on his social media accounts. In some of the shots, the players are shirtless. In all of them, they are playfully mugging for the camera or grinning.

“I don’t think any of us have really been on an actual spring break, so a little guys’ trip,” Fowler said. “We had a good time, and the four of us are all refreshed and ready to go play some golf.”

Kaufman, 24, said, “It’s great to be able to hang with some good friends who do the same thing as me and get away from your everyday life, which can be very stressful at times.”

He added, “It was good timing to be able to take a vacation and unwind for a couple of days before getting back to work.”

Of the four, Spieth is the last to return to the office. He said he spent some of his time away from the tour at the driving range, in Dallas, smoothing out the kinks in his swing — to return it, as he said, “to the consistent level it was at during really the second half of the year when I struck the ball the best.”

Spieth did not back off any shots during his Tuesday round, as he did many times at the Masters, where he was battling Augusta National and his swing. But the setting was far from pressure-packed.

Kaufman on occasion talked to the collar of Thomas, who was wearing a microphone and a tiny camera attached to the bill of his cap for GoPro, one of his sponsors. On one green, Fowler’s caddie, Joe Skovron, tossed him a ball; Fowler, doing his best Willie Mays impression, made a basket catch using his cap.

How will Spieth’s swing hold up when the wind picks up and the pressure bears down? The fans who flock to T.P.C. Sawgrass this week are not the only ones who are curious.

“It’s going to be interesting to watch him play,” Davis Love III said last week. “But I think, and just listening to him and talking to him, he’s got a good attitude about it.”

Love would have been derelict in his duties as the 2016 United States Ryder Cup captain if he had not checked in with Spieth. He was heartened by what he heard.

“If he was 32 or 39, yeah, maybe it would be different,” Love said, adding: “But my talk with him, he was talking about being more disciplined and sticking with his game plan better, the same things he said in his interviews right after it happened. So I think the reason he’s so successful will be the reason that this doesn’t bother him.”


