


The quarterback is 6 feet 5 inches, 237 pounds, with reddish blond hair, confident eyes and large hands. In college, he played prominent roles for two national championship teams. He was terrific at the Senior Bowl and the N.F.L. scouting combine and is described, by all accounts, as humble, religious and hardworking.

Given those credentials, it is little surprise that the quarterback, Carson Wentz, is a potential No. 1 overall pick in the N.F.L. draft, which begins Thursday in Chicago. He is expected to go first, to the Los Angeles Rams, or second, to the Philadelphia Eagles (in the event that the Rams select the former California quarterback Jared Goff at No. 1).

Bill Polian, the Super Bowl-winning general manager for three N.F.L. teams who is now with ESPN, praised Wentz as “an excellent prospect.” He added, in scout-talk: “He’s got prototypical size, much better than average speed, great arm; the ball jumps out of his hand; he’s a winner, he’s an accurate thrower intermediate and short; reads the field very well.”

But there is one thing missing from Wentz’s otherwise marquee-ready résumé: a prestigious college program. Wentz did not play for Notre Dame or Southern California, Michigan or Alabama, Texas or any of the other brand-name teams that fill up the schedules of the top 25 on autumn Saturdays.

In fact, Wentz did not play in the top tier of college football, but rather at North Dakota State, which competes in the Missouri Valley Football Conference of the Football Championship Subdivision — the level that used to be known as Division I-AA, a step below the 10 conferences that define college football to the average fan.

All that raises a multimillion-dollar question as Wentz waits to hear his name called Thursday: How, exactly, did a potential No. 1 pick fall through the cracks of the college football recruiting industrial complex?

The answer, according to some, has to do with the wide gap between the way football is played on Saturdays and the way it is played on Sundays.

Some of the best programs, whose goal is only secondarily to develop N.F.L. prospects, follow the lead of the top, albeit unseasoned, athletes they recruit and craft offenses that do not resemble the way professional teams play. A result, in many cases, has been quarterbacks who dominate at the top college level only to find their skills ill-suited to the N.F.L.

In the case of Wentz, it also might mean a quarterback who flew under the college radar but is ready to shine in the pros.

“With so many major colleges running spread option offenses that don’t always translate perfectly to the pro game, it’s possible for a gem like Wentz to slip through,” said Robert Boland, a sports administration executive-in-residence at Ohio University.

According to Ron Wingenbach, Wentz’s coach at Century High School in Bismarck, N.D., Wentz was recruited mainly by F.C.S. programs. The only major program to show interest, he said, was South Carolina, which inquired about Wentz during the summer after his senior year, by which time he had packed his bags for North Dakota State.

“He wasn’t on the radar of colleges, let alone recruiting services,” said Brandon Huffman, Scout.com’s national recruiting director.

That so many major programs missed on Wentz despite his possessing top-of-the-draft-level ability is extremely rare. Joe Flacco, the Baltimore Ravens’ starting quarterback, was drafted 18th over all in 2008 out of Delaware (though he had transferred from Pittsburgh). Steve McNair was drafted third in 1995 out of Alcorn State. Phil Simms was the No. 7 pick in 1979, out of Morehead State.

Various flukes in high school played a role in Wentz’s trajectory. He was only 5-10 entering his junior season — right when quarterback recruiting heats up — according to Wingenbach. He played varsity for two years, missing out on quarterback for most of his junior year because of a hand injury. He did not attend many colleges’ summer camps. And even the mightiest football powers, the ones with a dozen recruiting staff members and private jets to ferry them wherever they need to go, rarely make their way to the second most populous city of the 47th most populous state.

But Wentz’s steep rise in the esteem of the football establishment also reflects the new realities of the college and professional games and how they affect the sport’s most vital position. Blessed, perhaps, by not having to compete against the country’s top athletes, North Dakota State is able to thrive to the tune of five consecutive national titles while running a traditional, pro-style scheme.

“The style of offense we play in — we’re a huddle, West Coast offense,” Coach Chris Klieman said. “We’re going to go under center, let the quarterback change protections, audible to run.”

He continued, “All those things are a little lost in college football because a lot of guys go no-huddle and look to the sideline to see what the coordinator’s going to run.”

At the top level of college football, many teams run so-called spread offenses to take advantage of certain quirks in the college game — the wider hash marks, for example — but also to level the playing field with the blue-chip programs.

For example, at Texas Tech and Baylor, the coaches Mike Leach and Art Briles, inevitably working with less talent than conference rivals like Oklahoma or Texas, installed wide-open offenses that most likely would never fly at the professional level, where pass rushers are too quick and defensive backs too experienced. (Leach now runs that offense, known as the Air Raid, at Washington State.)

While Leach and Briles achieved great success in the Big 12, the most prominent quarterback either produced was Robert Griffin III — a Heisman Trophy winner under Briles who was drafted second over all and won the N.F.L.’s rookie of the year award before his career faltered badly.

“The really good up-tempo programs have said, ‘Look, we’ll recruit great athletes, we’ll work off of a run-first, throw-second option,’ ” Boland said. Referring to three very successful college quarterbacks with more varied success as pros, he added: “Sometimes that guy will be Marcus Mariota or Alex Smith, and sometimes that guy will be Tim Tebow.”

Tebow, of course, won the Heisman Trophy at Florida under Urban Meyer, who helped initiate the spread when he was at Utah, and had one season of success with the Denver Broncos before eventually washing out of the N.F.L.

Some of the most successful quarterbacks drafted in recent years — Andrew Luck, Russell Wilson, Kirk Cousins, Jameis Winston — played for some of the few top teams that run pro-style systems. (The exception has been Cam Newton, who won the Heisman in Auburn’s up-tempo offense and later adapted his game to the N.F.L.)

In the end, Klieman said, talent will win out. “If you’re good enough,” he said, “they’ll find you.”

Besides, he added, it hardly matters whether a quarterback competed in the Missouri Valley Football Conference, the Pacific-12, the Big Sky or the Southeastern Conference because the N.F.L. is a different story.

“It’s going to be a jump up for everybody,” he said.


