


An isolated, deeply religious settler family in the 1630s is destroyed by occult forces in “The Witch” — an independent first feature written and directed by Robert Eggers and one of the most intelligent American horror films of recent years.

Mr. Eggers’s movie, originally subtitled “A New-England Folktale,” a hit at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival and now on disc from Lionsgate, feels like a story that has been waiting to be told. We’ll never know how many European pilgrims were driven mad by the American wilderness: The imposingly pious William (Ralph Ineson), his equally severe wife, Katherine (Kate Dickie), and their brood of five stand in for all of them.

The woods at the edge of the family’s farm are lovely, dark, deep — and terrifying. Few American films have been so steeped in fear of the forest and its indigenous inhabitants. Thus, “The Witch” provides a kind of back story for movies like “The Shining” and “Poltergeist,” as well as, most obviously, “The Blair Witch Project,” in dramatizing a primal American unease.

“The Witch” is set barely a decade after the Mayflower landed and over 80 years before the Salem witch trials. All is new to Mr. Eggers’s characters. That it is also alien is emphasized by his mainly British ensemble. Whatever these Pilgrims are, they are not yet American.

The expulsion of heretics like Anne Hutchinson and Roger Williams is still in the future, as is King Philip’s War, the conflict with Native Americans that nearly destroyed the New England colonies. Still, Mr. Eggers, a native of rural New Hampshire, telescopes several atavistic traumas. In the opening scene, William, whose strident purity has tried the patience of his fellow Puritans, is banished from the colony. After he moves his family to a new plot of land and establishes a small farm, his youngest child is abducted, not by Indians but by a being his other children call the Witch of the Woods.

“The Witch” is skillfully wrought and imaginatively conceived. Shot in remote Ontario, the movie is superbly designed, impressively researched and extremely well written, drawing much of its dialogue from 17th-century diaries, letters and prayer manuals. Suspense is largely a matter of premonition. Manohla Dargis began her New York Times review describing “The Witch” as “a finely calibrated shiver of a movie.”

An early scene in which William, Katherine and the children are gathered by a campfire sets the tone. Here as elsewhere, Mr. Eggers’s camera placement provides the disquieting sense that something other than the audience is watching his characters. Throughout, a sense of free-floating demonic possession affects both woodland and domestic creatures.

As the family disintegrates, William and Katherine inexorably turn on their eldest child, Thomasin (Anya Taylor-Joy), a girl who has just entered adolescence. “The Witch idea is an exteriorization of a woman’s ideas about herself and her mother,” the British Freudian psychoanalyst Ernest Jones wrote in 1931. Mr. Eggers’s film is founded on the more contemporary notion that the Witch idea might be rooted in anxieties regarding female sexuality.

Yet the movie, which Mr. Eggers has described as a “Puritan’s nightmare,” is totally literal-minded. The supernatural is as real as the religious fears, guilty desires and repressed psychological drives that tear the bewildered family asunder.

Less an actress than a presence, Hedy Lamarr (1914-2000) appeared both bewitching and, at times, bewitched. In a tribute published in December 1941 issue of the Surrealist journal View, the artist Joseph Cornell called her “the enchanted wanderer.”

Lamarr, who was born in Vienna into a wealthy Jewish family, became notorious at 18 for swimming nude in the 1933 Czech film “Ecstasy.” Her best-known Hollywood role was the Old Testament vixen in Cecil B. DeMille’s mega-kitsch “Samson and Delilah” (1949), but her remote, haunting beauty nearly justifies a number of otherwise inconsequential films, mostly released just before and during World War II.

Warner Archive has made five of these available on DVD: “Lady of the Tropics” (1939), “Comrade X” (1940), “Come Live With Me” (1941), “White Cargo” (1942) and “Experiment Perilous” (1944). None, save the last — an atmospheric domestic gothic directed by Jacques Tourneur that features Lamarr’s favorite performance — are particularly distinguished. “White Cargo,” in which she plays the campiest femme fatale since Theda Bara, is, however, exceptionally risible.

Lamarr escaped Austria (and a rich, controlling husband) ahead of the Anschluss. Once in Hollywood, she was typically cast as uncanny “others” or what her biographer Ruth Barton calls “exotic dames.” These included European refugees, as in “Come Live With Me”; a winsome Communist true believer in King Vidor’s leaden screwball comedy “Comrade X”; and characters who were meant to be of mixed race, as in “Lady of the Tropics” and “White Cargo,” for which, the Times critic Bosley Crowther noted, she was “given a mahogany finish” — fitting for an actress whose characters are often described as objets d’art.

Although a passable actress, Lamarr was upstaged by her remarkable good looks. She was highly intelligent, with unexpected talents as an inventor that were barely appreciated during her lifetime. Even as she worked out her destiny in a Hollywood dreamland, many of her childhood friends and relations were consumed by the Holocaust. Lamarr visibly supported the United States war effort, but her feelings as a Jewish survivor are unknown. Her beauty seems all the more mysterious as a mask concealing a complex inner life.

NEWLY RELEASED

APPASSIONATA The young Ornella Muti stars as a wanton wife in a semiserious sex drama directed by Gianluigi Calderone (a former assistant to Bernardo Bertolucci). Released in Italy in 1974, but apparently never in the United States until this Blu-ray, “Appassionata” also features the Pasolini favorite Ninetto Davoli and Valentina Cortese, fresh from her appearance in François Truffaut’s “Day for Night.” (Twilight Time)

THE CRIMSON CULT Loosely based on H. P. Lovecraft’s “The Dreams in the Witch House,” this patchwork British production from 1968, now on Blu-ray, can boast three distinguished horror veterans (Boris Karloff, Christopher Lee and Barbara Steele) as well as an orgy scene that seems cribbed from Kenneth Anger’s underground “Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome.” (Kino Lorber)

THE DUNWICH HORROR Not the least successful Lovecraft adaptation, Daniel Haller’s 1970 film features a host of psychedelic special effects and Dean Stockwell as the sinister heir to a degenerate New England family. It’s paired on Blu-ray with another American-International literary horror, the 1971 remake of “Murders in the Rue Morgue” with Jason Robards as its unlikely star. (Scream Factory)

MAYDAY Pagan tradition returns with a vengeance in this 2013 BBC mini-series set in a rustic village in Surrey, England. The cast includes Lesley Manville (a Mike Leigh regular), Aidan Gillen (Baltimore’s mayor in “The Wire”) and Sophie Okonedo, currently in the Broadway revival of “The Crucible.” Available on DVD and Acorn TV. (RLJ Entertainment)

TOYEN Jan Nemec’s 2005 portrait of Marie Cerminova, the Czech Surrealist painter known as Toyen, is a fluid, evocative labor of love. A member of the Czech new wave, Mr. Nemec employs a dense experimental style, acknowledging the visionary quality of the artist’s imagination to depict her personal struggle to survive both during and after World War II. On DVD. (Facets)


