


ANDERSON, Ind. — As he approaches his 90th birthday, Carl Erskine doesn’t feel as if he has many boxes left to check. But there had been one: He wanted to see his childhood friend Johnny Wilson properly honored in his hometown. That moment arrived Friday when a nine-foot bronze sculpture of a leaping Wilson, his arms outstretched, a basketball in his right hand, was unveiled at Anderson High School.

Erskine, the Brooklyn Dodgers pitcher who appeared in 11 World Series games and threw two no-hitters in the 1950s, and Wilson have been friends since meeting as children, in an alley with a basketball hoop attached to a barn, when Erskine offered an innocent invitation: “Do you want to play?”

One white child, one black, they were bound from that point by their love of sports and their meager economic circumstances during the Depression in this north-central Indiana factory town. The friendship with Wilson was Erskine’s bridge to his warm relationship with Jackie Robinson, whom he joined on the Dodgers in Robinson’s second season after breaking Major League Baseball’s color barrier.

One day, Robinson went out of his way to thank Erskine for speaking to his wife, Rachel, and children in front of white fans. Erskine said no thanks were necessary, and on Friday he said one name explained why: Johnny Wilson.

Theirs is a friendship going on eight decades that both men see as a powerful counternarrative to the racial tensions that have consumed many American cities and at times inflamed the presidential campaign. They simply never saw each other through the prism of race.

Erskine said the sculpture was a deserved, if belated, tribute to Wilson.

“My hope is that it will mean a lot more than Johnny being a great athlete,” Erskine said in an interview. “What Johnny stands for to me is he beat all the odds. Segregation was rampant in those days. Blacks and whites were separate, except for friendship, and then it didn’t make any difference.”

Wilson was an all-around athlete in Robinson’s mold, playing four sports and earning the state’s top high school honor, Mr. Basketball, after leading Anderson to the state title in 1946, scoring 30 of his team’s 67 points in the championship game. He also shared the state championship in the high jump, and played football as well. In the summer, he joined Erskine to play baseball and held major league dreams of his own.

But while Erskine has lived a life of adulation and acceptance, Wilson was often met with rejection. He wanted to attend Indiana University, but the basketball coach said he wasn’t good enough even though he had been named the best player in the state. Unstated was that the Big Ten conference did not offer athletic scholarships to black students.

After Wilson led the state in scoring while playing for tiny Anderson College, the fledgling professional basketball leagues also offered no opportunity. So Wilson signed with the Harlem Globetrotters in the era when the team was highly competitive, barnstorming the country to take on college all-star teams and white professional teams, even traveling to Europe and Asia.

As talented as Wilson was in basketball, his first love was baseball. He had a tryout with the St. Louis Cardinals, hitting two home runs, with four other hits, and recording the fastest time in sprints. When the attending Cardinals scout was asked what he thought of Wilson, he said, “Which one was Wilson?” He was the only black player.

Wilson eventually signed with the Chicago American Giants, a team in the Negro leagues, playing one season before returning to the Globetrotters.

As boys, Erskine and Wilson worked around the segregation of the time. Wilson was barred from the Y.M.C.A. pool, so Erskine would swim with him at the “colored” pool. Black people did not sit on the first floor of the movie theater downtown, so Erskine would go to the balcony to sit with his friend. When a restaurant refused to serve them, they simply walked out together.

When Erskine asked Wilson to play with his all-white city youth baseball team, the team won easily. The next day, the city made Erskine’s team forfeit for using a black player, Erskine said.

When Erskine was flourishing with the Boys of Summer-era Dodgers, Wilson would try to find a radio to listen to the game when his friend was pitching. One day, their baseball teams played on the same day in Pittsburgh, and they met in Schenley Park across from Forbes Field and took in how far both of them had come.

“Look at us from the old neighborhood,” Erskine recalled saying to his friend.

Erskine returned to Anderson after baseball, working first in insurance and later in banking. He has also been deeply involved in Special Olympics; his youngest son, Jimmy, was born with Down syndrome, and Erskine still drives him back and forth to his job. He is in many ways the city’s most popular face.

Wilson, who will be 89 in July, met a different fate. He was twice rejected as a candidate to become coach of the high school basketball team, for reasons that he has always associated with race. Still, Wilson said he had no time for bitterness.

When he was denied an opportunity, Wilson said, his mother, Hazel, would tell him: “It’s their loss. They need you more than you need them. Don’t go where you aren’t wanted.”

And so Wilson did not.

Wilson lives on his own and rarely misses an Anderson High School basketball game. Each week, he volunteers at his church’s clothing drive, often passing out items to families in need. His town has also come to embrace him fully. He was awarded an honorary doctorate from what is now Anderson University. He was inducted into the Anderson High School Hall of Fame, and the state of Indiana honored him as a Sagamore of the Wabash, an award given to those who advanced the state’s heritage.

Wilson and Erskine talk frequently by phone, have breakfast or play golf together. During one round last summer, Erskine shot a hole in one, and Wilson was his witness.

Erskine, who helped raise money for the sculpture, which cost more than $60,000, said the high school grounds were an appropriate place to honor one of its most inspirational graduates.

Wilson was more sanguine, saying, “If one kid can look at that statute and say ‘I think I can do that,’ that would satisfy me.”

On the hot, steamy morning, Erskine helped to remove the purple draping from the sculpture as it dramatically appeared, with Wilson in his Harlem Globetrotters uniform, his lean body reaching skyward.

“He’s my brother without the blood,” Erskine said.


