


Alison Lee Lytton, a daughter of Kimberly A. Lytton and Donald L. Lytton of Las Cruces, N.M., was married June 18 to Steven Foo Yeung, the son of Bik Ying Yeung and Hung Biu Yeung of Tinton Falls, N.J. The Rev. Eugene R. Palmore, a United Church of Christ minister, led a ceremony at the Riverside Church in New York.

The bride, 34, is a senior product manager for educational digital products at Scholastic, the New York publisher. She graduated from New Mexico State University in Las Cruces and received a master's of law and diplomacy from Tufts.

The groom, 33, is a scientist and project manager in New Brunswick, N.J., at Research Diets, a biotechnology company making custom diets for laboratory animals involved in preclinical research. He graduated from the University of Connecticut, from which he also received a master’s in nutrition science.

The couple met in May 2014 after Mr. Yeung signed up for Tinder during a lunchtime break at work when a couple of friends told him about it.

“If I didn’t do it at work, I wouldn’t have met Alison,” said Mr. Yeung, who explained Tinder matches people in a certain geographical radius, and he would not have been matched to someone in Manhattan if he had signed up from his parents’ house, where he was staying for a while.

To her, Mr. Yeung seemed very down-to-earth from his photos.

“Often guys take selfies in mirrors without a shirt to show off their six-pack,” she said. “He seemed like a normal person, like one of my friends.”

Mr. Yeung decided to screen her by phone, and after a satisfactory conversation they met a couple of weeks later for dinner on the Bowery, and had cupcakes for dessert in SoHo.

“It was such a good conversation,” she said. “No awkward pauses. He’s Chinese-American. I spent my childhood in China. I speak Mandarin, and he speaks the Fuzhou dialect.”

He wanted to call her for a second date, but cracked his brand new iPhone at the Jersey Shore that weekend, which was Memorial Day weekend, and had to wait a couple of weeks to get it fixed.

“I thought he ghosted me,” she said. “That he disappeared. I was disappointed. I felt so comfortable and myself with him.”

As soon as he got his phone fixed, he invited her to the Jersey Shore, where he and his friends usually hang out.

“I found the one most American Chinese-American guy,” said Ms. Lytton, who grew up in Kunming, China, where her parents lived for 22 years, while he grew up along the Jersey Shore.

Their date lasted 10 hours — first brunch in Red Bank followed by watching a couple of races at Monmouth Park racetrack, and then dinner in Asbury Park, where they sat on the beach to watch the sunset.

“Being with him was like coming home,” she said. “It felt so natural.”

Her willingness to meet him on unfamiliar turf appealed to him.

“We had a great time,’’ he said. “She was willing to do anything, try anything. She was sincere to learn where I came from.” Later that summer she met his parents.

“Knowing she could speak Mandarin fluently helped,” said Mr. Yeung. “When Alison talks to my parents, I don’t know what they’re talking about.”


