


HAMPTON, Va. — Hillary Clinton rebuked Donald J. Trump on Wednesday for proposing national security ideas that she argued would put America in greater danger and inspire more terrorist attacks.

The criticism comes as Mr. Trump is under fire for offering what Democrats and Republicans have called an off-key response to the massacre in Orlando, Fla.

After 49 people were killed in a gay nightclub by an American-born Islamic State sympathizer on Sunday morning, Mr. Trump expanded his proposed ban on Muslim immigration to include people coming from countries with a history of harming America. He also suggested that President Obama was appeasing the nation’s enemies.

During a round-table discussion Wednesday with military members and veterans in Hampton, Va., Mrs. Clinton argued that such notions were nonsense.

“A ban on Muslims would not have stopped this attack,” she said. “Neither would a wall. I don’t know how one builds a wall to keep the internet out.”

She added, “Not one of Donald Trump’s reckless ideas would have saved a single life in Orlando.”

In the days since the worst attack on American soil since Sept. 11, 2001, Mrs. Clinton has taken a more aggressive approach toward Mr. Trump, mocking his proposals as the schemes of an angry amateur while trying to project the measured, authoritative tone of a president.

She extended that effort on Wednesday, ridiculing Mr. Trump over his fixation with the phrase “radical Islam,” poking fun at the woes of Trump University and suggesting he lacked the temperament to lead the country.

“After all the Twitter rants and conspiracy theories you’ve been hearing recently, it’s time for substantive discussions about how we protect our country,” Mrs. Clinton said.

The latest theory that Mr. Trump posted on Twitter on Wednesday came from an article on a conservative website that claimed Mrs. Clinton had received a secret memo stating that the Obama administration supported the Islamic State.

Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton denounced Mr. Trump in separate speeches on Tuesday, calling his views un-American and offensive.

While Mr. Trump’s impulsive style and provocative ideas served him well in the Republican primary campaign, the broader electorate appears to have concerns. A Bloomberg Politics poll this week showed Mrs. Clinton holding a double-digit lead, and Republican leaders are expressing growing fear about the party’s standard-bearer.

To offer a contrast with Mr. Trump, Mrs. Clinton spent more than an hour Wednesday discussing national security at the Virginia Air and Space Center here, leading a discussion and taking notes. Surrounded by American flags and NASA artifacts, she empathized with the plight of veterans facing long waits at V.A. hospitals and those who struggle to find jobs after returning from combat.

Mrs. Clinton also called for new approaches to stopping lone-wolf terrorists and said that people on terrorist watch lists should not be able to buy guns.

But with the final primary election finally behind her, it was evident that Mrs. Clinton had Mr. Trump on her mind, and she repeatedly brought him up without prompting from the small, friendly audience.

“His comments have become even more inflammatory in recent days,” Mrs. Clinton said after ruminating about how Mr. Trump wanted to halt Muslim immigrants from entering the country. “This approach is not just wrong, it is dangerous.”


