


SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, said Friday that his nuclear weapons and missile programs brought his country “dignity and national power,” as he convened the first congress of his Workers’ Party in 36 years.

Mr. Kim opened the congress in a large theater in Pyongyang, the capital, on Friday morning. The unusual political gathering was widely expected to serve as a platform for the young leader to consolidate his power, touting his nuclear weapons program as his biggest achievement.

In footage of the speech released by state-run television, Mr. Kim boasted of his country’s nuclear test in January and the launch in February of a satellite widely seen as a cover for developing an intercontinental ballistic missile.

He also said the nuclear test detonated a hydrogen bomb, although the United States and South Korea have doubted the claim because it yielded an explosion too small to be a thermonuclear bomb.

Mr. Kim called the nuclear test and satellite launch great successes that confirmed the “dignity and national power of Juche Korea at the highest level.” Juche, or self-reliance, is the North’s governing ideology.

Officials in Washington and South Korea who had hoped Mr. Kim might be willing to bargain over the program in return for economic and diplomatic concessions were bound to be disappointed. Mr. Kim increasingly appears to view the nuclear program as the main political asset that legitimizes his rule.

The congress, held in the April 25 House of Culture, unfolded behind closed doors. More than 100 outside journalists invited to Pyongyang for the rare event were denied access to the theater and had to rely on the North’s state-run Central TV, which didn’t release footage of Mr. Kim addressing the delegates until late Friday night.

Mr. Kim wore a Western-style suit and tie, not in his trademark Mao-style uniform. Central TV said the congress would review the country’s past policies, elect the leadership of the party and revise its charter. It will also uphold Mr. Kim as the party’s “supreme leader,” the broadcaster said.

The congress was expected to last until early next week.

Under North Korea’s one-party system, the congress is where the country’s most important elections and policy decisions take place, at least in theory. Analysts outside the isolated North are watching closely for insights into the evolving leadership of Mr. Kim, who inherited his family dynasty about four years ago, when he was still in his late 20s.

Analysts broadly agree that any changes announced during the congress, including to the party’s leadership or its charter, will seek to cement Mr. Kim’s authority as the North’s monolithic leader. Mr. Kim has had scores of senior generals and party officials executed for disloyalty since taking power.

Analysts are also watching to see if Mr. Kim loosens the state’s control over the economy, though no bold moves in that direction are expected.

Mr. Kim has championed a so-called byungjin strategy for the nation, which calls for securing a nuclear arsenal while trying to rebuild the moribund economy. All indications are that Mr. Kim, who came to power after the death of his father, Kim Jong-il, in late 2011, will hold fast to this policy during the congress.

In a lengthy dispatch on Friday, the state-run Korean Central News Agency, or KCNA, hailed Mr. Kim as a strong leader who had armed the country with a nuclear deterrent against its enemies, particularly the United States, so that his people could work to revive the economy.

North Korea has recently claimed success in testing various technologies needed to build capability for a nuclear strike, including a new engine for an intercontinental ballistic missile, in what many have seen as attempts to bolster that image of Mr. Kim.

Such advances “are the biggest gifts our defense scientists and engineers present to the seventh party congress,” KCNA said. Parroting the official rationale for Mr. Kim’s byungjin strategy, the report said the “powerful nuclear deterrent” would safeguard the North’s future and “boost the revolutionary will of the people to dedicate themselves to building the economy and improving their living conditions.”

The United States and South Korea have vowed to derail such a policy by isolating the North with the enforcement of United Nations sanctions until it gives up its nuclear weapons.

The party congress is the closest that North Korea has to an election of its top leader. In theory, the Workers’ Party, which governs North Korea, is supposed to hold a congress every five years to elect a central committee, which in turn chooses the leader of the party and his lieutenants.

But the Kim family, which has ruled the country since its creation in the 1940s, has paid little heed to such formalities. Kim Jong-il acquired all the top military and party titles without once holding a party congress. The last one took place in 1980, when Mr. Kim’s grandfather, Kim Il-sung, was in power.

Mr. Kim was appointed the leader of the Workers’ Party in 2012 at a conference of party representatives, but that gathering was a less prestigious forum than a full-fledged congress. South Korean officials have contended that Mr. Kim is holding the party congress now because he values pomposity more than his father did and wants his young leadership to receive the imprimatur of a full congress.

The decades since the last congress have been marked by existential crises for the North Korean government: the collapse of the Soviet bloc; the death in 1994 of Kim Il-sung, who remains a godlike figure in the country; and the devastating famine that followed, which weakened citizens’ trust in the Kim family’s rule.

Mr. Kim has sought to legitimize his leadership by sprucing up Pyongyang, the showpiece capital that is home to the country’s elite. He has also relaxed state control of the economy, tolerating a limited number of markets, and has let collective farms and factories keep a portion of their products for themselves or to trade in the markets.

But South Korean intelligence officials recently told lawmakers in Seoul that discontent has mounted in the North in recent weeks, as the authorities mobilized people for “70-day battles” to increase production before the party congress — both to demonstrate their loyalty and help cover the costs of the event.

Analysts in South Korea expected Mr. Kim to continue the past practice of handing out luxury goods to party delegates who have gathered from around the country.

Phil Robertson, deputy Asia director at Human Rights Watch, said this week that the congress was “made possible by the forced labor that untold thousands of North Koreans are subject to as part of everyday life under Kim Jong-un’s abusive rule.”


