


New plays by David Mamet and George Brant and a new musical from David Yazbek will be among the offerings in the Atlantic Theater’s 2016-17 season, the Off Broadway company announced on Monday.

In February, Neil Pepe, the Atlantic’s artistic director, will direct Mr. Mamet’s latest work, which remains untitled; the theater also did not provide a plot description. Staged at the Linda Gross Theater, the play will be a homecoming for Mr. Mamet, a co-founder of the Atlantic Theater, where several of his works, including “Romance” (2005) and “Two Unrelated Plays by David Mamet” (2009), have been produced. He returns to Off Broadway after his most recent Broadway play, “China Doll,” starring Al Pacino, was a box office hit and recouped its investment, despite taking a beating from critics.

The Atlantic’s season begins in August with “Marie and Rosetta,” a new play with music, written by Mr. Brant (“Grounded”), about Sister Rosetta Tharpe, a gospel singer and guitarist who gained fame in the 1930s and had a four-decade career in sacred and secular music until her death in 1973. Mr. Pepe will direct.

November brings the premiere of “The Band’s Visit,” a musical about a traveling police band from Egypt that winds up in a remote Israeli town. Based on a screenplay by Eran Kolirin, the show features music and lyrics by Mr. Yazbek and book by Itamar Moses. It will be directed by David Cromer, who replaces the Tony Award-winning director Hal Prince, who withdrew from the project earlier this year.

In January 2017, Atlantic Stage 2 will mount “Tell Hector I Miss Him,” a new play by Paola Lázaro set in a seedy neighborhood of Old San Juan, Puerto Rico. Next spring the company will produce the New York premiere of “Animal,” a new dark comedy by Clare Lizzimore about “the underside of domesticity, the complexity of the brain in chaos, and the thin line between sinking and survival,” according to a news release. The Golden Globe-nominated actress Rebecca Hall will star, and Gaye Taylor Upchurch will direct.

As part of its season for children, the Atlantic will mount “1001 Nights: A Love Story About Loving Stories,” an early work by the Oscar and Tony Award-winning composer Robert Lopez (“The Book of Mormon,” “Frozen”). Set to open this fall, this new production features a book by Adam Koplan and Mr. Lopez, and will be directed by Mr. Koplan.

With the exception of Ms. Hall, casting was not announced, nor were specific run dates.


