


Brett Eibner’s single capped the biggest ninth-inning comeback in Kansas City Royals history, a seven-run rally Saturday that lifted the World Series champions over the visiting Chicago White Sox, 8-7.

“There’s no shot clock, there’s no time clock,” White Sox Manager Robin Ventura said. “If you can’t close it out, that’s what happens. Today we couldn’t close it out.”

Held to six hits through eight innings, the Royals doubled their total in the 32-minute bottom of the ninth, scoring four of the runs with two out. Eibner, who was playing in his second major league game, also doubled in the ninth.

Darvish Makes Strong Return The Texas Rangers right-hander Yu Darvish made his first major league start in nearly 22 months, allowing one run and striking out seven in five innings of a 5-2 win over the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates. Darvish, who had last pitched in a major league game on Aug. 9, 2014, had Tommy John surgery in March 2015.

Around the Majors Joey Votto scored the go-ahead run in the ninth after an inning-ending double play was overturned, and the visiting Cincinnati Reds snapped their 11-game losing streak with a 7-6 win over the Milwaukee Brewers. Devon Travis drove home Russell Martin with two outs in the bottom of the ninth as the host Toronto Blue Jays rallied to beat the Boston Red Sox, 10-9.

The New Orleans Pelicans rookie guard Bryce Dejean-Jones was fatally shot after breaking down the door to a Dallas apartment, authorities said.

A man living at the apartment was sleeping when he heard his front door kicked open, Dallas Police Senior Cpl. DeMarquis Black said in a statement. When Dejean-Jones, 23, began kicking at the bedroom door, the man retrieved a handgun and fired.

Officers who responded found Dejean-Jones collapsed in an outdoor passageway, and he later died at a hospital.

Christian Pulisic, 17, became the youngest American scorer in the modern era as the United States routed Bolivia, 4-0, in Kansas City, Kan., in an exhibition to sweep its three warm-up matches for the Copa América.

Gyasi Zardes scored in the 26th and 52nd minutes around defender John Brooks’s goal in the 37th. Pulisic scored the final goal in the 69th minute. At 17 years 253 days, he bettered the mark set by Juan Agudelo (17 years 359 days) against South Africa in 2010.

The United States plays fourth-ranked Colombia on Friday in the Copa América opener at Santa Clara, Calif.

FIFA Dismisses Plot Allegation An alleged plot by FIFA’s president, Gianni Infantino, to oust the official who oversaw the salary offer he refused to accept has been called “ludicrous” by FIFA, world soccer’s governing body.

FIFA responded to reports in Saturday’s edition of Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a German newspaper, that the paper said were based on leaked details of FIFA council meetings this month. Infantino told council members a proposed salary of 2 million Swiss francs ($2 million) was insulting, the newspaper said.

A MONEY WIN FOR HULL Hull secured an immediate return to the Premier League and a cash bonanza by beating Sheffield Wednesday, 1-0, in a playoff final in London. Mohamed Diame scored in the 72nd minute on a curling right-footed shot from about 25 yards out.

Promotion is worth at least $250 million in future earnings to Hull, with the Premier League’s new domestic and international television deals starting next season and worth $12 billion over three years.

Justin Gatlin blasted to victory in the 100 meters at the Prefontaine Classic, leading from start to finish with the fastest time of the year.

Gatlin, the 2004 Olympic champion who was banned for doping between 2006 and 2010, clocked a wind-assisted 9.88 seconds at Hayward Field in Eugene, Ore. Asafa Powell finished second in 9.94 seconds, and Tyson Gay third in 9.98 seconds. Gatlin has won the Prefontaine event five times.

Kendra Harrison delivered the biggest surprise of the meet with the fastest women’s 100-meter hurdles in 28 years, storming to victory in 12.24 seconds.

AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

Scott Hend eagled No. 18 for the second straight day to reclaim the lead at the end of the third round of the BMW P.G.A. Championship in Virginia Water, England.

Hend entered tied for the lead with Danny Willett at 10 under par and ended it at nine under. Willett dropped five shots in his final 10 holes for a 76, tumbling to a tie for fifth. Tyrrell Hatton shot 66 and was a shot behind Hend.

Around Golf Ariya Jutanugarn made a 15-foot eagle putt on the 18th hole to take a one-stroke lead in the Volvik Championship in Ann Arbor, Mich. She is trying to become the first player to win three straight L.P.G.A. Tour events since Inbee Park in 2013. Jordan Spieth shot a five-under 65, even while missing many fairways and a few greens, to take a one-stroke lead at the Dean & Deluca Invitational in Fort Worth, Tex. Ryan Palmer and Webb Simpson were tied for second. Rocco Mediate shot an even-par 71, including his first bogeys of the week, in the Senior P.G.A. Championship to take a two-stroke lead in Benton Harbor, Mich.


