


VILLENEUVE-D’ASCQ, France — Late Wednesday afternoon, seconds after Russia’s Denis Glushakov had scored with a sharp, well-placed header, a fan in the Russian supporters’ end of Stade Pierre-Mauroy lit a flare. The flame was dark red. The fan held it above his head while other spectators danced and cheered, the sparks licking the air while the smoke rose.

Stewards quickly confronted the fan, and the flare was extinguished. But the questions now lingering over this European Championship group-stage match — which Slovakia won, 2-1 — are obvious: Did the use of a flare, which is prohibited under UEFA rules, constitute another instance of a “crowd disturbance” by Russian supporters? And if so, does that mean UEFA, European soccer’s governing body, will follow through on a last-chance warning it issued Tuesday and eject Russia from the tournament?

It seemed unlikely that a single fan, and a single flare, would send home an entire country, especially one set to host the next World Cup. Yet the vagueness of the language UEFA used on Tuesday in giving Russia a “suspended disqualification” for the violent behavior of its fans after an earlier match in Marseille left murkiness over what might come next.

In an email, a spokesman for UEFA, Pedro Pinto, quickly sought to play down the possibility that the flare could be seen as a crowd disturbance.

“A flare qualifies as the use of fireworks and not as crowd disturbances,” he said after the match.

Language in UEFA’s disciplinary articles does list the use of fireworks alongside other examples of fan behavior for which a club or federation can receive punishment, but another UEFA representative said that, at present, there was no specific definition for what constituted a “crowd disturbance.”

The incident came near the conclusion of what had been a largely genial afternoon, with the vast majority of fans on both sides showing good will inside and outside the stadium. But after the match the police used tear gas in the center of neighboring Lille to disperse a group of about 300 fans, and a spokesman for the regional government in northern France said three Russians and one Ukrainian would be expelled from the country for disturbing public order. Sixteen people were arrested Wednesday, including six Russians connected to violence in Marseille, the authorities said.

Local officials and the police were on alert in this region as Russia played on Wednesday, a day before England — whose fans fought with Russians last week — was to face Wales in nearby Lens. But while there were a few isolated confrontations in Lille on Tuesday, and more in the combustible mix of fans after the match, to that point there had been nothing close to the violence that took place in Marseille.

On Wednesday morning, fans of Slovakia and Russia posed for pictures together as they boarded trains in Paris headed to the match in Villeneuve-d’Ascq. Natalia Fekete, a 33-year-old Slovakian fan, said that she was “a little scared” to attend the match but that she felt comforted because Russian fans had far less antipathy toward Slovakian fans than they did toward the English.

“They are more aggressive in front of the English,” she said.

Russian fans largely agreed with that premise, with many saying that the behavior of the Russian fans in Marseille on Saturday had been incited by disrespect from England supporters.

“I was sitting behind the goal in the Russian zone,” said Iurii Shabanov, who attended the game in Marseille, “and I saw how after the English fans began to throw popcorns into the Russian zone.”

At the stadium on Wednesday, some Russian fans struck mixed tones, alternately frustrated by being painted as universally violent and disappointed at the focus on their fan base. Fans from other countries, including Germany, Croatia, Turkey and England, have been questioned or arrested by the police in other cities for unruly behavior, they said, but Russia has been the only team to be punished.

Of course, the difference, UEFA said, was that the violent acts of the Russian fans took place inside a stadium as opposed to on the city streets.

“It was deplorable; it was terrible to see that kind of violence,” said Maksim Trnovs, a Russian fan attending the Slovakia match. “Some people come to fight, not watch football, and that is wrong. But to say we may be disqualified? It is the fan who fights and the fan who should go home. Not the team.”

The team may well go home sooner than later, but mostly as a result of its poor play. Russia gave a largely stunted performance on the field Wednesday, with little precision or pace despite playing in perfect conditions under a closed roof. Slovakia, which lost to Wales in its opening game, frequently took advantage of a disjointed Russian defense.

Just after the half-hour mark, Marek Hamsik sent a gorgeous diagonal pass from midfield into the space behind the Russian defense, the ball bouncing perfectly for Vladimir Weiss to take it in stride. Weiss cut back toward the middle of the penalty area and, after waiting a beat for the Russians to run past him, blistered a shot past goalkeeper Igor Akinfeev to give Slovakia the lead.

Just before halftime, Hamsik received a pass from a short corner kick and again cut inside before whipping a perfect shot into the far corner of the goal behind Akinfeev. The Slovakian fans roared while those in the Russian end headed for the concourses to beat the halftime lines.

Russia’s coach, Leonid Slutsky, spent much of the game looking pained on the bench, although the last 10 minutes were lively and tense after Glushakov’s goal. The team’s captain, Roman Shirokov, has been injured and unable to start, and Slutsky has clearly been uncomfortable about having to answer for the behavior of his team’s fans as well as his players.

He was in such a position again Wednesday. When asked about the flare in the stands, Slutsky frowned.

“I was totally concentrated on the game,” he said. “I was watching for the events on the pitch.”

Pressed as to whether he was concerned about the flare — even if he had not seen it — Slutsky looked helpless. It seemed there was little for him to say.

“I repeat,” he said. “I didn’t see it.”


