


Spring has brought its usual raft of new books about baseball, and if none are “Moneyball”-like breakouts, they still offer plenty to entertain fans between innings.

Michael Leahy’s “The Last Innocents” follows seven Dodgers, including Sandy Koufax, through the 1960s, telling a story about baseball and about larger cultural changes. The former Mets pitcher Ron Darling’s “Game 7, 1986” works on a much smaller canvas to deliver just what the title promises: a close analysis of one game, the night when Darling performed poorly but the Mets won the World Series anyway. In “The Only Rule Is It Has to Work,” two number-crunching geeks, Ben Lindbergh and Sam Miller, write about what happened when they were given the reins to run a minor-league baseball team in California.

Speaking of geekdom, the ESPN commentator Tim ­Kurkjian’s latest book of anecdotal essays is titled “I’m Fascinated by Sacrifice Flies.” It includes a defense of that statement (“I must explain that they are not meaningless, humorless, pointless”) as well as chapters on what it’s like to be hit by a pitch, funny things fans have shouted to players and a catalog of the game’s superstitions. (Elliot Johnson chews grape-flavored gum on defense and watermelon-flavored gum when batting. “The hits are in the watermelon gum,” he says.)

Where Kurkjian’s book is diverting, Jeff Passan’s “The Arm,” which investigates the increase in injuries to pitchers, is troubling. Passan closely follows two major leaguers as they go through rehab after surgery, trying to rebuild their arms and their careers. The book also examines the rising numbers of teenage players going under the knife and other alarming trends. It’s a reminder that football, with its more chilling crisis of concussions, isn’t the only sport with a major health problem.

Quotable

“If you can read a book instead of taking a pill, then read the book. Read to find out more about yourself.” — Mark Haddon, in an interview with Electric Lit

Delightful Mail

Fans of authors’ correspondence will find a delightful example of the genre in “Jay to Bee,” which collects letters sent by the troubled New Zealand writer Janet Frame to the American painter William Theophilus Brown. In an introduction, Denis Harold, the book’s editor, calls it “not an academic work but . . . the uncensored revelation of a great writer’s imagination at play.” Frame’s playful spirit can be seen in the many doodles she included in her correspondence, as well as in her words. One postcard begins: “By the time you read this I shall have been swallowed by a carnivorous plant which you have been sheltering unbeknownst in your otherwise paradisal garden.”


