


As a master sheng player and vocalist, Wu Tong is one of China’s most successful crossover musicians. In 1991, he and four conservatory classmates founded the band Lunhui, or Again, which in 2000 became the first rock band to play on national television in China. In more recent years, Mr. Wu has traded in his rocker uniform for the less raucous, though no less energetic, world music circuit. He is a founding member of Yo-Yo Ma’s Silk Road Ensemble, the international music collective, which in April released the album “Sing Me Home.” In an interview, Mr. Wu, 44, talked about the new album, his evolving relationship with the sheng and what it was like to be a rock musician in China in the 1990s.

What is a sheng?

It’s like a mouth organ with a free reed and vertical pipes. It’s been around for more than 3,000 years. Traditionally, it was played by beautiful women, seldom by men.

How long have you been playing the sheng?

I first started playing the sheng when I was 5. I’m the fourth generation in my family to play the sheng. My father chose it for me because it has fixed sounds and pitches, like the piano. It was good training for when I later began to sing.

It took about 35 years of playing the sheng for me to understand the beautiful history behind this instrument. Before I didn’t really understand the sheng. I always wondered why my father chose this instrument for me. When I played in the rock band, the guitar would create such a powerful feeling, but when I played the sheng, I just felt like it wasn’t enough. It was acoustic, but it didn’t slide, and you couldn’t plug it in. It wasn’t heavy or very expressive.

But now I have come to realize that the sheng really represents the core value of the Chinese spirit. It has many noble characteristics. It’s not extreme; it’s just straightforward. It’s direct, but not stiff. It’s simple and beautiful in its own way.

The first generation to play the sheng in your family was your great-grandfather, who lived during the late Qing dynasty. How did he start playing the sheng?

I’m not really sure about my great-grandfather. I think he picked up the sheng in the way that aristocrats dabbled in music because they didn’t have to work.

Later, my grandfather was rejected by his family because he actually wanted to make music his career. So he brought my dad to Beijing and set up a factory manufacturing musical instruments near Hepingmen. They specialized in wind instruments like the flute, suona, duduk and sheng. My grandfather had learned about music from monks and Taoist priests, because wind instruments were often used in religious performances at that time. After the Communists came to power in 1949, the factory was turned into a cooperative. Finally it was merged into the state-owned People’s Musical Instrument Factory of Beijing. Later, my father took over the business, and now my sister is in charge.

Are children still learning to play the sheng today?

Yes, it’s still popular. Especially because the government is really focused on promoting traditional Chinese culture now, so you can see Western-style orchestras and Chinese orchestras in schools at all levels.

But I have to say that too many people take up these instruments for other reasons. In China, if you have some musical background, you can get extra points on your application when you apply for university.

You were also the founding vocalist of the rock band Lunhui.

That was the only time I clashed with my father. My father was always a serious figure, but when it came to making decisions about my life, he never really tried to stop me. He did ask people around me, like my teachers, if rock music was good, if it was safe, if you could make a living from it. At that time, anyone involved with rock was considered a hooligan — long hair, raggedy clothes, smoking cigarettes. And it’s true, it was hard to make money from rock music. We might have only three performances scheduled per year, usually small underground shows with 200 to 300 people. Two hours before the show, you might get a call telling you not to come because the police had come by and called it off.

For “Sing Me Home,” the latest album by Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk Road Ensemble, you did a collaboration called “Going Home” with the vocalist and banjo player Abigail Washburn. Tell us about that.

“Going Home” is based on Antonin Dvorak’s “New World” symphony. The lyrics had been translated into Chinese, but it wasn’t modern Chinese. So the musician Keith Lipson and I reworked the translation. The original text was very folksy, very down to earth, and we wanted to restore the original feeling. It’s not referring to a real home or a geographic home, but more of a spiritual home or even death. It is about people’s destiny after their death.


