


Facing backlash from the National Rifle Association for taking Second Amendment rights too far, Donald J. Trump on Monday walked back his suggestion that people should be armed when attending nightclubs or other public places where people tend to drink alcohol.

“When I said that if, within the Orlando club, you had some people with guns, I was obviously talking about additional guards or employees,” Mr. Trump wrote in a morning post on Twitter.

The clarification signified an about-face for Mr. Trump, who heartily embraced the argument that more guns equals more safety when discussing the recent massacre in Orlando Fla., during a rally in Houston on Friday.

“If we had, if we had, people where the bullets were going in the opposite direction, right smack between the eyes of this maniac — if some of those wonderful people had guns strapped right here,” Mr. Trump wrote (with a gesture to his right hip), “right to their waist or right to their ankle, and this son of a bitch comes out and starts shooting, and one of the people in that room happened to have it, and goes boom — boom — you know what, that would have been a beautiful, beautiful sight, folks.”

The presumptive Republican presidential nominee made a similar comment on the Howie Carr radio program last week.

“It’s too bad some of the young people that were killed over the weekend didn’t have guns you know attached to their hips, frankly,” he said.

Strict defenders of the Second Amendment tend to oppose restrictive measures on gun purchases or the rights to carry firearms, arguing that criminals target areas in which they know that people are unlikely to be armed. But even the N.R.A., the lobbying group for the gun industry, said that Mr. Trump’s assertion was off base.

“No one thinks that people should go into a nightclub drinking and carrying firearms — that defies common sense,” Chris Cox, executive director of the N.R.A. said on ABC News on Sunday. “It also defies the law.”

Mr. Trump has taken provocative positions on guns before, calling for an end to gun-free zones in schools in January and, more recently, suggesting that they should be eliminated entirely. After terrorists attacked a concert hall in Paris last year, Mr. Trump also said that the outcome would have been different if the city had looser gun laws.

At times during his campaign, Mr. Trump has gone too far in his efforts to demonstrate that he is a true conservative. In March, he was criticized by Democrats and Republicans alike when he said that women who had abortions should face punishment if a ban on the practice is ever enacted.

As he did on Monday in regards to weapons at clubs, he later reversed that position.


