


As Akai Gurley left his girlfriend’s apartment in a Brooklyn housing project one November night two years ago, he tried to take an elevator to the street, but found that it was broken. Had it been working, Mr. Gurley might never have set foot into the stairwell where he died.

It was the kind of freakish detail that pervaded the case of his killer, the former New York City police officer Peter Liang. Not only was the elevator broken, but the lights in the stairwell were out. And Mr. Liang was a rookie, not even a year out of the Police Academy. Moreover, the shot he fired glanced off a wall, caromed randomly and struck Mr. Gurley in the heart.

The accidental nature of the killing was noted by many on Tuesday when Mr. Liang was sentenced to probation in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, avoiding a prison term in one of the most divisive police misconduct cases in recent city history. Paul Shechtman, a lawyer for Mr. Liang, argued in court that there had never been a manslaughter case in New York in which the allegations were less egregious and the conduct less blameworthy. Ruling that the shooting had been unintentional, Justice Danny K. Chun, who presided over the case, went so far as to reduce the jury’s verdict from manslaughter — based on recklessness — to the less severe criminally negligent homicide.

But if the killing of Mr. Gurley was a kind of crime of chance, what of the conditions that preceded and permitted it? Would a private building on the Upper East Side have had an elevator persistently out of service as was the case at the Louis H. Pink Houses in East New York? Would the stairwell lights in such a building have been broken? Would armed officers — one of them with his gun drawn — have been on patrol inside?

Now that the case has ended, barring an appeal, a larger question has emerged: If the fatal shooting of Mr. Gurley was indeed an accident embedded in a web of troubling circumstance, what can the city do to prevent something similar from happening again?

In past police misconduct cases, measures have been taken. After Abner Louima was attacked by police officers with a broomstick in a Brooklyn station house in 1997 — an act that the police then tried to cover up — his lawyers successfully sued to end the so-called 48-hour rule, which gave officers two full days before they had to speak with investigators. A few years later, after Amadou Diallo was fatally shot outside his Bronx building, the police disbanded the Street Crime Unit, the aggressive plainclothes troop whose officers committed the killing.

In an article published on Wednesday in The Daily News, Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney whose office prosecuted Mr. Liang, wrote that he embraced “the nation’s urgent conversation” about the criminal-justice system that Mr. Gurley’s death had helped to spur. The city, Mr. Thompson added, should “strengthen police-community relations” and examine how offenders were “brought into the system” to begin with.

Some police reform advocates had more specific suggestions.

Robert Gangi, director of the Police Reform Organizing Project, said that searches of housing project stairwells, known as vertical patrols, should be ended or restricted absent actual suspicion that a crime was being committed. Mr. Gangi also said that a prison sentence for Mr. Liang would have sent a message that the city “considers these incidents to be serious and unacceptable.”

Alex S. Vitale, a professor of sociology at Brooklyn College, said that he would take a literal approach to the “broken windows” theory of policing, a favorite strategy of the police commissioner, William J. Bratton.

“For too long, the department’s emphasis has been on making communities safer through zero-tolerance policing,” Mr. Vitale said, “but they don’t actually fix any broken windows. The physical dynamic in the Pink Houses was a major contributing factor to what happened. And if the city was really focused on making the place better, it wouldn’t just criminalize behavior, it would fix elevators and lights, and think of ways to empower people to better manage their environments.”

There has been one corrective step in the wake of the Gurley case. After Mr. Liang and his partner, Officer Shaun Landau, testified that they failed to help Mr. Gurley because they had been poorly trained in CPR, the department stripped their academy instructor of her badge. And though it preceded Mr. Liang’s indictment, a federal lawsuit filed in Manhattan in 2010 is slowly forcing changes in the way that police officers interact with housing-project residents during the vertical patrols.

But a frustrating truth about the Gurley case is that many of its underlying problems are problems of inequity and race that are difficult to solve with city policy. While the shooting was not a racial crime per se — Mr. Liang did not confront or even see his victim — it was racially inflected, if only because black New Yorkers are much more likely than white ones to live in rundown buildings patrolled by police officers in heightened states of anxiety and fear.

“It’s on the government to build trust when there have been constant incidents like this,” said Johnetta Elzie, a founder of Campaign Zero, an advocacy group that focuses on ending police violence. “There needs to be accountability, but I don’t know what accountability looks like when police are getting probation for killing people. It’s a mess — it’s definitely a mess.”


