


WASHINGTON — The first appropriations bill taken up this year by the Senate — in what was supposed to a be a new spirit of bipartisan cooperation on financing the government — crashed and burned on Wednesday because of a dispute over an amendment that Democrats and White House officials said would undermine President Obama’s nuclear accord with Iran.

The amendment, offered by Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, would bar the United States from purchasing heavy water — which is used in producing nuclear energy and nuclear weapons — from Iran. Under Mr. Obama’s nuclear accord, Iran must reduce its supplies of heavy water.

The United States and Russia are the world’s largest purchasers.

Mr. Cotton, in a floor speech on Wednesday, said the United States should not be subsidizing the Iranian government’s nuclear program and noted that nothing in the agreement requires the United States to buy heavy water from Iran.

Mr. Cotton said that he had such great confidence in the merits of his amendment that he had encouraged Democrats to subject it to a 60-vote threshold for approval, even though it could have passed with a simple majority vote.

“I have offered to put it at a 60-vote threshold because there are 60 senators who do not believe that the United States should be subsidizing Iran’s heavy water industry,” Mr. Cotton said on the floor.

He added, “I want to pass this bill. I want to move on to the next appropriations bill.”

Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, accused Republicans of sabotaging the energy and water appropriations bill by unveiling Mr. Cotton’s amendment at the last minute.

The energy and water appropriations measure, which also covers many national-security related programs, including the nation’s nuclear arsenal, was brought to the floor first this year in part because it was expected to win passage with little rancor.

As a result of the Democrats’ opposition, a procedural vote needed to move the bill toward final passage failed on Wednesday morning. The vote was 50 to 46, with 60 votes needed under Senate rules for the bill to move forward.

Senate Republican leaders said Mr. Cotton’s amendment was never pending for consideration and accused Democrats of creating a pretense for scuttling the bill.

Democrats said Mr. Cotton’s amendment could have been called up for a vote after the procedural step, at a point when Democrats would have been unable to stop the overall bill.

They also noted the White House had warned that Mr. Obama would veto the bill if Mr. Cotton’s amendment was attached to it.

Appearing uncharacteristically livid, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, took to the floor to assail Democrats.

“I think we have come up with yet another definition of obstruction today,” Mr. McConnell said. He accused Democrats of finding “a new way to blow up the appropriations process,” and added, “Our Democratic colleagues were great at dysfunction when they were in the majority and they are pretty good at it in the minority.”

“This is a ridiculous place for the Senate to be,” Mr. McConnell said. “Ridiculous.”

Democrats, also irritated, said it was Mr. McConnell’s responsibility to prevent members of his Republican conference from introducing amendments that would sabotage legislation that otherwise enjoyed bipartisan support.

“They have an onus to fix it,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York.

Democrats insisted that Mr. Cotton was trying to undermine the nuclear accord, and his efforts set off a war of words with the White House.

Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, accused Mr. Cotton of putting forward an “ideologically motivated policy rider.”

“Senator Cotton is certainly no expert when it comes to heavy water,” Mr. Earnest added. “I’m confident that he couldn’t differentiate heavy water from sparkling water. His focus is on undermining the effective implementation of this agreement that prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.”

Mr. Cotton, a graduate of Harvard University and Harvard Law School who joined the Army after the Sept. 11 terror attacks and did combat tours in Iraq and Afghanistan, took to Twitter in his own defense.

“As for you @PressSec,” he wrote, addressing Mr. Earnest, “You’re right. I don’t know much about sparkling water. It isn’t served in Army, unlike in your ritzy West Wing.”

Congressional Republicans have been under pressure on fiscal matters because of their inability to pass a budget resolution in the House, where hard-line conservatives oppose a bipartisan agreement reached last fall on modest increases in federal spending.

Speaker Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, who made his name as his party’s most prominent budget architect, has insisted that despite the failure to draft a budget, Republicans would work to adopt annual appropriations bills. In the Senate, Mr. McConnell has similarly set a goal of passing all of the regular appropriations bills and Mr. Reid had previously pledged cooperation.

Mr. McConnell’s aides accused Mr. Reid of breaking that pledge by leading Democrats in blocking the energy and water measure.


