


Yankees Manager Joe Girardi was bewildered after his team fell to the Tampa Bay Rays, 8-1, at Yankee Stadium on Sunday. A left-handed starter had again neutralized his lineup, and the nine strikeouts that Girardi’s own starting pitcher, Michael Pineda, had registered were overshadowed by the 10 hits, seven runs and four home runs he had allowed in his five innings.

“Sometimes, it’s hard to figure out,” Girardi said. “You never think that a guy would have nine strikeouts in five innings and give up four homers.”

Adding further stress was the condition of designated hitter Alex Rodriguez, who was replaced in the sixth inning after feeling stiffness in his left oblique muscle in his abdomen.

The Yankees are still planning to rest the injured center fielder Aaron Hicks over the next few days, and although no immediate roster move was planned, the team might need to adjust as it tries to climb out of last place in the American League East.

Pineda began the afternoon with a three-pitch strikeout, fooling a swinging Logan Forsythe with a biting slider. Logan Morrison then grounded out, and Pineda looked to be on a roll.

With Evan Longoria at bat, Pineda was one strike from retiring the side in order, but he threw a fastball that Longoria stroked off the center-field wall for a double. On Pineda’s next pitch, Corey Dickerson belted a two-run homer over the right-field fence.

Steve Pearce followed with a single, and Brad Miller drove him in with a double to left-center. Steven Souza Jr. then clocked a two-run homer to left field.

The next batter, Kevin Kiermaier, doubled, too, but he was stranded on second base when Curt Casali, the ninth batter of the inning, popped out to second baseman Starlin Castro.

Pineda remained in the game and pitched a scoreless second, but Pearce added a home run on the first pitch of the third for a 6-0 Rays lead. As Pearce made contact, Pineda hunched over.

Souza later hit a second home run off Pineda, a solo blast in the fifth. After that inning, Pineda flung off his hat and threw his glove against the bench. He was replaced by Kirby Yates for the sixth.

“This is a bad day for me today,” Pineda said after the game.

The four home runs Pineda allowed were his career high, surpassing the three he had yielded in his first start of the season, on April 6 against the visiting Houston Astros, and in two other outings earlier in his career. With Sunday’s loss, his E.R.A. this season ballooned to 6.95.

Faced with a large deficit, the Yankees’ lineup continued to struggle against left-handed starters. Drew Smyly, the fifth left-hander to start against the Yankees in six games, allowed one run in seven innings.

“I got no idea,” outfielder Carlos Beltran said when asked why the Yankees had struggled so much against left-handers.

The lone run came in the fourth inning when Rodriguez legged out a double that scored Brett Gardner.

Girardi said that Rodriguez was taking swings in a batting cage to prepare for his next at-bat when he felt a pain. Rodriguez was not in the Yankees’ clubhouse after the game, but the results of a magnetic resonance imaging test were negative, the team announced. Rodriguez will travel to Texas, where the Yankees will begin a nine-game trip on Monday.

“Anytime someone leaves with an oblique, you’re not really optimistic because they take a while depending on the severity of it,” Girardi said before the test results were available. “I even think sometimes when players physically feel ready, I still don’t think they had the strength they had before.”

Girardi said that it would be “pretty hard” to go on the road with only 23 healthy players — Hicks is still dealing with a sore left shoulder after diving for a fly ball during Friday’s game — and a new, youthful bat could inject necessary punch into the lineup. Rodriguez, 40, is hitting .145 and regularly looked overmatched at the plate during the recent homestand, during which the Yankees went 3-6 and scored more than three runs in a game only twice.

One option could be Aaron Judge, a 6-foot-7 prospect who is hitting close to .300 at Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre and has intrigued fans for years.

While Beltran did not offer a remedy for the Yankees’ offensive woes, he is well versed in oblique injuries. Last season, he missed almost three weeks with a left oblique strain.

“You got to be careful with those,” he said.

INSIDE PITCH

SANDY ACEVEDO, 18, a Dominican infielder whom the Yankees signed as an international free agent in July, died in a car accident Saturday, the team announced. ... Reliever BRANDEN PINDER, who has a partial tear of an elbow ligament, will visit Dr. JAMES ANDREWS this week for a second opinion. JOE GIRARDI said, though, that he believed Pinder was “leaning toward” having Tommy John surgery.


