


The bodies of murdered young women began turning up one by one more than 30 years ago in South Los Angeles. The killer became known as “the Grim Sleeper,” so named because he apparently took a long break between victims. On Thursday, a jury convicted a small-time car thief, Lonnie D. Franklin Jr., of 10 murders, capping nearly three months of wrenching testimony and decades of uncertainty for the victims’ shattered families.

Mr. Franklin was found guilty of 10 counts of first-degree murder, and one count of attempted murder because one of his victims escaped.

Family members of the victims in the courtroom sobbed as the verdicts were read. “It’s just unimaginable how you feel once you get what you’ve been waiting to hear,” said Porter Alexander, 75, whose daughter Alicia Alexander was killed in 1988. “I’m so glad.”

In the trial that began in February in Los Angeles Superior Court, prosecutors said Mr. Franklin had stalked a fairly circumscribed area of South Los Angeles from the mid-1980s until 2007, when the last known victim was found. Most had been shot with a .25-caliber pistol, and some had been strangled. DNA or ballistics evidence linked Mr. Franklin, 63, to each of the victims — nine women and one teenage girl — prosecutors said.

“Most of these victims have been dead for over 20 years,” Beth Silverman, the deputy district attorney, said during closing arguments this week. “It’s time. It’s time that justice was served in this case.”

Mr. Franklin’s lawyer, Seymour Amster, had tried to raise doubts about the reliability of the evidence, and during closing arguments, he proposed that an unnamed relative could have been the killer.

A court clerk pronounced the word “guilty” over and over as she read the verdicts in the order that the victims died: Debra Jackson, 29; Henrietta Wright, 35; Barbara Ware, 23; Bernita Sparks, 25; Mary Lowe, 26; Lachrica Jefferson, 22; Alicia Alexander, 18; Princess Berthomieux, 15; Valerie McCorvey, 35; and Janecia Peters, 25.

The penalty phase begins on Wednesday. Prosecutors said they would seek the death penalty.

The effort to capture the killer, who appeared to stop in 1988 and begin again in 2002, had dragged on for so long because of a lack of witnesses and evidence, officials said. The number of murders that pervaded Los Angeles in 1980s, including the work of several other serial killers, also complicated the investigation.

But some family members and victim advocates saw a more troubling factor: They suggested that the case had not spurred a sense of urgency in law enforcement or in the news media because of the victims involved: young African-American women living at the margins, many of them cocaine users and at times prostitutes.

Margaret Prescod, an advocate for the families, contrasted this case with that of Natalee Holloway, the white Alabama teenager whose 2005 disappearance in Aruba caused a media sensation.

“These are 10 women here,” she said. “And you walk around the city of Los Angeles and ask people, most people have never even heard of it. Can you imagine that?”

The break in the case came after Mr. Franklin’s son, Christopher Franklin, was arrested in 2008 on a charge of carrying a weapon and had to provide a DNA sample. Investigators determined that he had a familial link to evidence from the cold case.

The authorities said the father’s connection to the murders was confirmed after a detective posed as a pizzeria busboy and collected a partly eaten slice that he had left. At the time, familial DNA to capture a murder suspect represented a first in American law enforcement. The technique is now used in at least 10 states.

On July 7, 2010, the authorities announced the arrest of Lonnie Franklin, a former sanitation worker and Police Department garage attendant. He was captured in front of the lime green home he shared with his wife, just a few miles from the alleyways where the bodies had been found. The Grim Sleeper had been there, hiding in plain sight, the whole time, officials said.

“We never gave up on this investigation, not for one minute,” Chief Charlie Beck said in a statement at the time.

In a search of the elder Mr. Franklin’s home, the authorities found hundreds of photographs of women, many of them naked. Among them was a picture of Enietra Washington, who is believed to be the serial killer’s only survivor.

Ms. Washington, 57, provided some of the trial’s most riveting testimony as she recounted the day she was attacked in 1988. She said Mr. Franklin pulled up next to her in an orange Ford Pinto as she was walking to a friend’s house and asked if he could give her a ride, pressing the offer repeatedly. After she got in, he shot her in the chest, Ms. Washington testified.

“You shot me?” she recalled saying, according to The Los Angeles Times. “I asked him, ‘Why?’”

She was “dogging him out,” or disrespecting him, she recalled him saying.

Ms. Washington said he sexually assaulted her, took photographs of her and left her for dead on the street. In court, prosecutors presented the picture found in Mr. Franklin’s home, showing Ms. Washington bloodied and partly exposed.

Mr. Franklin did not testify, but he has maintained his innocence. During the trial, the jury was shown a taped interrogation of Mr. Franklin. Los Angeles detectives placed photos of the victims on a table, asking him if he recognized them, one by one, according to The Los Angeles Times.

Each time, Mr. Franklin rejected any connection to the women. “I haven’t killed anybody,” he said.

Since the case began lurching toward trial in 2010, investigators have linked him to at least six additional victims. They believe there could be others.

In an unexpected twist on Wednesday, prosecutors disclosed that Mr. Franklin had been convicted of rape while serving in the Army in Germany, ABC7 reported. Ms. Silverman, the deputy district attorney, said he and two friends had driven to a village, dragged a woman to the vehicle and sexually assaulted her.

Ms. Silverman said she would bring up the case during sentencing.

Ms. Prescod, who founded a group Black Coalition Fighting Back Serial Murders, said the conviction of Mr. Franklin might represent a bit of respite for the victims’ families.

“But for us it’s not over,” she said on Thursday. She noted that 35 women appearing in the photographs found in Mr. Franklin’s home remained unaccounted for.

“Where are they?” she asked. “Where else could that happen and it not be an outrage?”


