


Robby Fabbri, Paul Stastny and Troy Brouwer each scored a goal and had two assists, and the St. Louis Blues dominated the Dallas Stars to advance to their first Western Conference finals since 2001 with a 6-1 victory in Game 7 of their series Wednesday night.

The Blues, in the playoffs for the 40th time and still in search of their first Stanley Cup, will have home-ice advantage in the Western Conference finals against Nashville or San Jose — and for the Stanley Cup as well if they advance. The Predators and the Sharks will play the deciding Game 7 on Thursday night.

David Backes, their captain, and Patrik Berglund also had goals for the Blues, who won their third road game in this series. Vladimir Tarasenko added an empty-netter with 4 minutes 40 seconds left.

Patrick Eaves had the lone goal for Dallas.

Marc Crawford just wanted to be back in the N.H.L.

Crawford, a former N.H.L. coach of the year who spent the last four seasons coaching in Switzerland, was one of a number of candidates interviewed for the opening with the Ottawa Senators that eventually went to Guy Boucher.

Within hours of being hired, Boucher approached Crawford and offered him the opportunity to join his staff as an associate coach, and Crawford accepted.

Crawford brings a wealth of experience to Boucher’s staff. He has been a head coach for 1,151 N.H.L. games, a total that ranks 16th in league history, over 15 seasons with Quebec/Colorado, Vancouver, Los Angeles and Dallas.

He was coach of the year with Quebec in 1995 and won the Stanley Cup in 1996 after the Nordiques moved to Denver and became the Avalanche.

Bryce Harper of the Washington Nationals was suspended for one game and fined by Major League Baseball for his behavior after an ejection this week.

The commissioner’s office said Harper had decided to appeal the penalty, so he remained eligible to play until the process was finished. Harper, last year’s National League most valuable player, was in the Nationals’ lineup Wednesday night against the Detroit Tigers.

On Monday night, during the bottom of the ninth inning of Washington’s 5-4 victory over Detroit, Harper was in the dugout when he was ejected by the plate umpire, Brian Knight, after the Nationals’ Danny Espinosa was called out on strikes.

When someone is tossed from a game in the majors, he is required to leave the dugout.

Moments after the ejection, pinch-hitter Clint Robinson connected for a game-winning home run, and Harper ran onto the field with his teammates to celebrate. Harper pointed toward Knight and cursed at him.

Eight-Game Streak Ends for Cubs Brett Wallace hit a three-run homer in San Diego’s four-run seventh inning, and the visiting Padres stopped the Chicago Cubs’ eight-game winning streak with a 7-4 victory in the opener of a day-night doubleheader.

Wil Myers had two hits and scored two runs for San Diego, which had lost three in a row. Carlos Villanueva (1-0) pitched a scoreless inning for the win, and Fernando Rodney got three outs for his ninth save.

Sunderland completed its latest escape from relegation in the English Premier League on Wednesday — and consigned Newcastle, its bitter nearby rival, to the second tier in the process.

A 3-0 win over visiting Everton guaranteed Sunderland safety with a game to spare and justified its decision to hire the survival specialist Sam Allardyce as manager in October.

Under Allardyce, who has yet to be relegated from the top English league in 25 years as a manager, Sunderland lost just one of its final 10 matches.

“It’s pretty miraculous,” Allardyce said.

Newcastle and Norwich joined Aston Villa in going down just as the Premier League was to begin new domestic and international television deals worth a record $12 billion over the next three years.

Norwich’s 4-2 victory over Watford proved to be in vain, as Sunderland stayed 4 points ahead.

Roger Federer put his full array of shots on display in a 6-3, 7-5 win over Alexander Zverev in the second round of the Italian Open in Rome, an encouraging performance given that he had decided to play only moments before stepping onto the court.

“I was expecting to lose in straight sets today,” said Federer, who has been having back problems. “That was the mind-set going in, so to win in straights is actually a really big surprise to me. I played cautious, and I only decided after the warm-up that I was actually going to play.”

Top-ranked Novak Djokovic, Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal, a seven-time champion in Rome, also advanced in straight sets on the red clay courts at the Foro Italico.

In women’s action, Angelique Kerber, the reigning Australian Open champion; fourth-seeded Victoria Azarenka; and Simona Halep, last week’s Madrid Open winner, each lost.

Djokovic, seeking his third straight title in Rome, beat Stéphane Robert, 7-5, 7-5. Nadal defeated Philipp Kohlschreiber, 6-3, 6-3, and Murray beat Mikhail Kukushkin, 6-3, 6-3.

Eugenie Bouchard, the 2014 Wimbledon runner-up, beat the second-seeded Kerber, 6-1, 5-7, 7-5, and Irina-Camelia Begu, ranked 35th, defeated Azarenka, 6-3, 6-2. Daria Gavrilova eliminated Halep, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3.


