


In its debut over the weekend, the new Beyoncé visual album mixed “Lemonade” with a little “Dust.” The film “Daughters of the Dust,” written and directed by Julie Dash, about a family of Gullah women living on the Sea Islands and their decision to migrate to the American mainland in the early 1900s, looked to be inspiration for some of the lyrical, historical imagery in Beyoncé’s latest project, "Lemonade.” Now, the film, which is on DVD only in an out-of-print version, will get new life on the big screen.

The Cohen Film Collection, which maintains a library of classic films, announced on Wednesday that it has completed a digital restoration of “Daughters of the Dust” and plans to release that version theatrically this fall as part of the reopening of the New York art house venue the Quad Cinema. A national rollout and a new Blu-ray version of the film will follow.

In his praise of “Daughters of the Dust” during its initial theatrical release, the New York Times critic Stephen Holden called it “a film of spellbinding visual beauty.” This restoration aims to bring more of that beauty to the forefront. Tim Lanza, the archivist for Cohen Film Collection, acquired the original film print, which had been rescued from a lab by the University of California, Los Angeles Film and Television Archive.

“The film had not been properly color graded when it was originally released,” Mr. Lanza said in a phone interview. “We worked with the cinematographer A.J.” — that is, Arthur Jafa — “to approve the color grade we had done.” He continued, “The big issue for Julie and A.J. was capturing the variety of African-American skin tones. That was not something presented in the first version available.”

Mr. Lanza and his team worked to ensure a color richness, stabilized the image, cleaned it up digitally and enhanced the sound.

The restored version is set to screen at the Cannes film market, an industry event that runs alongside the festival in May, and will probably appear at film festivals later in the year.


