


Drake’s new album, “Views,” opened at No. 1 on Billboard’s chart this week with very strong numbers in both sales and streaming, a major victory for Apple, which is offering the album through an exclusive deal.

“Views” (Young Money/Cash Money/Republic) sold 852,000 copies in the United States in its first week on sale, according to Nielsen, the best opening week of the year and the industry’s biggest sales week since Christmas, when Adele’s “25” ratcheted to almost 1.2 million. Even more remarkable was the streaming number. Songs from “Views” were listened to 245 million times in its first week, most of it from Apple Music, which is the only place where the album can be streamed in full. (Spotify has a few singles but not the full LP.)

The streaming tally for “Views” more than doubles the previous record of 115 million, set just a week ago by Beyoncé’s “Lemonade,” itself another streaming exclusive (with Tidal, in which Beyoncé is a partner); “Lemonade” drops to No. 2 this week with 196,000 sales and 97 million streams. Kanye West and Justin Bieber have both posted weeks of about 100 million streams, but in ordinary weeks the totals are usually less than 20 million.

The escalation of listening numbers show not only how quickly streaming has transformed the music industry but also the aggressive way that Apple and Tidal have been pursuing exclusives with top artists to lure fans and challenge Spotify’s dominance. (Spotify says it has 30 million paying subscribers around the world; Apple Music says it has 13 million; and Tidal reports having three million.) Drake spoke at the introduction of Apple Music last June, and the company has had a deal with him since then that includes a show, “OVO Sound,” as part of Apple’s Beats 1 Internet radio service. This week, Drake’s “One Dance,” which is on “Views,” is the No. 1 single.

Notably for Apple, the success of “Views” shows that fans still have a strong appetite to buy the download version of the album — which costs $13.99 — even when the streaming version of the same record is available through Apple Music, which costs $9.99 a month but has a free three-month trial period.

Also this week, Prince has two albums in the top 5 — “Purple Rain” is No. 3 and “The Very Best of Prince” is No. 4 — and Rihanna’s “Anti” is No. 5. A new album from Rob Zombie, “The Electric Warlock Acid Witch Satanic Orgy Celebration Dispenser,” opens at No. 6, and Vol. 58 of the pop compilation series “Now That’s What I Call Music!” starts at No. 7.


