


A 70,000-pound whale just washed up dead on the beach. What do you do?

That is the question confronting the authorities in Southern California this week after the 43-foot carcass of a gray whale came ashore in San Clemente on a cramped stretch of beach that is also one of the state’s most popular spot for surfers.

Figuring out how to remove it has been complicated.

Spectators have gathered to gawk at the animal’s hulking body since it made landfall on Sunday afternoon in an area of San Onofre State Beach called the Lower Trestles, said Kevin Pearsall, a public safety superintendent for the Orange Coast district of the California State Parks Department. Interest from the news media has been high, too.

“You would think it was the first whale that ever washed up on the beach,” he said.

Officials have labored to find a quick, effective way to remove the animal. But there are many factors to consider:

Officials must find a method that will not upset spectators (some have become emotionally invested in the dead whale).

“It’s sensitive because it’s such a majestic creature and people have very fond ideas about whales and their beauty, so for people to see one dead on the beach, it’s a very nostalgic moment,” Mr. Pearsall said.

One onlooker, Cynthia Stern, told The Associated Press she had driven 75 miles to lay an orchid by the whale and to rub its rotting flesh with homeopathic balms.

“You could start to feel the positive energy as you walked down the beach,” she said. “Even though it’s a carcass, it’s profoundly positive — and anyone who went there is blessed.”

Two of the go-to methods for disposing of a whale carcass are hauling it back out to the ocean and leaving it to the elements, or burying it right there on the beach where it landed. Mr. Pearsall said the latter method was “quicker, safer and a little bit more polite” to the animal.

But neither of those options is possible at the Lower Trestles. Ocean currents and high winds raise the risk that it could wash back ashore. Plus, the beach is simply too small, and the whale too big to be buried beneath its sand.

The fisheries division of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration must authorize the removal because “all body parts, alive or dead, are protected” by the Marine Mammal Protection Act, said Regina Asmutis-Silvia, the executive director of Whale and Dolphin Conservation, North America.

“They don’t want anyone killing animals, saying they found them dead, and then selling their teeth or bones,” she said.

On Wednesday, Mr. Pearsall said the authorities had decided to partner with an outside group to cut the whale into “appropriate, efficient” pieces and haul them to a landfill. That process will begin by Thursday morning, he said.

“We are trying to encourage people not to come look at the procedure,” he said. “It does sound gross, if you think of all the whale blubber. And now that it’s deceased, I don’t know what kind of fluid it’s got. It does not sound like it would be a pretty experience to cut it open.”

One thing the authorities never considered was blowing up the whale, Mr. Pearsall said. That was done in 1970, after a 45-foot, eight-ton gray whale washed ashore in Florence, Ore.

The explosion launched dangerous chunks of whale flesh in all directions, one of which crushed the passenger compartment of a car parked a quarter of a mile away. Video of a news report from the time has been viewed more than 1.5 million times on YouTube.

“I’ve been sent that YouTube video three times,” Mr. Pearsall said. “It’s been overwhelming how many people have had ideas about this, who have called or emailed and said, ‘Well I think you should do this or do that.’”

Between 10 and 20 dead whales wash ashore each year in California, a reflection of the large population of humpback and gray whales whose migration routes are along the coast, said Justin Viezbicke, the California Stranding Network coordinator for NOAA Fisheries, which conducted a partial necropsy on the whale carcass.

So how did this whale die? Mr. Viezbicke said that would probably never be known.

“The carcass was pretty rotten when it came to shore — it had been floating for a number of days — and with really far-gone carcasses it’s hard for us to get information,” he said.

The large number of people who use the Lower Trestles and who had gathered in recent days to see the whale were factors, too.

“We would have to open it up to do a full necrosis and there are concerns about doing that because of the high human use of the area,” he said. “Any time you take apart a 43-foot-long whale, it tends to get a little messy.”


