


BUCHAREST, Romania — The Romanian government on Tuesday approved legislation that would give priority to restitution claims by Holocaust survivors for property lost during World War II and under Communist rule. The move was seen as a small acknowledgment of the treatment of Romanian Jews during the war.

Most of those affected by the legislation are in their 80s and 90s, and have been trying to recover their property for many years.

“This is important because the legislation addresses not only the practical problems, but also acknowledges the history, which is essential,” said Gideon Taylor, the chairman of the World Jewish Restitution Organization, which has held meetings with Romanian politicians over the past year.

Romania, an ally of Nazi Germany until 1944, when it switched sides, had a prewar Jewish population of about 800,000. Today that number is about 11,000. A report in 2004 by an international commission led by the Romanian-born Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel estimated that during the war years, 280,000 to 380,000 Jews died in Romania and areas under its control.

Many Jews had their land and property seized and were sent to ghettos or labor camps. Those who survived then found their property nationalized by Romania’s Communist leadership, which ruled from 1947 until 1989.

Since the 1989 revolution that led to the fall of the Communist dictator Nicolae Ceausescu, tens of thousands of restitution cases have been brought forward seeking the return of property. These cases can drag on for decades, and more than 40,000 claims remain today, all of which were filed before a deadline in 2003.

Sari Yalon, who lived in the northern region of Bucovina, said all the Jews there were deported in October 1941. “We left our house with only what we could carry with us,” she said by telephone from her home in Tel Aviv.

“My parents and I survived, but my grandparents and other family didn’t come back,” she added.

Ms. Yalon, 90, is trying to reclaim the three-story house that her father-in-law built in the 1930s.

“I don’t know if this will help,” she said. “Romania will find every excuse possible not to pay.”

She added: “We want justice and compensation. It was my husband’s family’s property. Romania has had it for so many years, profiting. I don’t need the money, but I don’t want them to just have it.”

Her husband died four months ago.


