


Connor Cook won more games than any other quarterback in Michigan State history. Andrew Billings was coming off a dominant season on Baylor’s defensive line.

It did not mean much in the N.F.L. draft.

Cook watched as six quarterbacks were taken off the board before he was selected by Oakland with the second pick of the fourth round on Saturday in Chicago, and Billings went to Cincinnati at No. 122 after it had looked as if he could be a first-round pick.

“Anytime you see another quarterback get drafted in front of you, it hurts,” Cook said. “I’m a competitor.”

Oakland has Derek Carr, who threw for 32 touchdowns last season, but it traded up to take Cook in front of Dallas out of fear that the Cowboys might be looking for a potential successor to Tony Romo. Dallas then selected a quarterback later in the round when it took Mississippi State’s Dak Prescott at No. 135.

The 6-foot-4 Cook set team records with 9,194 yards passing and 71 touchdown passes for the Spartans. But questions about his 57.5 percent completion rate and his leadership skills pushed him down the board.

Billings, a little over 6 feet and 300-plus pounds, was another top name on the board coming into the day. He led the Bears with 15 tackles for loss.

Minnesota chose one of the draft’s biggest wild cards when it took wide receiver Moritz Boehringer in the sixth round. Boehringer played in the German Football League last season. According to the N.F.L., Boehringer is the first player from Europe drafted without having played in college.

Southern Mississippi safety Kalan Reed is the new Mr. Irrelevant, going to Tennessee with the last pick.

Long before Reed and the Titans closed out the proceedings, the impressive showing for Ohio State continued on the draft’s third day. Linebacker Joshua Perry went to San Diego at No. 102, and quarterback Cardale Jones was drafted by Buffalo with the last pick of the fourth.

Jones helped Ohio State win the national championship in 2014, and Perry made 105 tackles during his senior year with the Buckeyes, who had 10 players selected in the first three rounds, a record for the modern era of the draft since 1967.

After Jones went to the Bills, the next quarterback off the board was Stanford’s Kevin Hogan, to Kansas City at No. 162. Baltimore drafted the Navy star Keenan Reynolds in the sixth round, but he is expected to transition to wide receiver after rushing for a Division I-record 88 touchdowns with the Midshipmen.

Jacksonville continued its defensive focus when it selected Notre Dame tackle Sheldon Day at No. 103. Day had four sacks and two forced fumbles for the Irish this season.

The Jaguars also selected three defensive players in the first three rounds, including Florida State cornerback Jalen Ramsey at No. 5 over all and U.C.L.A. linebacker Myles Jack in the second.

Baltimore used three of its five fourth-round picks on offensive players. Kenneth Dixon, a running back from Louisiana Tech, could be an immediate contributor after he rushed for 1,141 yards and caught 34 passes for 467 yards as a senior.

Among the other noteworthy picks were some players with family ties to the N.F.L.

Wisconsin fullback Derek Watt, the brother of the Texans’ star defensive end J. J. Watt, was drafted by San Diego at No. 198. Florida running back Kelvin Taylor, the son of the former Jacksonville standout Fred Taylor, was selected by San Francisco in the sixth round. Illinois guard Ted Karras, who has numerous family connections to the league, went to New England at No. 221.

The Cowboys took the Baylor basketball player Rico Gathers late in the sixth round. Gathers will try to make it in the N.F.L. as a tight end.

COLTS TALKING WITH LUCK Jim Irsay, the Indianapolis owner, said that negotiations on Andrew Luck’s contract extension were getting serious and that a deal could be reached before training camp.

The obstacle does not seem to be money. Irsay has said he planned to pay market value for Luck, his franchise quarterback.

FALCONS SEEKING FREE AGENTS Atlanta began recruiting undrafted free agents before the final round of the draft. The Falcons are emphasizing the recent success of undrafted free agents in making the roster and even starting.


