


THE THANK YOU BOOK Written and illustrated by Mo Willems 57 pp. Hyperion. $9.99. (Early reader; ages 4 to 7)

Ending a long-running, beloved series with some kind of unexpected creative bang while not ticking off your loyal fans is hard — just ask Jerry Seinfeld or David Chase. Perhaps Mo Willems, who started out as a TV guy — he has six Emmys to show for his time as a writer and animator on “Sesame Street” — had in mind the final episodes of “Seinfeld” and “The Sopranos” when he conceived the 25th and last book in the Elephant & Piggie series. The backlash against those classic TV series’ endings was swift and merciless (many thought “Seinfeld’s” was too preposterous, that of “The Sopranos” too baffling). Willems has gone in the polar opposite direction: “The Thank You Book” not only sticks to what made the series great, it wraps its fans in a grateful, valedictory embrace. There’s even a goody bag of sorts at the end — an Elephant & Piggie stand-up card saying, “Thank YOU for being a reader!”

But first, the book offers a solid helping of the two best friends’ usual spirited, comic back-and-forthing, with their famously well-developed personalities — Gerald the Elephant is a Negative Nelly, Piggie is antic and blithe — on full display. This time, Gerald may have outdone himself in finding a non-worry to worry about. As the two chums sit peacefully back to back on the title page, a rare serene smile on Gerald’s face as he dozes, Piggie thinks, “I am one lucky pig.” She decides to “get thanking,” declaring that she’ll thank “everyone who is important to me.”

This jolts Gerald awake. He tells her he’s sure she’ll forget someone. She props her hoof up on his shin feistily as she grits her teeth and promises: “I. Will. Thank. EVERYONE.”

What follows is a tour de force of Willems showmanship: He brings back every character who has ever made an appearance in an Elephant & Piggie book — as well as the Pigeon, a character from another Willems series entirely. Piggie thanks the ice cream dispensing Penguin from “Should I Share My Ice Cream?,” who replies, “It is what I do.” She thanks Brian Bat from “My New Friend Is So Fun!” for drawing with her; he replies, “That was fun!” The fun is of the heartwarming, family-reunion variety, until the Pigeon shows up and Willems shows off some of his sharper-elbowed comedy chops. Piggie thanks the cheeky bird for “never giving up,” adding an apology because “you do not get to be in our books.” The pigeon — who, true Willems fans will recall, has photobombed the endpapers of all the Elephant & Piggie books — replies, “That is what you think.”

As Piggie works through the list, Gerald pipes up with increasing intensity to tell her she’s forgetting someone important. You’re sure he means himself, and for several pages, suspense builds. But Piggie hauls in others to thank, until he gets right in her face and his point seems to dawn on her. She crumples and says, “I goofed.” Gerald gets a big thanks and a hug as she tells him he’s the best friend a pig could ever have.

But then comes the final twist — Gerald was not talking about himself at all: Of course she was going to thank him. He stands on his head as he tells her the person he knew she was going to forget: “Our reader.” Face bright red, Piggie acknowledges that he’s right. There’s an almost impossibly sweet yet graphically sophisticated moment in which Piggie seems to step toward the front of the page as she looks out, sincerely, at readers. She thanks us. “We could not be ‘us’ without you,” Gerald adds. “You are the best!” Piggie says, forefeet wrapped around her heart.

It’s a moment that reminds you of the wonderful dual nature of the series. They are marvelous picture books to read aloud to a very little child, but their truest home is as early readers, for those who are just learning to get through a book on their own. (Notice that Elephant and Piggie manage to conduct their banter without contractions, and with precious few challenging words or long phrases.) These are in many ways the trickiest books to make, because they have to be easy enough to read without being boring or rote. But the task could not be more important, for individual children and for society — as Dr. Seuss noted many decades ago, they’re the front lines of the effort to create eager readers and a literate culture of critical thinkers.

By the end of “The Thank You Book,” there is something that feels almost sacramental going on, as if all the thanking is marking not just the end of the series but some timeless rite of passage, the initiation into reading, which after all depends on support from so many. As it turns out, in the fall Willems is going to be launching a new imprint of early readers called “Elephant & Piggie Like Reading,” written by various children’s authors and illustrators. Willems has said that Elephant and Piggie will introduce each book, having graduated into a new role, like the kids they have helped become readers.


