


PARIS — Last week, the international soccer star Zlatan Ibrahimovic, captain of the Swedish national team, scheduled a news conference in Paris at precisely 5 p.m., three days before the start of the European Championship in France. Speculation began that the 34-year-old Swedish striker, who last month quit Paris St.-Germain of Ligue 1 after four seasons, was going to announce that he had signed with Manchester United in the English Premier League, a major score in professional soccer. But in Zlatan style, he zigged instead of zagged and faked them all out.

He wasn’t joining another team — at least not yet. He was jumping onto the athleisure bandwagon.

So began the unveiling of A-Z, a new activewear brand in a highly limited palette (navy, gray, white, black, and dark red) with relatively simple lines. Produced in partnership with the Norwegian retail group Varner, it will be available online in 11 European countries, with plans to roll out globally.

A few hours before the announcement, Mr. Ibrahimovic, who is 6-foot-5 and was dressed in an A-Z navy training suit and white performance T-shirt, spoke with The New York Times about the new company, his life philosophy and his view of fashion.

Why start a clothing brand?

After 15 years of working with brands, including Puma and Nike, I had the dream to see other people wear my own brand. I know how brands work. They say: “Put on this shirt and you’ll become stronger. Put on the pants and you’ll become faster.” But it’s not about the gear at all. It’s about you and what you want to do. Everybody has the possibility. You just need to take it.

Why did you call the company A-Z?

You can look at it in different ways. In training, you can bring it from A to Z. Or it can be the time it takes, from A to Z. Or it can be from amateur to Zlatan.

You aren’t the first Swedish athlete to do sportswear. The tennis legend Bjorn Borg has a line, too.

He has underwear, I believe.

I think there’s more to it than that.

Like those little shorts?

We did love those little shorts. Did you get any inspiration from what he’s done?

Of course, you get inspiration from other athletes and what they do. And it’s a challenge and a risk to go into something that you don’t have experience in. But I have a business partner, Varner, who has been successful in clothing, just not in the sports domain. That’s where I come in. It’s a good combination.

Did you help design the clothes or test-drive them?

I’ve tried every single sample and given my opinion. When I put my name on a product, whatever it is, it has to be real. I want to stand in front of everybody and say: “This is me.”

How did this project come about?

I was supposed to do an underwear ad for (Varner’s men’s wear brand) Dressmann. At the same time my deal with Nike had come to an end. We had talks, but we didn’t find an agreement. I said, “Why don’t I have my own brand?” And (Petter Varner, the company’s chief executive) made it happen.

You’ve started with men’s and children’s clothes. When’s the women’s line coming out?

It’s in progress. My wife, Helena, is on the team and giving her opinion: how it should look, the colors. She likes to train. She goes to the gym and keeps herself fit. Keep yourself healthy and you’ll be happy.

Do you follow fashion?

Not really. I know only one soccer player who understands fashion, and that is David Beckham. He is fashion. For me, dressing is about comfort, and if I feel comfortable, I feel good. That is my style. David is pure fashion.

Any designers you particularly like and wear?

Rick Owens. When I see him, I see myself, in the body shape, in the hair. And he’s cool: his attitude. He does his own thing and doesn’t care what anybody else says. It’s like when I say I believe in myself. It’s not important what other people tell me. What’s important is what I believe. And that’s what I see in him.

Do you know him?

No, but my wife sees him at the gym. He works out very well, she says, but in his street clothes. I need to send him some of my clothes. Then he can send me some of his.


