


TRENTON — Since just about the moment Alex Rodriguez grabbed his hamstring while running out a ground ball three weeks ago on a chilly night in Baltimore, Rodriguez and Yankees Manager Joe Girardi had repeatedly waved off the idea of a rehabilitation assignment.

As recently as Sunday, Girardi scoffed at the possibility.

“We’re not going to waste his at-bats in Triple-A,” Girardi said.

Class AA was apparently another matter. On Tuesday, while the Yankees were playing the Toronto Blue Jays at Yankee Stadium, Rodriguez was about 80 miles south, batting third as the designated hitter for the Trenton Thunder.

“We’re allowed to change our mind,” Girardi said before the game.

The change of plans came Monday after the Yankees returned from Oakland, Girardi said. General Manager Brian Cashman, the bench coach Rob Thomson, the hitting coach Alan Cockrell and the special adviser Gene Michael conducted a conference call and decided it would be best for Rodriguez to spend two days in Trenton. Girardi called Rodriguez to inform him of the plans, which do not call for him to join the Yankees on Friday against Tampa Bay as they begin a 10-game trip.

“As we sat and talked about it as a group, with Cash there on the phone, we just, we — I felt it was probably best that he got a couple days of at-bats,” Girardi said. “Three weeks sneaks up on you, and by the time you look up, it’s 21 days.”

Rodriguez knocked off some of the rust with two crisply hit ground-ball singles in four at-bats — he also popped up and grounded out — before leaving the game when it went into extra innings. He did little to test his hamstring, but he will play again in Trenton on Wednesday.

“I saw the ball surprisingly well,” Rodriguez said. “You take a three-week break, and you’re not sure how you’re going to react when you get in the box. I tracked it well and took a few good swings.”

Rodriguez spoke to a group of reporters in a small room near the Thunder’s clubhouse along the first-base line. It was not his first visit to Trenton, but the atmosphere was decidedly different than when he took questions in early August 2013. Then, he was on a rehabilitation assignment as he recovered from hip surgery, but he was also the subject of scrutiny as Major League Baseball was preparing to hand down a suspension for his role in the Biogenesis scandal.

Asked the difference between his last visit and this one, Rodriguez smiled. “Well, there’s no pink elephant in the room,” he said, reprising the term he had used in 2013 to describe the Yankees’ benefiting financially if he were given a lifetime ban.

When the rest of the Thunder had finished infield practice, Rodriguez bounded up the dugout steps with three bats in hand to take batting practice. He took several rounds and then retreated to the clubhouse.

The Thunder promoted Rodriguez’s appearance, advertising it with his image on the marquee board outside the stadium. In the hallways leading to the clubhouse, there were signed jerseys of other renowned Yankees who had made rehab appearances in Trenton — Roger Clemens, Derek Jeter, Bernie Williams and Andy Pettitte among them.

Rodriguez, who has been out since May 4, may have been familiar with some of his new teammates. Outfielders Tyler Austin and Lane Adams, shortstop Tyler Wade and catcher Kyle Higashioka were with Rodriguez during spring training. He said he was just happy to be in uniform.

“Well, Princeton’s down the street, so I feel a little smarter, which is hard to do for me,” Rodriguez said with a laugh. “I love spending time with the kids.”

The Yankees have hardly missed Rodriguez, going 14-6 without him and climbing to third place in the American League East. Rodriguez’s absence has allowed Carlos Beltran, 39, to shift mostly from right field to designated hitter, allowing his legs to stay fresh. It has also allowed the Yankees to play Aaron Hicks, a superior defender, in right field.

Beltran and Hicks have flourished. In 13 games at designated hitter in Rodriguez’s absence, Beltran was hitting .365 (19 for 52) with six home runs and 20 R.B.I. When Beltran has played right field in Rodriguez’s absence, he has hit .100 (2 for 20).

Hicks, who was hitting .067 as a fourth outfielder when Rodriguez was hurt, had started 16 of 18 games, hitting .286.

But as Rodriguez correctly noted, he is the one major right-handed power hitter in the Yankees’ lineup. He seemed to be getting his swing back after a slow start, hitting three home runs in his last five games before the injury.

“Any time Joe has options, it’s a great thing,” Rodriguez said. “I’ve been on a championship team. One of the things that was helpful for Joe was having a lot of options. The tougher it is for him to make a lineup, the better.”

Michael, the special adviser, and the assistant general manager Tim Naehring watched from behind home plate, but their presence was already planned. Watching Rodriguez to assess him was almost pointless, Michael said.

“He can tell more about how he’s swinging it than anybody watching him,” Michael said.


