


MOJAVE, Calif. — The world’s largest airplane by wingspan sits in a cradle of scaffolding as workers fit the remaining parts that will turn it into a flying launchpad for firing rockets into space.

Everything about this project, called Stratolaunch, screams bigness. The slogan “Think Big” is plastered on workers’ T-shirts and on posters around the hangar in the desert outside Los Angeles, where the plane is being assembled. The effort is being financed by the jumbo fortune of Paul G. Allen, the billionaire space enthusiast and a Microsoft founder.

The plane’s nickname is Roc, after the gigantic mythical bird that carried an elephant in its talons, though Stratolaunch executives are not crazy about it; it sounds like something not known for staying aloft.

A rare tour of the plane and hangar last week by executives working for Mr. Allen showed that the project was still underway, and on track to begin commercial operations before the end of the decade. But there are lingering questions about how Stratolaunch’s business will work once its flying behemoth is ready for takeoff.

“It’s an incredibly ambitious undertaking,” said Charles Beames, president of Vulcan Aerospace, the entity Mr. Allen created to oversee Stratolaunch and other space initiatives. “A really big plane means carrying anything from a really big rocket to a smaller rocket. That allows us to serve a broader set of customers.”

Mr. Allen unveiled Stratolaunch in 2011 with the goal of revolutionizing access to space, mostly for commercial satellite operators hungry for more efficient methods of getting into orbit. Mr. Allen lured the renowned aerospace engineer Burt Rutan out of retirement to help with the project. A decade earlier, Mr. Allen financed Mr. Rutan’s efforts to build SpaceShipOne, a rocket-powered plane that in 2004 won the $10 million Ansari X Prize as the first private-crewed spacecraft to reach space.

Stratolaunch bought two used Boeing 747s from United Airlines, removed most of their critical parts and is now reassembling them into one carrier plane with a new shell made of lightweight graphite composites. It is hoped that the plane will take off with a rocket slung underneath, which it would then drop from an altitude of more than 30,000 feet, sending it on its way to space.

Other private space ventures, including Blue Origin, funded by Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, and SpaceX, founded by the tech entrepreneur Elon Musk, are trying to reduce the costs of getting into space by operating reusable rockets that launch from and land back on Earth. (On Sunday, Blue Origin conducted another successful test of its New Shepard rocket, launching and landing the same rocket for the fourth time.)

Stratolaunch executives said an airborne launcher would have other advantages, like the ability to simply fly to patches of clear sky to avoid foul weather that could scrub a mission. They also say their plane can easily move to areas that are better suited for launching satellites into certain orbits, although the plane needs a landing strip that can handle its great size.

The wingspan of Stratolaunch’s airplane stretches 385 feet. A football field could fit on top of the plane’s wings and there would still be extra room for a few rows of bleachers. The Spruce Goose, the flying boat designed by Howard Hughes that flew only once, has a wingspan of about 320 feet.

There has been tumult around aspects of Stratolaunch.

Its partnerships ended with SpaceX and Orbital ATK. Stratolaunch had worked with them both to develop rockets for blasting satellites into space from the plane. And questions have been raised about whether there would be enough business — given the trend toward smaller satellites — for such a large plane.

In an interview, Mr. Beames said that Stratolaunch, which will be able to carry payloads of over 500,000 pounds, was the right size. “It’s definitely not overbuilt,” he said. “What the size gives us is flexibility in payload.”

Bill Ostrove, a space systems analyst at Forecast International, an aerospace and defense research firm, says the real demand for Stratolaunch’s services will be determined by its ability to serve the small-satellite launch market, which is extremely competitive.

“If Stratolaunch can figure out its strategy and develop a working rocket, it should be able to capture some business, as long as the small-satellite market continues to grow and demand for launch vehicles continues,” he said.

During the tour last week, workers with Scaled Composites, the company founded by Mr. Rutan that is building the plane, were positioning panels on the twin fuselages of the plane and grinding surfaces down to a smooth finish. Over 300 people are working on the craft.

The assembly of the plane, inside a cavernous hangar built especially for it, is more than three-quarters finished. The size of the plane is difficult to comprehend. The top of its tail wing is nearly four stories from the ground.

Tucked away in corners of the hangar are the landing gear components from the two 747s. The new plane will use six of the eight Pratt & Whitney engines Stratolaunch acquired when it bought the 747s. The plane’s cockpit is being outfitted with electronics, crew seats and windows from the 747s.

Mr. Beames said Stratolaunch would announce new partnerships in the coming months that will fill out details about the project. He declined to say when Stratolaunch would begin test flights, but he vowed to meet a goal of Mr. Allen’s to be up and running by 2020.

“Come hell or high water, you can be sure we’ll do that,” Mr. Beames said.


