


Not only was Jahmal Lightfoot so brutally beaten by correction officers that his eye sockets were fractured, he was accused — falsely — of instigating the attack. And as punishment he was placed alone in a cell for up to 23 hours a day for nearly four months.

For Mr. Lightfoot, an inmate at Rikers Island, that was just how life was.

The guilty verdicts this week against five current and former Rikers officers in the 2012 beating and cover-up did more than just yield justice for Mr. Lightfoot. They were also a sweeping indictment of the New York City’s long-troubled jail complex at a time when it has come under intensifying criticism over what many see as a deeply entrenched culture of violence and corruption.

The trial opened a window into a level of abuse and misconduct inside the sprawling complex with about 8,000 inmates that helped lead to efforts at reforming Rikers.

The five officers were convicted of all charges on Tuesday by a jury in State Supreme Court in the Bronx, including first-degree attempted gang assault, which carries a prison sentence of up to 15 years. A sixth officer was acquitted of taking part in the cover-up. Three other officers, who have allowed the judge presiding over the trial to decide, are still awaiting their verdicts.

“That something like this could even happen — with this number of correction officers — demonstrates how deplorable the conditions were at Rikers when this happened,” said Sanford Rubenstein, a lawyer who represents Mr. Lightfoot in a lawsuit against the city over the beating.

Again and again during the trial, Mr. Lightfoot, city investigators and other witnesses recounted the spate of stabbings and slashings among inmates — often fueled by gang rivalries — that enveloped the jail in violence and prompted precautions that some inmates saw as indignities. Guards routinely ordered the inmates to strip for body searches, checked inside their mouths, walked them through metal detectors, and tossed their mattresses and cells looking for weapons.

Jamaal Brooks, a former Rikers inmate, testified that officers would sometimes “disrespect” inmates, and punish them unnecessarily. “I want the same respect I give you,” Mr. Brooks said on the stand. “If you threaten me, I’m going to threaten you.”

Mr. Brooks added that inmates often received harsh punishments for even minor infractions. Some inmates were punished with weeks, even months, in lockdown in “the box,” a section of the jail where inmates were confined to their cells for up to 23 hours a day.

Mr. Lightfoot, who was sent to Rikers in 2010 after being arrested on suspicion of snatching a woman’s pocketbook, was no stranger to the box. He had racked up infractions during his time at Rikers, including being caught with a weapon fashioned out of a battery that he said he needed to protect himself from other inmates.

Such grievances only worsened tensions within the jail complex, leading in some cases to violence against both guards and inmates. Darcel D. Clark, the Bronx district attorney, who sat in the front row as the verdicts were read in the Lightfoot case, said afterward that “this trial provided a glimpse of how violence permeated Rikers Island and fueled a sense of lawlessness.”

She added, “Inmate attacks on correction officers led to an ‘us versus them’ mentality that justified, for some officers, use of excessive force.”

Prosecutors said that Eliseo Perez Jr., a former assistant chief for security at the jail, had ordered his men to teach Mr. Lightfoot a lesson because the inmate thought he was a tough guy. Mr. Lightfoot, now 31, testified that he was unarmed when he was led into a small cell covered by a sheet. He said it was “open season” for the officers to pummel him with their fists and boots as he curled up in a fetal position to shield himself.

As he was recovering from his injuries, Mr. Lightfoot said he was summoned to an internal disciplinary hearing and shown a photo of a crude, U-shaped piece of metal that prosecutors said had been planted as part of the cover up. He was told he was being charged with assault on staff and refusal of a direct order. He was found guilty and spent 110 days in the box.

“This trial shined a spotlight on how bad the situation was in Rikers for the inmates,” Mr. Rubenstein said.

City correction officials said that they had taken “aggressive steps” in recent years to overhaul the recruitment and training of officers, and improve their professionalism.

“We are giving our officers the tools they need to manage inmate behavior without resorting to unnecessary force — and we have stepped up investigations and enforcement divisions to probe any unnecessary uses of force and malfeasance,” said Eve Kessler, a spokeswoman for the department. “Officers and inmates alike are benefiting from less serious violence in our jails.”

Mark G. Peters, the commissioner of the Department of Investigation, which helped investigate the Lightfoot case, said that the episode had opened the door for other complaints about alleged inmate brutality and corruption at Rikers. The arrest of Mr. Perez, a high-ranking member of the Correction Department, and the other officers had shown that no one was above the law, he said.

“There’s a sense now that someone is watching what’s going on, which starts to make Rikers feel less isolated from scrutiny,” Mr. Peters said.

In the past two years, Mr. Peters’ department has led an investigation of Rikers that has resulted in the arrest of 31 correction officers and staff members, some on suspicion of gang-related crimes. The most recent arrests include those of two officers who were accused of smuggling in scalpels and drugs as part of an operation that city investigators said was run mainly by three subgroups of the Bloods gang.

“Rikers is better than it was in 2012,” Mr. Peters said. “But that doesn’t mean the problem is fixed. We’re still a long way from that.”


