


Even when he is not at his best, the left-hander Chris Sale is usually good enough to carry the Chicago White Sox to victory.

Such was the case Sunday, when Sale grinded through an up-and-down outing.

Sale took a shutout into the sixth inning, Brett Lawrie homered for the third straight day and the White Sox beat the host Baltimore Orioles, 7-1, for a split of a four-game series.

Off to the best start of his career at 6-0, Sale allowed one run, five hits and four walks over five and one-third innings. He is the first White Sox pitcher to win his first six starts in a season since Jon Garland was 8-0 in 2005.

DODGERS 1, PADRES 0 Clayton Kershaw pitched a three-hitter, struck out 14 and singled home the game’s only run for host Los Angeles.

Kershaw ended the Dodgers’ six-game losing streak with his 13th shutout and his 22nd complete game in 248 career starts.

Kershaw, a three-time National League Cy Young Award winner, walked none and retired the first 14 batters.

NATIONALS 6, CARDINALS 1 Max Scherzer struck out nine and did not allow a runner past first base in seven innings, and Washington completed a three-game sweep in St. Louis.

Clint Robinson and Danny Espinosa hit back-to-back home runs, providing the power for Washington on a day when Bryce Harper, the N.L. most valuable player, struck out four times.

TIGERS 6, TWINS 5 Jarrod Saltalamacchia doubled home the go-ahead run in the eighth inning in Minneapolis, and Nick Castellanos hit a three-run homer in Detroit’s fifth straight victory.

Saltalamacchia’s drive to left field off reliever Ryan Pressly allowed Justin Upton to score from first. Twins shortstop Eduardo Escobar bobbled the ball on the relay throw.

ROCKIES 6, DIAMONDBACKS 3 Nolan Arenado hit his major-league-leading 11th home run as Colorado completed a three-game sweep in Phoenix.

Arenado hit a two-run shot in the sixth, one inning after Gerardo Parra hit a solo drive.

REDS 6, PIRATES 5 Scott Schebler hit an R.B.I. double in the 11th inning, and visiting Cincinnati ended a six-game losing streak.

Eugenio Suarez led off in the 11th with a triple past the diving left fielder Starling Marte and scored on Schebler’s hit off Ryan Vogelsong.

BRAVES 4, CUBS 3 Daniel Castro singled and scored on Nick Markakis’s sacrifice fly in the 10th inning, as visiting Atlanta won for just the sixth time in 24 games.

BREWERS 14, MARLINS 5 Chris Carter went 3 for 5 with two homers to lead host Milwaukee’s season-high 18-hit barrage.

ROYALS 4, MARINERS 1 Eric Hosmer homered, Ian Kennedy took a shutout into the sixth and visiting Kansas City ended a 27-inning scoreless streak.

PHILLIES 2, INDIANS 1 Vince Velasquez lowered his E.R.A. to 1.44 with two-hit ball over six scoreless innings, and host Philadelphia earned its sixth straight win.

BLUE JAYS 5, RAYS 1 Marcus Stroman allowed one run in eight innings on his 25th birthday, and Troy Tulowitzki hit a three-run homer for visiting Toronto.

ANGELS 9, RANGERS 6 Kole Calhoun got three hits and drove in two runs as Los Angeles avoided a series sweep and ended Texas’ four-game winning streak.

ASTROS 2, ATHLETICS 1 Jose Altuve homered leading off a game for the fourth time this season — one of just two hits by Houston — as Houston avoided a series sweep in Oakland.


