


WASHINGTON — There is a sequence in the movie “Beverly Hills Cop” in which three men carry a protesting Eddie Murphy across the lobby of a building and fling him through a window. Glass scatters everywhere, and within seconds, a police car pulls up.

When the officers tell him to stand and put his hands on the hood, an incredulous Murphy asks what he is being charged with.

Disturbing the peace, he is told.

That scene came to mind 4 minutes 13 seconds into the first period Saturday night at Verizon Center, where whatever sliver of peace that existed during the Washington Capitals’ playoff series with the Pittsburgh Penguins vanished.

After Penguins defenseman Olli Maatta released a shot on goal, Washington defenseman Brooks Orpik leveled him with a late shoulder to the head, causing him to fall backward. Two teammates helped Maatta up and off the ice, and he wobbled down a tunnel, not to be seen for the rest of Pittsburgh’s 2-1 series-evening victory, and perhaps even longer.

As for Orpik, he skated over to an official, apparently dubious of any transgression, and then to the penalty box.

Two minutes.

For interference.

By the letter of the N.H.L. rule book, Orpik did interfere with Maatta — with his cognitive functions. The immediate punishment evoked Murphy’s response as police officers shoved him in the back seat: If he had been pushed out of a moving car, what would he be charged with then? Jaywalking?

It was the type of hit, reckless and indefensible, that warranted a five-minute match penalty. It was the type of hit that ratchets up the nastiness quotient beyond the standard hostility that develops between rivals during the course of a series.

“I thought it was a target to his head,” said Pittsburgh Coach Mike Sullivan, who, though teammates suggested Maatta had sustained a concussion, did not offer any updates on his condition except to say that he was not optimistic that he would play Monday. “It’s the type of hit that everyone in hockey is trying to remove from the game.”

It was the type of hit, particularly in this age of increased concussion awareness, that merits swift action from the league, whose department of player safety reacted on Sunday by suspending Orpik for three games, beginning with Game 3 Monday night in Pittsburgh.

In a video explaining its ruling, the N.H.L. said that Maatta should not have been expecting to be hit, and that Orpik, “entirely in control” on the play, administered a blow that was “unacceptably high and excessively late.”

“It looked bad — I mean, you could word it however you want,” said the Penguins star center Sidney Crosby, who missed parts of two seasons because of concussion symptoms. He added: “To see your teammate in that bad situation and see him stumbling, you know it’s not good. I don’t think you ever get used to seeing that.”

But more than anything, it was also the type of hit that Orpik should be sensitive about. On April 18, Orpik was rammed into the glass by a hard — but legal — check from Philadelphia center Ryan White and crumpled to his knees, dazed.

As ugly as his hit on Maatta seemed, it was Orpik’s reaction — his lack of responsiveness, his distant stare while being helped up — that looked worse, and scarier.

Orpik missed the final three games against Philadelphia, and sat out for 10 days, cleared a few hours before Game 1 against the Penguins on Thursday night. He will miss time again, now because of his own doing.

The Capitals declined requests to make Orpik available to the news media on Saturday night, but his coach, Barry Trotz, after speaking with him, relayed an explanation mired in half-truths.

Even if, as Trotz said, Orpik thought Maatta might emerge from his crouch, and even if Orpik did not intend to hit him that high, there is no possible reason, based on the angle of the shot, for thinking the puck would carom back to where Maatta was.

“If you know anything about Brooks, he plays hard, he plays clean, he’s not a dirty player,” Trotz said. “The Pittsburgh people know that.”

Across his 13-year career, Orpik has fashioned a reputation as rugged and reliable, beloved by teammates but a nuisance to everyone else. He spent the first 11 seasons in Pittsburgh, where he mentored Maatta, now 21, who also has a history of concussions. So does Kris Letang, whom Orpik punched in the head in the second period. No penalty was called.

“If they’re going to let that go, it’s fine,” Letang said. “It’s going to be equal for every team.”

Orpik’s was the third suspension levied this postseason for excessive force. All have involved Washington. The Flyers received the first two suspensions, and they were well deserved: for Pierre-Edouard Bellemare’s brutal hit from behind on Dmitry Orlov and Brayden Schenn’s charging T. J. Oshie.

Philadelphia was the aggressor in that series, compensating for its comparative lack of skill and depth by striving to agitate the Capitals, who for whatever reason have adopted a similar approach against Pittsburgh. If Washington’s intent has been to goad the Penguins into taking retaliatory penalties or adjusting their style to reflect the increase in physicality, it has failed so far.

“A lot of teams try to slow us down or try to be extra physical against us, and we know if we get sucked into that then we’re getting away from our game and we’re not productive that way,” Crosby said. “I think it’s pretty clear that we know if we get caught up in that, we put ourselves in a bad position.”

Even before Saturday, the Penguins were furious with Washington, whose professional pest, Tom Wilson, was fined — though not suspended — for delivering a knee-to-knee hit against the rookie Conor Sheary in Game 1.

Wilson called it accidental, saying that their legs got tangled, and Sheary did not comment much, other than calling it “a hockey play.”

There were plenty of appealing hockey plays in Game 2, from Matt Murray’s gorgeous save of a Nicklas Backstrom one-timer to the former Capital Eric Fehr’s fending off Orpik to score the winning goal with 4:28 left. But the lasting image is of a player on his knees, unable to stand, an absent look in his eyes, a head injury sustained, and needlessly at that.


