


HARRISBURG, Pa. — A judge in Philadelphia said that insurers in litigation with Penn State asserted that in 1976, a boy told Joe Paterno, the university’s football coach at the time, that he had been molested by Jerry Sandusky, the website PennLive reported Thursday.

An order by the judge, Gary Glazer, also cited reports by unidentified assistant coaches that they had witnessed inappropriate contact between Sandusky, a former Penn State assistant, and children, PennLive said.

Glazer wrote in a decision on insurance coverage for Sandusky-related claims that there was “no evidence that reports of these incidents ever went further up the chain of command at PSU.”

Sandusky is serving 30 to 60 years in state prison on a 45-count conviction on child sexual abuse charges for instances, going back to back to the 1990s, involving 10 boys.

Paterno went to university higher-ups with a graduate assistant’s 2001 report of Sandusky abusing a child in a team shower and told a grand jury in 2011 that he did not know of any other similar events involving Sandusky.

“I do not know of anything else that Jerry would be involved in of that nature, no,” Paterno testified 10 months before Sandusky was first charged in 2011, along with two university administrators accused of covering up complaints about him. “I do not know of it.”

The Paterno family lawyer, Wick Sollers, told PennLive that there was no evidence to corroborate the new disclosure and that Paterno had never covered up Sandusky’s actions.

“Through all of this review there has never been any evidence of inappropriate conduct by Coach Paterno,” Sollers said. “To the contrary, the evidence clearly shows he shared information with his superiors as appropriate.”

Paterno also told The Washington Post in 2011 that he knew nothing about a 1998 police investigation into a mother’s complaint about Sandusky showering with her son.

A Penn State spokesman, Lawrence Lokman, told PennLive that university officials involved in the Sandusky scandal’s legal fallout knew broadly of the insurance case’s allegations.

“Many, many people, potential victims and victims have come forward to the university as part” of the settlement process, Lokman said.

Paterno had an unparalleled coaching career at Penn State but was fired in the months between Sandusky’s arrest and his own death from lung cancer in 2012.

Three administrators who worked with him as high-ranking university officials await trial on criminal charges over their handling of the Sandusky scandal.

Sandusky is appealing his conviction and on Thursday was granted a hearing on May 20.

Judge John Cleland said the hearing would “provide the defense with an opportunity to prove” claims that prosecutors lied, withheld evidence and leaked secret grand jury information to find additional victims as it seeks to have charges dismissed against Sandusky, or to be granted a new trial.


