


The Music Box Theater on Broadway has been packing in the crowds for weeks, with theatergoers eager to see a starry but unfamiliar musical, “Shuffle Along,” even as that jazz-and-tap show is still being revised in previews.

But now comes the moment of judgment: Is it any good?

And another very important question: Is it new?

The lead producer of “Shuffle Along,” Scott Rudin, is planning to argue that the musical is a revival, according to a spokesman. That would allow it to sidestep a head-to-head competition with “Hamilton,” the show that is presumed to have a lock on the Tony Award for best new musical.

The issue might sound arcane, but it has significant financial implications, because Tony Awards can drive ticket sales.

“If you’re a producer, and you want to win an award, this year you want to be a revival,” said John Breglio, an entertainment lawyer and the author of a new book, “I Wanna Be a Producer.”

But the question is complicated, because this production of “Shuffle Along,” a show that first opened in 1921 as one of Broadway’s earliest all-black musicals, features songs from the original but an almost entirely new book. It is arguably as much a production about “Shuffle Along” as it is a production of “Shuffle Along.”

The issue is being closely watched within the theater industry because the show involves Broadway’s most prolific producer, some of its most virtuosic performers and a much-honored creative team. The musical, capitalized at up to $12 million, will be the last opening of a packed Broadway season when its curtain rises next Thursday.

“I’ve never known a case quite like this,” said the veteran Broadway producer Elizabeth I. McCann. “The descriptions make it sound like a new musical, but that wouldn’t make the producer very happy because he’d be up against ‘Hamilton,’ and that would be it.”

But there is some precedent to support Mr. Rudin’s view. In several recent instances, awards administrators have deemed heavily reworked shows, with new books, to be revivals — a possible outcome in this situation.

“If it’s a title we’ve seen before, that tends to go toward the revival notion, even if it’s substantially rewritten,” said Theodore S. Chapin, the president of Rodgers & Hammerstein. Mr. Chapin is no stranger to this issue: He has represented the rights holders on three productions that were declared revivals, despite substantial revisions, including “Flower Drum Song,” “Cinderella” and “Annie Get Your Gun.” Mr. Chapin is also a member of the Tony Awards committee that will decide whether “Shuffle Along” is a new musical or a revival.

“Shuffle Along” has been revived twice before, in 1933 and 1952. The current production is an unusual version with an expanded title — “Shuffle Along, or, the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed” — that tries to explain its larger ambitions. The show stars Audra McDonald, a six-time Tony winner, as well as Brian Stokes Mitchell, Billy Porter, Brandon Victor Dixon and Joshua Henry.

The production is still being altered through the previews process, but many of the songs in the version onstage this week, including not only the title number but also “Love Will Find a Way,” “Honeysuckle Time” and “I’m Just Wild About Harry,” were in the original score by Noble Sissle and Eubie Blake.

The movement, choreographed by Savion Glover, pays homage to dance styles of the era. The current Playbill includes an insert with information and advertising from the show’s original program. And two of the actors wear blackface at points in the show, as in the original.

But whereas the original “Shuffle Along” had a loosely structured plot about a race for a mayor in the fictional Jimtown, written by F. E. Miller and Aubrey Lyles, the current version, with a book by the show’s director, George C. Wolfe, barely touches on that story. Instead, it offers a theatrical history lesson, tracing the roots of “Shuffle Along” in the black vaudeville circuit, its financially troubled pre-Broadway tour, the offstage drama during the successful Broadway run, and then the struggles of the show’s creative team and stars after the show closed. At least one song that was not in the original, “Memories of You,” a 1930 composition by Eubie Blake, is featured.

The is-it-or-isn’t-it-a-revival question, which has loomed over “Shuffle Along” since the show was first announced last year, has implications for this season’s strong musical revivals, including “The Color Purple,” “Fiddler on the Roof,” “She Loves Me” and “Spring Awakening,” which could be shut out of a nomination, or defeated, if “Shuffle Along” is deemed to be a revival.

The decision is to be made on April 29, the morning after the show opens, by the Tony Awards administration committee, a group that includes 10 members of the Broadway League, which represents producers; 10 from the American Theater Wing, a theater advocacy organization; and one person each representing associations of writers, actors, designers and directors.

Mr. Rudin will make his case in a letter to the committee; his spokesman, Philip Rinaldi, declined to discuss the matter further, saying the administration committee had asked “for confidentiality on these issues” and that “the producers feel it’s inappropriate to discuss in which categories ‘Shuffle Along’ might be eligible.”

Several members of the administration committee declined to talk about their decision-making process, but one longtime member, the producer Emanuel Azenberg, said the committee would try to weigh the issue on its merits. “If it’s a reasonable argument presented by the producer, they’ll go along with it; if it’s one that is political, they’ll smell that one out, too,” he said.


