


Kyrie Irving scored 31 points and Kevin Love added 28, leading the Cleveland Cavaliers over the Detroit Pistons, 106-101, in the opener of their first-round playoff series on Sunday.

Both players starred in their returns to the postseason after they had been knocked out of the playoffs with injuries last year. Love sustained a shoulder injury in the first round, and Irving fractured a kneecap in the N.B.A. finals.

“These guys have been working hard, Kyrie on his knee, Kevin on his shoulder, just to get back to this moment,” LeBron James said. “It was great to be out on the floor with them and for them to put together the performance that they did.”

James had 22 points and 11 assists for the top-seeded Cavaliers, who got all they could handle from the Pistons.

Kentavious Caldwell-Pope scored 21 and Marcus Morris 20 for the Pistons, who are in the playoffs for the first time since 2009.

Cleveland showed its experience in the final minutes. Love hit consecutive 3-pointers after the Pistons had tied the game, 88-88, and then James made a driving layup and Irving hit two free throws after Detroit had cut the lead to 4 with less than 3 minutes to go.

Game 2 will be Wednesday night in Cleveland.

HEAT 123, HORNETS 91 Luol Deng scored 31 points, Hassan Whiteside added 21 points and 11 rebounds, and Miami routed visiting Charlotte to open a first-round series.

Deng made 11 of 13 shots and Dwyane Wade scored 16 points in 26 minutes for the Heat, who made their first playoff appearance since the 2014 N.B.A. finals.

Deng made all five of his shots in the first quarter as Miami built a 19-point lead.

“He wants to make winning plays,” Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra said.

Nic Batum scored 24 points for the Hornets and Kemba Walker added 19.

Hornets Coach Steve Clifford said his frontcourt “got manhandled.”

“And if Deng and Whiteside are going to combine for that kind of numbers, it’s going to be hard for us to win,” Clifford said.

Miami hosts Game 2 on Wednesday.

SPURS 106, GRIZZLIES 74 Kawhi Leonard had 20 points and host San Antonio gave Memphis its worst postseason loss in franchise history.

LaMarcus Aldridge added 17 points, and Tony Parker had 15 points and 6 assists for San Antonio in the series opener. The Spurs rested their starters in the fourth quarter in preparation for Game 2 on Tuesday in San Antonio.

The Spurs outscored Memphis by 33-14 in the third quarter to break open what had been a relatively close game against the short-handed Grizzlies.

Vince Carter had 16 points to lead Memphis while Zach Randolph was held to 6 points.

CURRY QUESTIONABLE Stephen Curry is listed as questionable with an ankle injury for Game 2 of Golden State’s playoff series against Houston, though he has insisted to his coach that it will be hard to keep him off the court.

Curry did not practice after hurting his right ankle during Saturday’s 104-78 victory. He called the injury a “tweak” after the game.

Coach Steve Kerr said Curry, the league’s reigning most valuable player, had campaigned to play.

“He’s doing a little better than yesterday,” Kerr said.

If Curry is unable to play Monday, Shaun Livingston will start in his place.

“I think Steph missed three or four games this year,” Kerr said. “We did fine.”


