


In June 1944, trains carrying 185 students from Morehouse College in Atlanta arrived in a northern Connecticut town about 15 miles west of Hartford. Recruiters had hired the students from one of the country’s top black colleges to harvest shade tobacco, then one of the state’s biggest cash crops. Among them was a 15-year-old incoming freshman named Martin Luther King Jr.

King spent two summers working in the fields around Simsbury, and he later credited that time with helping him decide to enter the clergy, which, in turn, led him to join the civil rights movement. He ate at the local soda shop and was invited to sing at two of the town’s churches. “After that summer in Connecticut, it was a bitter feeling going back to segregation,” he wrote of that 1944 trip in his autobiography.

And yet until a few years ago, King’s time in Simsbury had been virtually forgotten.

The major books on his life, including Taylor Branch’s three-volume biography, make no mention of it, and even Simsbury residents were only vaguely aware of their town’s brush with greatness. “I didn’t know about it, growing up,” said Elaine Lang, a Simsbury native who now runs the Simsbury Historical Society. “It was one of those ‘footnotes of history’ sort of things.”

That changed in 2011, when Richard Curtiss, a history teacher at Simsbury High School, and a group of students in his Advanced Placement course in United States history produced a 15-minute documentary about King’s time in the town, drawing on letters he wrote home and interviews with local residents who remembered the Morehouse workers. The CBS Evening News reported on the students’ effort.

“There is a tremendous sense of pride that this was a town where one of the most important figures of the 20th century spent time, and may have had an impact on the beliefs he would follow later in life,” Mr. Curtiss said. Later this year the town will build a memorial to King, to be placed on the historical society’s grounds.

King was one of thousands of Southern black students to make the trek north for summer work in the 1940s. Tobacco companies like Cullman Brothers, which hired King, needed them to make up for the loss of local white labor to the war effort, and they lured them with good wages and the not-so-subtle implication that they would be safer and freer working in the North than in Alabama or Georgia.

“The farms liked them because they weren’t as rebellious as Northern kids, and had a good work ethic,” said Kevin Gray, a former president of the historical society.

The male and female students lived in separate four-story, white clapboard dormitories on the edge of town, close to the fields where they would pick tobacco and the barns where they would hang it to dry. The dorms were abandoned in the 1970s, Ms. Lang said, and the town fire department burned down the men’s building as a training exercise in 1984. The women’s dorm, however, still sits on the edge of a fallow field, boarded up but apparently sturdy.

At the time of King’s visit, Connecticut was a leading producer of shade tobacco, which is grown under cheesecloth netting and used to make cigar wrappers. Even today, tobacco is grown on about 2,000 acres in the state, and many of the world’s top cigar makers swear by Connecticut tobacco.

But harvesting and drying tobacco is hard work. King and his fellow workers rose at 6 a.m. and toiled under the tents all day, where the heat could easily reach 100 degrees. Tobacco juice and tar stained their hands. For a day’s labor, they received $4 — a princely sum compared with what they could have earned in the South.

In their free time, the students cooked, played basketball, held prayer meetings — King was elected the leader of the group’s religious activities — and, most important for the future civil rights leader, debated the injustices that they faced back home. In a newsletter produced by black students who were working at a farm near where King worked, the editors wrote that their mission was “to encourage student discussion of vital problems which confront us as students and as citizens of the South.”

The students also went into Simsbury and Hartford, where they were shocked they could walk through the front door of a restaurant and be served. “I had never thought that a person of my race could eat anywhere,” King wrote, “but we ate in one of the finest restaurants in Hartford.”

But the return to the South was a harsh reminder of the reality of segregation. “It was hard to understand why I could ride wherever I pleased on the train from New York to Washington,” he wrote, “and then had to change to a Jim Crow car at the nation’s capital in order to continue the trip to Atlanta.”


