


A box of store-bought ravioli is easy enough to pick up a for a quick dinner, and it’s no crime. The contents are unlikely to be delicate or ethereal, though. You’ll be fed, but you won’t be transported.

For that kind of experience, unless there’s a benevolent nonna in your kitchen, you must make your own egg-rich pasta dough, stretch it thin and fashion it into carefully crimped parcels. The process is fiddly, but the result is worth the effort. Homemade pasta, if you make it regularly, not just once in a blue moon, is not hard to master. Just do it.

An inexpensive hand-cranked pasta machine is the tool of choice, easier for most novices to maneuver than a rolling pin. But don’t force the dough to thinness. Allow the metal rollers to gradually stretch it, going from the widest opening to the narrowest, letting the rolled sheets relax a moment before proceeding to the next notch. This guarantees the dough will be supple.

I say ravioli, but these really aren’t. Since they are stuffed half-moon shapes rather than square ones, they are called mezzelune. (The singular is mezzaluna.) But what’s in a name? Except for the shape, they’re nearly the same, cousins that bear a strong family resemblance.

Typically mezzelune contain seasoned ricotta and may be tossed in a butter sauce with a few sage leaves. I have used sweet new-crop peas, slivers of shiitake mushrooms (lacking wild morels or porcini, another option in a perfect world) and a shower of slivered scallions to surround mine, with flecks of lemon zest and mint in the filling.

To keep the project manageable, it is wise to complete some of the tasks in advance. Both the pasta dough and filling can be made a few hours ahead. The dough benefits from resting, well wrapped, at room temperature; this helps it hydrate properly and allows it to be stretched more easily to silky tenderness. The filling is easily assembled — put it together and chill it when you have a spare moment. And the mezzelune may be completely assembled and kept refrigerated until you’re ready to cook them (up to three hours). The final cooking can then be accomplished in only a few minutes.

Should you decide that making mezzalune is not in the cards, cut your fresh egg pasta into wide or narrow ribbons, and toss them with the simmered peas, ricotta and mushrooms. You’ll still have a lovely springtime meal.

Recipe: Mezzelune Pasta With Peas and Shiitake Mushrooms

And to Drink ...

The bright green flavors of the peas combined with the lactic flavors of the ricotta call for a fresh, crisp white wine with herbal accents. Now that we’ve narrowed the choices to a several dozen, let’s pick a few. Lively sauvignon blancs should go beautifully with this dish, particularly if you can find a bottle from northeastern Italy. If not, Sancerres and Pouilly-Fumés will also be fine. More than a few Italian whites will fill the bill: Pinot biancos from Alto Adige would be delicious, as would a good Gavi di Gavi from the Piedmont region, or a fiano from Campania. Outside of Italy, Chablis would go well with this dish, as would peppery grüner veltliner from Austria. If in doubt, try a bone-dry rosé. ERIC ASIMOV


