


Frankie Thomas, the daughter of Jamie Bernstein of New York and David E. Thomas of Newport, R.I., was married June 4 to Dr. Ian William Tattersall, the son of Susan F. Cotmore and Peter J. Tattersall of Guilford, Conn. Dr. Chase W. Shutak, a friend of the groom who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, led a ceremony that incorporated some Quaker traditions at the weekend house of the bride’s family in Fairfield, Conn.

On June 3, the bride, 29, received an undergraduate degree summa cum laude from the City College of New York, where she is a writing tutor. She is also a freelance transcriber, mainly for journalists and documentary filmmakers, and a freelance writer whose work has appeared in literary journals, blogs and online magazines.

The bride is a granddaughter of the composer Leonard Bernstein.

On May 18, Dr. Tattersall, also 29, received a medical degree and Ph.D. in vascular biology from Columbia. This month, he is to become a medical intern at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York. He graduated cum laude from Yale.

The couple were introduced in June 2011 by a mutual friend, who had gathered a group at a karaoke bar in the East Village. Dr. Tattersall arrived in time to catch what he described as Ms. Thomas’s spirited rendition of Dusty Springfield’s “Son of a Preacher Man.”

“She had a good voice,” he said of Ms. Thomas. Later, she rejoined the group and began chatting with Dr. Tattersall, learning about his lab work and also his involvement in theater. (In medical school, he had been a member of the Bard Hall Players.)

Ms. Thomas, who was then doing community theater in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, became even more interested when she uncovered their mutual love for Shakespeare, especially “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.”

“I thought he was cool,” she said. “I was so in my literary, artsy world. I’d never met a scientist before. He was deeply involved in community theater.”

The next day, he friended her on Facebook. ( “I was well aware of her grandfather’s canon,” said Dr. Tattersall, who had been in a high school production of “West Side Story.”)

Within a couple of weeks, he had invited her to join him and his medical school friends for drinks. She asked him out on a one-on-one date after he was the first to post a comment when she posted a novella online, “The Showrunner,” in which the main character has a sexual encounter with a minor character named after him.

“I thought I was getting a vibe,” she said of her bold move in asking him out. His response, in which he told her that she was “swell” but that he had a girlfriend, was not the one she was looking for.

Although she said she was a little crushed and embarrassed by his comeback, they found themselves hanging out that summer. By fall, he was available again, and asked her out on a real date.

“It was just us hanging out, but circumstances were different,” he said. “We were not in a hurry to jump into a relationship.”

It soon became clear, though, that they wanted to spend more time with each other, and by January they were directing “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” together for the Bard Hall Players.

“It was great to have her around because she had pretty much memorized the play,” he said. “I was struck by how well we were going through it together.”

After she moved in with him in 2013, he inspired Ms. Thomas, who had dropped out of the University of Southern California in 2008, to go back to college. And this spring, in a moment of near-perfect synchronicity, the couple, who became engaged last year, both had graduation ceremonies.

“He’s graduating, I’m graduating,” she said. “What better way to celebrate the occasion than with a wedding.”


