


The American West has captivated David Hockney for decades. The 78-year-old painter, printmaker and photographer has depicted the West in diverse forms, from sun-splashed swimming pools and portraits from 1960s and ’70s Los Angeles, to a sprawling, 60-canvas oil painting of the Grand Canyon. Hockney, who maintains a studio and home in the Hollywood Hills, continues to experiment with new media — from photocopiers and fax machines to the iPhone app Brushes and digital films. And a new exhibition at Pace Gallery presents “The Yosemite Suite,” a group of more than 20 works that Hockney made on his iPad during visits to Northern California’s Yosemite National Park in 2010 and 2011.

Drawing the landscapes as he experienced them, the artist relished the immediacy of the iPad as a tool. “You can set up a palette very, very quickly indeed — quicker than any other medium,” Hockney says. “It’s also an endless sheet of paper, and the color is literally at your fingertip.” The result is a series of vibrant, textural drawings, which the artist reproduced as large-format prints, meticulously transposed according to a scale that he feels captures Yosemite’s splendor.

The series includes iconic vistas and landmarks, as well as intimate glimpses into Hockney’s excursions into the landscape itself. In “Untitled No. 1” (above left), the blue shadow of a mountain looms behind a stone facade, with the bright abstractions of tourists occupying the foreground. In “Untitled No. 2” (right) a redwood-lined road stretches, with no apparent endpoint — a meditative view of a traveler’s solitary journey through nature. Hockney’s bird’s-eye view gazes down upon the Yosemite Valley in “Untitled No. 21” (center), a dizzying perspective that includes coniferous trees and dense forests, as well as the sharp, purposeful lines of Half Dome’s granite face in the distance. It’s clear that the views are entirely Hockney’s own, rather than exact reproductions. “They are drawn landscapes,” Hockey explains. “Photographs are very theatrical — they need lighting. My eyes can see more.”

Others in the series play with light (a spidery sun glints through tall trees, their shadows long and purple on the forest floor) and movement, both man-made and natural. In “Untitled No. 13,” a waterfall streams down a green wash of mountain that recalls a watercolor painting, while kinetic lines swirl at the base — perhaps evidence of the sketched figures and their cars parked nearby.

With “The Yosemite Suite,” Hockney joins a host of artists who have been captivated by the park’s allure since its founding in 1890. Before Ansel Adams’s lens, the painter Albert Bierstadt’s dramatic landscapes gained important early publicity for Yosemite, and drew the first crowds from around the United States in the late 19th century. Now, as the National Park Service celebrates its centennial, the presentation at Pace seems to echo the tradition of landscape artists as champions of wild spaces. The coming year is also significant for Hockney: An exhibition of recent work from his Los Angeles studio opens in July at the Royal Academy, London, and a traveling retrospective at the Tate Britain, the Centre Pompidou and the Metropolitan Museum of Art begins in February.

Hockney’s eye for subtle details and temporal changes in the environments he captures continues to influence the way we see the world around us. “I think landscape is a spatial thrill,” he says.


