


The photo was featured on the cover of New York City’s tabloids: a man in shorts and sunglasses sitting on a water scooter, a smile on his face, middle fingers extended to the sky.

The man, Glenn Lieberman, was among more than 130 people who were charged as part of a scheme in which people collected disability payments based on fraudulent health claims. More than 85 of them, like Mr. Lieberman, were former police officers.

Prosecutors highlighted the picture at a news conference in January 2014 and said that it had been taken when Mr. Lieberman claimed he was too mentally incapacitated to leave his house. Then Mr. Lieberman became somewhat of a symbol of the abuses that prosecutors attributed to the scheme.

On Friday, Mr. Lieberman, 50, pleaded guilty to third-degree grand larceny. As part of a plea bargain, he was expected to be sentenced to 250 hours of community service and had already paid the $250,000 he owes in restitution and fines, said Gerald J. McMahon, his lawyer.

Also on Friday, Kevin Hurley, 56, who was convicted of second-degree grand larceny during a trial in May, was sentenced to two and a half to seven and a half years in prison, and Geoffrey Davila, 50, a former officer in the New York City Correction Department, pleaded guilty to attempted third-degree grand larceny.

Earlier, four people accused of directing the operation had pleaded guilty in exchange for prison sentences of between one and nine years.

Of those charged, more than 100 have pleaded guilty to a felony charge; eight cases were dismissed, and 15 remained open, according to the Manhattan district attorney’s office.

The charges in the case were incendiary: that a large group of people, many of whom were already collecting New York City pensions, used fraudulent psychiatric claims — some connected to Sept. 11 — to bilk Social Security for disability payouts averaging $30,000 to $50,000 a year in a scheme dating back to the 1980s.

The district attorney’s office said Mr. Lieberman’s guilty plea signified that he admitted to stealing at least $50,000 from Social Security. Mr. McMahon said that it meant only that his client could not defend the charge that he was not entitled to the payments.

“The overwhelming reaction is that he’s pleased it’s finally finished, he thinks it’s an appropriate resolution, and he’s happy to move on with the rest of his life,” he said.

Mr. McMahon reiterated Friday what he had said before: that the water scooter photo was taken before Mr. Lieberman was on disability.

Prosecutors said that Mr. Lieberman, like most of the other defendants, was awarded disability based on claims of mental illness, some of which were related to Sept. 11. Investigators believed Mr. Lieberman’s involvement on the day of disaster was minimal.

Mr. McMahon disagreed, saying he thought that they had showed it was not.

“It’s not true,” he said.

A representative from the district attorney’s office said that the overwhelming majority of defendants who pleaded guilty to felony charges related to the scheme did not receive any jail time, though they were ordered to pay fines and restitution for the benefits they were given. A spokeswoman said the office has already recouped about $25 million lost from the fraud.

The photo of Mr. Lieberman was just one piece of visual evidence that the district attorney’s office had in its case against people who were receiving disability benefits. Other photos depicted people fishing, teaching martial arts or sitting in the cockpit of an aircraft.

Mr. McMahon said he believed the case would have been different without the photo of his client.

“That picture singularly made this case twice as hard as it would have been,” he said. “It was a cross that we had to bear for two and a half years.”


