


A 4-year-old boy died on Thursday after falling down an elevator shaft in a Brooklyn garage.

Typically, drivers go to parking garages and wait for their vehicles to be conveyed to the ground floor, never seeing the rest of the building. But on Wednesday night, according to the police, the boy rode to the third floor of the garage on Union Street in the Park Slope neighborhood with his parents in a freight elevator.

The boy, identified by the police as Jack Roberts, slipped through a 10-inch gap between the elevator and the wall, falling 50 feet. He was taken to New York Methodist Hospital and later transferred to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead. The names of his parents were not released.

As news of the boy’s death spread through the affluent, family-friendly neighborhood, bouquets of flowers appeared outside the garage, Park Slope Garage Condominium, a beige building with abstract murals on the exterior and the interior. People gathered to talk about the tragedy that had happened on the bustling block, which is also home to the Park Slope Food Coop, a fire station and a bicycle shop.

Alice Soriano, Jack’s nanny since he was 2 months old, said she last saw him at 6:30 p.m. on Wednesday. Jack has two older half-sisters who adore him, she said. Ms. Soriano said she did not know why the family had been inside the garage that night.

“His mother sent me a text about 10:30 last night; it said, ‘Call me it’s emergency,’” Ms. Soriano said. “I called my priest. I said: ‘Please, I need a prayer for Jack. He’s our angel.’”

Jack had blonde hair, which he wore in a bowl cut. At a park near his house, he was remembered for playing fearlessly on the jungle gym and the swings. His liked freestyle dancing, music lessons and soccer games, Ms. Soriano and his aunt said. He wanted to be a contractor when he grew up.

“Everybody in the neighborhood knows him, everybody loved him,” a woman who identified herself as his aunt Kathy said. She declined to give her last name, saying she did not want to do so without checking with her sister, Jack’s mother.

“I think it was just a horrible, tragic accident,” she said.

The owner of the garage, Howard Pronsky of Berman Realty, did not respond to requests for an interview. Alexander Schnell, the spokesman for the New York City Buildings Department, said the elevator was being investigated. He said the department had issued a cease-use order for the elevator on Wednesday until further review.

On Thursday, luxury vehicles slipped in and out of Park Slope Garage Condominium, as a parking attendant declined requests for an interview from reporters.

The garage, a multistory building at 841 Union Street, has two freight elevators meant for vehicles, according to owners of parking spaces. The building, which was one of the first so-called condominiums for cars in the state, has more than 100 parking spaces, which are selling for close to $300,000.

After another garage with more than 250 spaces on Union Street closed to become condominiums, prices for spaces at Park Slope Garage Condominium shot up.

Owners of parking spaces there expressed shock at the boy’s death. “You teach your kids, ‘Don’t play with matches, don’t walk in front of cars,’ and then something crazy like this happens,” said Jackie Lew, a real estate agent who recently listed her parking spot in the building for $279,000. “The last one went for $300,000,” she added.

When the garage opened in 1986, its spaces were valued at $29,000, a price that at the time seemed outrageous. The prices inched up over the years, but when Andrea Farrington and her family bought theirs, in 2004, they paid $35,000. Ms. Farrington said she had been allowed to go to her parking space on the third floor, where the boy fell, only once in 12 years. “Never, we were never allowed to take the kids up,” she said. “They really don’t like people going up there.”

Joseph Saba, a composer for television and film who bought a space to park his Subaru in 2015 for $180,000, said he was saddened by the boy’s death. He, too, said it was odd for the family to have ridden the elevator.

“There have been times when we wanted to run up and get something, and we have been denied,” Mr. Saba said. “They were pretty strict about it.”


