


“No chance,” “no way,” “never.”

Yet, here we are: Donald J. Trump is the presumptive Republican presidential nominee.

Maybe it’s not fair to call out the knowing skepticism of the political thinkers who once declared Mr. Trump’s nomination an impossibility. Many people thought he was a long-shot (not everyone, though). Democrats were quick to mock when he declared his entry into the race on June 16. News organizations struggled with how to cover him.

Here’s a quick look at how unthinkable it all seemed before voting began.

Senator Rand Paul spoke with certainty about that in August.

During an interview on NBC News, Mr. Paul, who was still in the race, attributed Mr. Trump’s strength in the polls to the “free advertising” of media coverage.

“He’s on every channel, all the time, and people have gone gaga,” he said.

Mr. Paul dropped out in February.

On Tuesday, after Mr. Trump’s landslide win in Indiana, Senator Ted Cruz acknowledged the inevitable and quit the race. And finally on Wednesday, Gov. John Kasich of Ohio dropped out, leaving a Republican field of just one: Mr. Trump.

James Fallows, a correspondent for The Atlantic, wrote last July that Mr. Trump faced several obstacles that simply could not be overcome.

He is a novelty candidate akin to Herman Cain or Michele Bachmann, Mr. Fallows explained. He has no experience in appointed or elected office or the military. And his derisive remarks about Mexicans would not bear scrutiny.

“Everyone knows, for certain, that he will fade as the novelty of his histrionic act gets old and as Republican voters begin to think about actually winning,” he wrote.

Bob Garfield, the writer and host of the WNYC radio program “On the Media,” took issue in July with how news organizations were reporting early polls, deemed by him to be unreliable, that seemed to show strong support for Mr. Trump.

The candidate, he said, was akin to “the kid in geometry class making fart sounds in his armpit. What’s not a joke is how the press reported those poll numbers — and most others.”

That was Nate Silver in August. The prediction expert and editor of FiveThirtyEight.com pegged Mr. Trump’s odds then, informally, at 2 percent.

Writing on the day of the first Republican face-off, Mr. Silver said, “Tonight’s debate could prove to be the beginning of the end for Trump, or he could remain a factor for months to come. But he’s almost certainly doomed, sooner or later.”

Political scholars at the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics declared in September that the Republican hierarchy would never allow Mr. Trump’s nomination.

It’s not enough to be a showman, reasoned the authors, Larry Sabato, Kyle Kondik and Geoffrey Skelley.

“Party leaders believe the initials of the G.O.P. will be changed to R.I.P. if Trump is on the November 2016 ballot, and this near-unanimity of leadership opinion should be enough to defeat Trump one way or the other,” they wrote.

That was the flat declaration from Chris Cillizza, who writes about politics for The Washington Post, in July.

“But just because Trump isn’t going to win (or even come close) doesn’t mean that his rise — and the massive amount of attention he continues to attract — is meaningless. It’s not. The question, however, is what exactly Trump’s, gulp, popularity means.” He backtracked a month later, as many eventually did.

One of the most vocal voices on Twitter foretelling Mr. Trump’s downfall was Bill Kristol, the editor of The Weekly Standard.

The last straw, he said, came when Mr. Trump belittled Senator John McCain’s war record. “He’s not a war hero,” the candidate had declared. “He’s a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren’t captured.”

During an appearance on MSNBC in July, Mr. Kristol said, “He’ll stay in the debates. He’ll be showman. He will get out before Iowa.”

The McCain remarks also looked a turning point for Nate Cohn, a New York Times writer for The Upshot, who called that “an inflection point” for Mr. Trump’s candidacy.

His surge had so far been a largely media-driven phenomenon, Mr. Cohn reasoned. His attack against Mr. McCain would trigger a shift in scrutiny to the candidate’s record. And that would be it. “Even a cursory look at Mr. Trump’s political record reveals a candidate with serious liabilities once journalists and campaigns started taking him seriously.”

On Wednesday, Mr. Cohn had some new thoughts about the presumptive Republican nominee. The headline: “What I Got Wrong About Donald Trump.”


