


If you had told me one year ago that Bernie Sanders would manage to survive in the Democratic primary race all the way until New York, I would have been surprised and impressed.

But if you judge Mr. Sanders by the standard his campaign now wants him to be judged by — as a serious candidate with a shot at the nomination — the result Tuesday night was terrible.

New York, like every contest at this stage, was a state he needed to win. The result confirms that he is on track to lose the pledged delegate race and therefore the nomination.

He entered the night with a deficit of around 200 pledged delegates — the delegates awarded based on the results of primaries and caucuses, not the superdelegates. He needed 57 percent of the remaining pledged delegates to emerge with a majority by the convention.

That might not seem like so much, but it’s a huge number because Democrats award their delegates proportionally in each primary. Mr. Sanders, therefore, needed to win the rest of the race by a margin of roughly 57 to 43 — a big problem for a candidate who had been losing by around 57 to 43. Here’s one way to think about how big his deficit is: If all of the 17 contests Mr. Sanders won got to vote again (which is to say, counted twice), he would still trail Hillary Clinton in the pledged delegate count.

Mr. Sanders seems on track to win 43 percent of the vote again tonight. By falling short, his burden in the remaining states grows even greater: He might now need 58 or 59 percent of the remaining delegates, depending on how the results finish.

Mrs. Clinton’s strength in New York, a state Mr. Sanders’s advisers contended they could win, confirms that he is not on a pace to win the remaining states by such a clear margin.

To the extent that Mr. Sanders’s supporters envisioned a path to a majority of delegates, it hinged on the assumption that he would prove strongest in the most heavily Democratic states, like New York and California.

The assumption was not consistent with the results leading to today. Mr. Sanders lost the states most similar to New York or California, like Illinois and Florida, even Massachusetts. In truth, there has been no relationship between Mr. Sanders’s strength and the Democratic leanings of a county. The stronger predictors of Mrs. Clinton’s strength were diversity and affluence — which augured well for her in New York.

In the end, Mrs. Clinton won New York thanks to big support from nonwhite and affluent voters in New York City and its suburbs.

She swept the Upper West Side, Chelsea, Brooklyn Heights and Park Slope. These places voted strongly for past liberal challengers, like Zephyr Teachout in the 2014 primary for governor, but not for Mr. Sanders.

She also swept majority black and Hispanic precincts, as she has for most of the cycle.

And she fared well in the suburbs, winning by nearly a two-to-one margin in Westchester County, where she lives.

Mrs. Clinton’s affluent and diverse coalition sets her up for a string of wins next Tuesday along the Eastern Seaboard, and later in New Jersey. After next Tuesday, Mr. Sanders could need 63 or 64 percent of the remaining delegates.

He will be hard pressed to make up this deficit. He has thrived in caucus states, but there is only one of those left: North Dakota. Mr. Sanders could win 64 percent of the vote in a couple of mostly white Western primaries, like Oregon or Montana. But he’s unlikely to win by much more. He could win in Indiana, Kentucky and West Virginia, but is not likely to do so by 64 percent.

Mr. Sanders could be competitive in California, where there are fewer black voters. But the affluence of the Bay Area and Los Angeles will hurt him there, just as it did in New York City’s liberal bastions. It is hard to imagine a two-to-one victory.

It is more likely that Mr. Sanders has reached the stage of the campaign where even feel-good victories — like repeats of his genuinely impressive win in Michigan — will leave him too far behind.


