


When Miles Davis died 25 years ago, he left behind a peerless body of work, a complicated legend and a formidable archival trove. Given his compulsion for reinvention — the spark behind his famous boast that he’d “changed music five or six times” — his death at 65 also opened the door to endless rounds of conjecture. What other directions might Davis, the volatile and enigmatic trumpeter, have explored? Who would he be collaborating with today?

The pianist Robert Glasper has one ready answer. “I think I’d definitely be in his band at some point,” he said recently. Mr. Glasper, who supervised the music in Don Cheadle’s brash, kinetic biopic, “Miles Ahead,” has studied Milesian music and attitude closely over the last several years. His efforts paid off not only in the film but also on a seductive new album, “Everything’s Beautiful,” featuring his remixes of Davis tracks from the Columbia/Legacy vault, with a starry assortment of guests.

“I’m obviously influenced by Miles Davis — even just the psyche of how he thinks about music,” Mr. Glasper said. “How he moves through, and always wanted to reflect, the times that he’s in. That’s what I’m doing now. He opened that door.”

Mr. Glasper has spent most of his career bridging modern jazz, hip-hop and soul, with his agile acoustic trio as well as the Robert Glasper Experiment, a four-piece band. His crossover triumphs on Blue Note include a pair of albums with the Experiment: “Black Radio” (2012) and “Black Radio 2” (2013). Both yielded Grammy Awards, cracked the Top 20 on the Billboard album chart and featured an array of vocalists — rappers like Lupe Fiasco and Common, and singers like Erykah Badu and Bilal. (Those Grammys were grouped under R&B, not jazz.)

The guest list on “Everything’s Beautiful” similarly includes Bilal and Ms. Badu, along with the formally ambitious soul singers Laura Mvula and Ledisi and the progressive R&B groups Hiatus Kaiyote and King. But where the “Black Radio” albums flaunt the prowess of a live band in the studio, the new release rests on a foundation of sampled material. So it feels something like a Robert Glasper Experiment album without the Experiment — a suggestion that elicited a hearty laugh from Mr. Glasper. “No,” he shot back. “Well, kind of.”

Mr. Glasper has the casual, jittery self-possession of someone given to constant motion. He was a striking presence on Kendrick Lamar’s 2015 hip-hop masterwork, “To Pimp a Butterfly,” and remade songs by Mr. Lamar, Jhené Aiko and others on his own album, “Covered,” with the trio.

His sinuous hand as an arranger comes across just as clearly on a cover recorded for the album but never commercially released: “Sign o’ the Times,” by Prince, one of those artists whose brief history with Davis generates its own subcategory of what-ifs.

Mr. Glasper naturally identifies with Davis, who would have turned 90 this Thursday. Some of the first lines of dialogue in “Miles Ahead” (which will be available in bonus-laden Blu-ray, DVD and digital formats on July 19) find Mr. Cheadle, as Davis, brusquely disavowing the word “jazz” and shrugging off expectations rooted in the past.

Davis’s trademark rasp appears all over “Everything’s Beautiful,” more often than his horn. The opening track includes a set of instructions to his sidemen during sessions in the late ’60s and early ’70s. At one point Davis goads the drummer Joe Chambers to play “some kind of pulse that goes on all the time, that doesn’t sound like ‘ting-ta-ting’” — a disparaging nod to a swinging ride cymbal pattern — in favor of a loop that “doesn’t break, and it doesn’t sound corny.”

“He’s talking about hip-hop,” Mr. Glasper said. “Miles wanted hip-hop without knowing what it was called.”

The new album supports that idea with tracks like “Violets,” which has Phonte Coleman rapping over Bill Evans’s piano part on “Blue in Green.” (Mr. Glasper asked the track’s producer, 9th Wonder, to sample an unissued take rather than the canonical version from “Kind of Blue.”) On “Silence Is the Way,” Ms. Mvula sings of dauntless introspection over a skeletal beat. “Ghetto Walkin’,” based on “The Ghetto Walk,” features Bilal, whose lyrics ring with cool perseverance.

Some guests, including King and Hiatus Kaiyote, created their own tracks for the project; Mr. Glasper takes his only piano solo on a remix of “Milestones” by Georgia Anne Muldrow. Elsewhere there are signs of his distinctive comic touch. “I’m Leaving You,” a funky strut with guitar work by John Scofield, has a chorus in which Ledisi belts the affronted title phrase, followed by a muttered protestation from Davis: “Wait a minute, wait a minute.”

Another breakup song, “Maiysha (So Long),” is a synthetic bossa nova whose lyrics hide a bawdy inside joke — “That’s what she said,” the punch line turned into a popular meme by the NBC sitcom “The Office.” Ms. Badu and Mr. Glasper, longtime friends, were goofing around with the joke in the studio, and it stuck. “I figured Miles would love that,” Mr. Glasper said.

Which brings us back into the realm of speculation. “I think Miles would have messed with a lot of different artists,” Mr. Glasper mused. “If he was here now, he’d love Kendrick Lamar. He’d love André 3000. He’d love Erykah.”

And if Davis’s push to reach a young black audience is one point of solidarity for Mr. Glasper, his prickly relationship with the jazz establishment suggests another. “A lot of times I prefer not even to say ‘jazz,’ because technically I do more than that,” Mr. Glasper said, using his own words to strike a familiar chord. “I don’t want to put myself in a box, either.”


