


MONTREAL — For some drivers at the pinnacle of auto racing, it can pay to move sideways or even take a step backward to jump-start a stalling career.

As Formula One prepares for the Canadian Grand Prix this weekend, the series has had another reminder that there are more ways than one for a driver to climb the ladder to the top. For the second year in a row, a Formula One driver hitting a slow spot in his career has found his reputation embellished by success in a different series, with victory in one of the world’s “Triple Crown” of greatest car races: the 24 Hours of Le Mans, the Monaco Grand Prix or the Indianapolis 500.

Two weeks ago, Alexander Rossi, a 24-year-old American reserve driver at the Manor Formula One team, won the Indianapolis 500 race in his first try. In Monaco on the same day, drivers at Rossi’s Manor team finished in the last two positions, 14th and 15th. In five Formula One races last year, Rossi never finished higher than 12th.

A year ago Nico Hülkenberg, a German driver with the Force India team, took advantage of a weekend off his busy Formula One schedule to race in the 24 Hours of Le Mans, and like Rossi, he won a Triple Crown race in his rookie year.

The effect for both Rossi and Hülkenberg was to burnish their reputations and give Formula One team owners another look at their talent.

Hülkenberg has yet to gain a top-three podium spot in a Formula One race, but his victory in Le Mans clearly raised his stock.

“Winning Le Mans didn’t change my career, but it definitely gave me a boost,” said Hülkenberg on Thursday in Montreal. “It is a huge achievement, probably the biggest in my career.”

Rossi had spent nearly his entire career climbing a well-established ladder of lower racing series in Europe, competing with future Formula One drivers from around the world on their own turf. But he never had sufficient sponsorship to ensure a full-time seat in the series. He spent several years as a well-respected test and reserve driver and finally raced in five races last year.

After winning in Indianapolis, Rossi said he had been thinking of the race in Monaco that day, just as he would always seek out television coverage of the Indianapolis 500 in a bar in Monaco while he was racing there.

But it was the surprise victory in Indianapolis that will have done more than anything to raise his stock in Formula One.

“It definitely wasn’t the direction I was heading," said Rossi of the IndyCar series, after the victory. “I didn’t expect to be here three months ago. And I’m not going to try and predict where I will be in a couple of years.”

The victories of both Rossi and Hülkenberg raise anew the question about the best way for a modern driver to conduct his career in a world that has become increasingly more professional and demanding of time commitment.

Until around the 1980s, top drivers commonly raced simultaneously in several series in addition to Formula One. Drivers like Stirling Moss would also race at Le Mans, in Italy’s Mille Miglia, in rallies and other sports car races. But Graham Hill is the only driver to have won the career Triple Crown.

Mario Andretti, one of only two American Formula One champions, raced in IndyCar in the 1960s, where he won the Indianapolis 500 in 1969, as well as in occasional Formula One races and other series. He began a full-time career in Formula One in the mid-1970s, finally taking the title in 1978.

In recent years, Formula One teams have written exclusive contracts with their drivers, often forbidding them not only to take part in other forms of racing or in potentially dangerous activities, like riding motorcycles or skiing.

There can be a good reason for it: In February 2011, Robert Kubica, a Polish driver who was a rising star in Formula One, had a serious accident in the Ronde di Andora rally race in Italy, and permanently lost full use of his hand and arm, ending his career at the age of 26.

In any case, if a sidestep into a different series is not always a recipe for success, the two-step backward method can still work for Formula One drivers. Romain Grosjean, a French driver found that by stepping down a rung, he could revive a false start in Formula One.

Before entering Formula One full time in 2009, Grosjean had won four of the steppingstone series beneath Formula One, in a fabulous start to his career. But it took just seven difficult races in Formula One, in his rookie year, for Grosjean to find himself without a team the following year.

So in 2010 and 2011 he drove in sports car racing, and other open-wheel, single-seat series. He won the AutoGP series in 2010, and in 2011, he won the GP2 Asia and then the international GP2 series in 2011. That series is the traditional feeder series to Formula One, where he had already raced in 2008 and early 2009, and his results there saved his career.

“They looked at me differently,” Grosjean said in Montreal on Thursday, of the Formula One team directors. “They decided that maybe I wasn’t that bad after all, since I had won the GP2.”


