


SAN ANTONIO — Manu Ginobili was shuffling his feet frantically along the sideline, waving his arms maniacally, as if he were staging some sort of interpretive dance.

Dion Waiters was inches away from him, trying to inbound the ball, as his team, the Oklahoma City Thunder, held a 1-point lead over the San Antonio Spurs with 13.5 seconds remaining to play before a loud and anxious capacity crowd at AT&T Center.

What happened next was perhaps the most remarkable scene of the 2016 N.B.A. playoffs.

Desperate to find an open teammate and feeling the pressure of a suffocating defense, Waiters rammed his right elbow into Ginobili’s chest to create some much-needed space. There was no whistle, and then, milliseconds before Waiters would have violated the five-second time limit, he flipped a looping pass to Kevin Durant, who could not corral it. The Spurs ended up with the ball and wove a sequence of passes toward the basket before securing an open 3-point attempt for Patty Mills.

But the shot clanged well short, and players from both teams were scrapping for the loose ball as the buzzer sounded.

With that, the Thunder escaped from San Antonio with a 98-97 victory on Monday night in an intense, highly entertaining and hard-to-forget game, evening the teams’ Western Conference semifinal series at one game each. As the players walked off the court, lusty boos reverberated around the arena and replays of the final sequence flickered over and over on the jumbo screen above center court.

The breathless final moments injected life into the long N.B.A. postseason and restored intrigue to the series after a lopsided opening victory for the Spurs. It also led the N.B.A. to state Tuesday that there had been five incorrect calls in that final sequence of the game.

Specifically, the N.B.A. said, Ginobili should have been cited for a technical foul for delay of game for stepping on the sideline during that final inbounds play. Waiters should have been called for an offensive foul for hitting Ginobili with his elbow. When the ball was tossed in by Waiters, fouls should have been called on the Spurs’ Mills and Kawhi Leonard, the N.B.A. added. And after the Spurs stole the ball and Mills missed his 3-pointer, the Thunder’s Serge Ibaka should have been called for grabbing the jersey of the Spurs’ LaMarcus Aldridge in the resulting scrum.

That is a lot of calls that were not made, so it was no surprise that the National Basketball Referees Association posted on Twitter on Tuesday that the final inbounds sequence — with a completely unexpected foul by the player throwing the ball in — would be used in future training sessions.

But that is down the road. In the immediate aftermath of the game, both teams used linguistic gymnastics as they answered questions about what exactly had happened as time ran out. Asked to comment on the inbounds play, Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said, “Something certainly happened on the sideline, I thought.”

Ginobili smiled when asked to describe the sequence.

“Didn’t you see it?” he said.

Billy Donovan, the Oklahoma City coach, turned a reporter’s question about the play into an awkward, minute-long back and forth in which he ultimately pleaded ignorance about the whole thing.

“I’m not sure what you’re talking about,” Donovan said.

Waiters shook his head when asked if he realized he had elbowed Ginobili.

“No,” Waiters said. “I’m in the game, man. I don’t really know what was really going on.”

Meanwhile, Ken Mauer, the lead referee, did not need to wait for the N.B.A. to weigh in to acknowledge mistakes had been made. He told a pool reporter after the game that an offensive foul should have been called on Waiters for his errant elbow and that the Spurs should have been awarded the ball (which they eventually stole anyway).

“It’s a play we’ve never seen before, ever,” Mauer said of Waiters’s elbow.

Noncall notwithstanding, other things occurred in the final 13.5 seconds that seemed worthy of scrutiny or plain wonderment:

■ Upon stripping the ball away from Durant after Waiters made the inbounds throw, the Spurs’ Danny Green floated a parabolic pass to Mills that seemed to give the Thunder more time to get back on defense.

■ After Mills grabbed Green’s pass almost underneath the Thunder basket, he relayed it to Ginobili and rushed into the right corner to set up for the final shot, with Ginobili giving the ball back to him with an audacious no-look pass thrown from behind his left ear.

■ Steven Adams of the Thunder, who seemed everywhere during the final sequence, appeared to be held by a fan after contesting Mills’s final attempt, and he glared into the stands after angrily freeing himself.

When it was all over, the Spurs mostly declined the opportunity to make excuses.

After scoring 43 points in the first quarter of Game 1, they were weirdly impotent at the start of Game 2. They started the contest shooting 2 of 16 from the field — with a surprisingly high number of those misses coming at the rim. As the early deficit spiraled, Popovich chirped angrily at his players from the sideline.

The Thunder looked re-energized after a lethargic performance in Game 1. Durant (28 points) and Russell Westbrook (29 points, 10 assists) were ruthless. Still, Popovich chided a reporter for wondering afterward whether a difference in effort levels between the teams had been a factor thus far in the series.

“At this level, everybody plays hard,” Popovich said. “It’s not about effort. That’s going to be there for everybody. It’s about mistakes. It’s a game of mistakes.”

As he saw it, his team made many errors. Yet somehow it still put itself in a position to win.

“I thought we lost the game three times tonight, and we got back in it,” Popovich said. “So I give our guys credit for hanging in there on a night when they weren’t very sharp.”

It was the play of Aldridge, who scored 38 points in just less than 30 minutes in Game 1, that masked many of San Antonio’s shortcomings in Game 2.

He scored 41 points on Monday night, making 15 of 21 shots. He established openings with trickery — spins, half-turns and all manner of fakes — or simple athleticism. He goaded defenders into fouls.

With 25.8 seconds left, Aldridge drained a 3-pointer from the top of the arc after catching a 20-foot, no-look pass out of the paint and through traffic from Tony Parker, itself a feat of wizardry. About 12 seconds later, Aldridge drew a foul on another 3-point attempt and hit all three free throws to bring the Spurs to within a point.

That set up the wild closing scene.

With Game 3 set for Friday in Oklahoma City, Ginobili — in the aftermath of the madness he had just experienced in Game 2 — was determinedly looking ahead.

“It’s over,” he said of Monday’s contest. “I’m not going to be able to change it. Nobody’s going to change it. It’s one-one. We’ve got to go to O.K.C. and try to win a game.”


