


BALTIMORE — J. Paul Reddam, the principal owner of Nyquist, the Kentucky Derby winner, was, for me, the most intriguing figure of the week leading to Saturday’s Preakness Stakes.

You can argue that Bob Baffert was more intriguing, by virtue of having trained American Pharoah, the horse that broke thoroughbred racing’s 37-year Triple Crown drought last year. But I’d argue that Baffert was among the least interesting precisely because the monkey was off his, and the racing industry’s, back. Baffert himself acknowledged Friday that the Triple Crown had changed his life.

“I finally felt relieved because I’ve been through it so many times,” said Baffert, who added that if his horse, Collected, did not win the Preakness, he would pull for Nyquist. “It’s good for the game,” he said. “Like they say in the N.F.L., it’s good for the shield.”

Reddam, on the other hand, was anything but relieved.

A Canadian-born philosopher king turned money lender turned successful horseman, Reddam is a multimillionaire and a haunted near-witness to history.

Four years ago, Reddam arrived in Baltimore on a cloud of joy and high expectations. His colt, I’ll Have Another, had run down Bodemeister to win the Kentucky Derby as a 15-to-1 long shot.

This time, Reddam and his team will leave Baltimore with the long, lonely faces of losers, his hopes for a second shot at posterity derailed by Exaggerator, who finally triumphed over Nyquist in a muddy, fast-paced race at Pimlico.

The unique aspect of the Preakness — and the reason it’s my favorite leg of the Triple Crown — is that members of the Derby-winning team arrive in Baltimore as conquering heroes. You’re the greatest owner, the greatest trainer, the greatest jockey.

“Whatever anyone says,” Baffert said, “you’re the greatest.”

In one of the most exciting Preakness races in recent history, I’ll Have Another again ran down Baffert’s Bodemeister, the favorite, nipping him at the wire.

With the Belmont up next, Reddam felt that posterity was his. I’ll Have Another’s calling card was his stamina, which corresponded with Belmont’s major challenge. After a great workout on the Thursday before the race, the trainer Doug O’Neill told Reddam, “We can’t lose.”

But Reddam forgot that this is horse racing. He forgot the cardinal rule of managing expectations, one he had learned in 2003 when he bought into a horse called Ten Most Wanted, a strong contender to win that year’s Derby.

“I can remember going back to the barn two hours before post time, and the trainer Wally Dollase looking me straight in the eye and saying, ‘Two hours from now, we will have won the Kentucky Derby,’ ” Reddam recalled last week.

“I was like, ‘Oh, wow, this is unbelievable.’ He had me absolutely convinced, we were walking over to win the Derby.”

Ten Most Wanted finished ninth, far behind the winner, Funny Cide.

“I remember sitting there, drenched in sweat, just in shock,” Reddam said. “Everyone was going crazy over Funny Cide. I was just so devastated. But that really taught me to control my expectations.”

Until he found himself staring at posterity with I’ll Have Another.

As we spoke, Reddam recalled every painful detail of the three days leading to the 2012 Belmont Stakes.

There was a delightful barbecue Thursday afternoon, and then a scheduled day off on Friday. But soon Reddam received a series of disturbing calls on Friday from O’Neill. The horse had injured a tendon in a foreleg overnight. There was swelling. It couldn’t be ignored. A veterinarian would have to look at the leg.

“If he was a $50,000 claimer, nobody would have paid attention — he would have run,” Reddam said, echoing a common sentiment in an industry where money usually comes first.

But I’ll Have Another was not a $50,000 claimer, and this was the Belmont. Besides, scrutiny was being placed on O’Neill, who was facing a 45-day suspension for violating medication rules with horses under his care.

“The horse could have run, he wouldn’t break down,” Reddam said. “The worst that would happen is that he’d have to pull up.”

But I’ll Have Another was withdrawn.

“It was really shocking,” Reddam said, “because, the day before, we thought, ‘This is really going to happen.’ ”

A subsequent investigation by The New York Times found that I’ll Have Another had physical ailments before he was pulled from the Belmont and was being treated with painkillers and anti-inflammatory drugs. According to The Times’s report, X-rays taken of the colt’s front ankles and knees revealed osteoarthritis.

So here we were, four years later, sitting at a restaurant in Baltimore’s Inner Harbor. Reddam had the good fortune to have another Derby winner.

Reddam was confident before Saturday’s race, but, invoking the 2012 scratch, he said: “This is horse racing. Anything can happen.”

He added, “But if our horse loses, somebody will have to run an extraordinary race.”

That race was run by Exaggerator. A second-place finisher to Nyquist in the Derby, Exaggerator became the first Derby runner-up to win the Preakness since 1993.

After the race, Reddam said that his horse was valiant in defeat.

He added: “I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t disappointed. Until you’re actually beaten, you think you’re invincible.”

Reddam said he felt the only way that Nyquist would lose Saturday was if he got caught up in a crazy speed duel with Exaggerator.

And he did.

“That doesn’t take away from the fact that he was a champion, and he was beaten by a great horse,” Reddam said.

Even with Saturday’s defeat, Reddam remains an intriguing figure in a tough, fragmented industry.

Years ago, he made what seemed to be a drastic shift from the high-minded world of academia — philosophy — to the world of money lending and thoroughbred racing.

Reddam earned degrees in philosophy at the University of Windsor and the University of Toronto and received his doctorate at Southern California.

He went to a philosophy conference and was surprised at the combativeness of the discourse.

“I realized that philosophy in academia was about one-upmanship,” he said. “The business world is about making money.”

Reddam, even then a serious horseplayer, decided that he might as well make as much as he could, and have fun doing it.

As we wrapped up our conversation, I asked Reddam to name the greatest moments in his racing life. The 2012 Preakness? The 2012 Kentucky Derby? This year’s Derby victory?

“They’re all different,” he said. “I love pie. Do I love cherry pie better than apple pie? I’ll take them both.”

The low point, without question, was that week in New York in 2012.

Was there anything in his academic training that allowed him to make sense of it?

“People have tried to throw tens of millions of dollars — in a couple cases, more — to accomplish things in racing, and you can’t buy it,” Reddam said.

During our conversation about racing’s ins and outs, Reddam was prophetic when he spoke about the trainer he most admired heading into Saturday’s race.

“The guy I admire, outside of our own connections in this year’s Triple Crown, is Keith Desormeaux,” Reddam said.

“That guy hasn’t spent millions of dollars. He’s bought horses on the cheap that he saw and developed them, whether it was a Swipe or an Exaggerator.

“That guy is obviously a tremendous trainer.”

How far are you willing to go to reach the unreachable dream?

For a philosopher and a businessman, that’s one of those gnawing questions for the ages.


