


“Perhaps it’s fate that today is the Fourth of July, and you will once again be fighting for our freedom, not from tyranny, oppression or persecution — but from annihilation!”

Maybe you remember the patriotic climax of “Independence Day” in 1996. It was a doozy of a speech, but has it become iconic enough to resonate after 20 years? How many moviegoers really recall that moment when Bill Pullman’s unshakable President Thomas J. Whitmore proclaims, “We’re fighting for our right to live, to exist,” as he sends a young squadron of pilots (and a drunken one played by Randy Quaid) to do battle with murderous alien invaders who have destroyed much of the planet.

Even if you don’t recall it, Roland Emmerich, the outspoken director of the original as well as the new “Independence Day: Resurgence,” doesn’t really care. “I’m always against sequels,” he said via phone. “They’re exactly the same.” He sees “Resurgence” (out June 24) as a new film that just happens to be anchored by some of the same actors. But he was coaxed into Franchise Land by the tremendous advances in visual effects (the original won the Oscar in that category). “We had to wait for it to catch up,” he said.

For those who don’t remember the first, it earned more than $800 million at the global box office and made Will Smith, then 28, a worldwide summer brand. Its success kicked off the first barrage of big-budget disaster films since the early-’70s heyday of “The Poseidon Adventure” and “The Towering Inferno.” Mega-grossers like “Armageddon” owe it some respect.

Still, 20 years between the same part is a challenge for an actor. Jeff Goldblum, who is reprising his role as the wisecracking scientist David Levinson, can’t remember many actors who have taken on the same role two decades later. “It’s like Paul Newman in ‘The Hustler’ and the ‘Color of Money,’” he said via phone. Even he had to rewatch the original film. “Making a ton of money and being iconic are probably not the same thing,” Mr. Goldblum admitted, adding blithely, “Who knows how deep an impression it really has made and how welcome it will be?”

What has changed on and offscreen will surely play a role in the film’s fate — if not the Earth’s — this time around. Here’s a sampling.

Plus This one’s in 3-D and IMAX 3-D. The ships are bigger, the aliens scarier and more bloodthirsty, and the technology is more advanced. We even have bases on the moon and Saturn (well, briefly).

Minus The notion of an “Independence Day” without Will Smith is, to some, like, well, “Men in Black” without Will Smith. He stole the first “I.D.” by punching out an alien (“Welcome to Earth!”), but he’s not around for this one. While his character’s absence is explained in the new film, and his son (played by Jessie T. Usher) has taken over the family business of flying through space, it’s certainly conspicuous.

Minus “Ever since I was kidnapped by aliens 10 years ago, I’ve been dying for some payback, and I just want you to know I won’t let you down,” Randy Quaid says when volunteering to pilot a jet in Film 1. He’s gone this time around and sorely missed.

Plus Maika Monroe, star of the horror film “It Follows,” plays the former president’s daughter. And Liam Hemsworth’s fighter pilot, Jake Morrison, is Errol Flynn-like.

Plus The glass ceiling has shattered. Not only is the president of the United States a woman (Sela Ward), but Vivica A. Fox, Mr. Smith’s wife in Film 1, is also no longer an exotic dancer. She’s a staid health care worker.

Plus Gay heroes prevail. Dr. Brakish Okun (Brent Spiner) wakes from a 20-year alien-induced coma (“Did we win?”), and he’s loud, proud and armed with lasers. Okun greets a benevolent, super-intelligent orb with the Streisand-ian “Hello, gorgeous!”

Minus But where is Harvey Fierstein, who played Mr. Goldblum’s colleague in Film 1?

Plus Supersize globalism. “Nations have put their petty differences aside” in the wake of the first round of devastation. Earthlings now live in a virtual one-world state. Americans share space stations with the Chinese, consult with the Germans and enlist the help of African warlords.

Minus After 9/11, the tsunami of 2004 and Hurricane Katrina, is watching the utter destruction of cities on film as entertaining as it was back in 1996? Quite honestly, no.

Plus and Minus? Cineaste hipsterism has gone mainstream. Charlotte Gainsbourg is in this film, and Von Trier-less, she smiles!


