


ORLANDO, Fla. — Hanging out at home with a friend last Saturday, Demetrice Naulings decided there was still night enough to party. It was a snap decision. So he and his friends headed to Pulse, the gay nightclub where he often worked as a host, arriving just before 2 a.m. He was the last person to walk into the club — a decision that shatters him still.

“We never even got a drink,” said Mr. Naulings, 34. Shots rang out from the next room. Pop pop pop pop, to the sound of the loud, syncopated music.

Everyone kept dancing until the next volley of shots. He heard screams, pandemonium. The people around him dived for the floor.

And then the music stopped. The gunman had shot at the D.J. booth and the chandelier in front of it. The lights went off for a bit and then came back on. Next to him was one of his best friends, Eddie Justice.

“You could hear complete silence,” said Mr. Naulings, a hair stylist with a fondness for hats. “In the silence, you could hear bullets hitting the ground. You could hear a clip being taken out and hitting the floor and him putting a new one back in.”

Then the bullets sped through the air in the next room again, and another moment of silence.

“It was devastating,” he said. “You don’t know whether you will lose your life. Should I run to the exit? What do I do next? You think he may be coming here. So people started to run.”

They ran as a pack into the women’s bathroom. “But we said, ‘We are going to die here,’ ” Mr. Naulings said. “So me and Eddie just ran,” he said.

They went into a narrow hallway, hidden away, that led to a side door that Mr. Naulings, familiar with the layout, knew opened to the outside. “People were climbing and stumbling and pushing,” Mr. Naulings said. “They could see the door; like 90 people were pushing towards it.”

In the mayhem of the hallway, Mr. Naulings lost sight of Mr. Justice. Still, the bullets flew. One penetrated the wall and hit a young woman who was frantically trying to get out. “She fell and people just stumbled over her in the panic of the moment,” he said.

Suddenly, with the pressure of dozens of people pushing on it, the door burst open and the crowd poured out. Mr. Naulings ran into a bartender shot in the shoulder. He started looking frantically for his friends, Mr. Justice and another buddy. Mr. Naulings figured Mr. Justice had stayed behind and was in the men’s bathroom.

He reached out to him on Snapchat: “Where are you? The police are outside. Send me a message back.”

Five minutes later, he saw a response from Mr. Justice. “I’ve been shot. I’m going into shock. Please tell them to hurry up. Call the police.”

His other friend was also in the bathroom. He was hiding behind a dead body. At one point, the gunman poked at a girl right next to him. She flinched, and he shot her.

Mr. Naulings found himself hugging everyone — strangers, friends, co-workers. “I didn’t think this was a slaughterhouse,” he said. “It was a safe zone.”

Later, he heard that Mr. Justice had died, desperately texting his mother as the killer stalked the building. “He meant everything to me,” Mr. Naulings said of his friend. “He didn’t just die for nothing.”

Mr. Naulings never saw the gunman. He only heard the bullets, the shouts, the killer reloading. It lingers as a horrific soundtrack he can’t keep out of his head. He’s not sure when or if it will stop.

“It’s like the boogeyman, when you are in your closet or under the bed,” Mr. Naulings said. “You can’t see him but you can hear him.”


