


Russia, a perpetual powerhouse at the Olympics, sent more than 400 athletes to the last Summer Games, in London in 2012. At the opening ceremony in Rio de Janeiro in seven weeks, the country’s delegation may appear relatively meager during the parade of nations in Maracanã Stadium.

Russia’s track and field team, which won 18 medals in London, has been barred from competing in Rio, a ruling by the sport’s governing body announced on Friday that carries historical and political weight. No such penalty had ever been levied in the history of the Olympics. And Russian officials have claimed that interests beyond sports motivated the judgment against the country’s sports regime.

For American TV viewers, it may amount to little more than a minor subplot in NBC’s telecast.

“If I were doing the opening ceremony, I’d say something like, ‘While there isn’t the Cold War we grew up with, clearly there has been friction between Russia and the U.S. and very often for the Summer Games,’” said Bob Costas, who will anchor NBC’s broadcast but will not call the parade of nations.

“So while it’s not the same as it was when the U.S. and the Soviet Union were going at it in the 1960s and ’70s, it does take something away,” Costas said.

The absence of the Russian track and field team is unlikely to hurt NBC’s prime-time ratings for several reasons, among them the likelihood that the removal of a major rival might help the United States win more medals.

“I can’t see there being any impact,” said Dick Ebersol, a former chairman of NBC Sports. “Anything that helps you win more medals is a help.”

Mike Weisman, a former executive producer of NBC Sports, who ran the production of the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, said: “It helps if a power like Russia isn’t there. The United States will be in more finals and win more medals.”

Weisman recalled that the Soviet boycott of the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles helped raise the United States’ medal count.

“When we did ’88, we used as a selling point that unlike 1984, when all the best athletes weren’t there, this will be the best non-boycotted Olympics, with all the great athletes,” Weisman said. “But in events like gymnastics, we didn’t have a woman in the top 10. When we finished the gymnastics prelims, we said: ‘Watch the next few nights. You’ll see the East Germans, the Romanians and the Russians — tell your friends and neighbors.’”

In 1984, the United States’ medal count of 40 (including 16 golds) in track and field dwarfed the 11 won by the second-place nation, West Germany. Four years later, the United States and the Soviet Union tied with 26 medals in track and field.

NBC’s prime-time Olympic broadcasts are not overly dependent on track and field. The first week is dominated heavily by gymnastics and swimming and diving before track and field takes over in the second week. Ebersol said NBC was “ideally set up” to thrive without the Russian track and field team. Most of the American audience is hardly familiar with the top Russian athletes, despite the country’s historical success in track and field.

“You can’t tell me that there are star Russian athletes who are familiar to American viewers like Valery Brumel,” he said, referring to the Soviet high jumper who won a silver medal in the 1960 Olympics and a gold four years later.

In 2012, NBC’s four highest-rated nights of Olympic competition from London featured gymnastics (the top three featured the women), and the fifth featured the men’s 100-meter final but also included diving and gymnastics. In Beijing four years earlier, gymnastics and swimming were also the featured events on four of the five highest-rated nights. The third-ranked night included the men’s 100 meters, swimming and the women’s marathon. (Russia would not have had a medal contender in this year’s men’s 100 meters.)

Ebersol, who was instrumental in the deal-making that brought many Olympics to NBC, said the disciplinary action against the Russian track and field team by the International Association of Athletics Federations, the sport’s governing body, was “as strong and complete a statement on doping and what will happen to you if you systematically cheat.”

“This is great for all sport and anybody who wants a real step forward in clean competition,” Ebersol said. “The I.A.A.F. was strong and clear and direct in interpreting longtime rules.”

Brazilians, meanwhile, probably feel as if they cannot get a break.

As South America’s largest country prepares to host the Summer Games, that nation of 200 million has been buffeted by an unending torrent of bad news.

The oceanside host city is buckling under a surge in violent crime amid a national Zika epidemic that has spooked athletes and spectators alike.

Investigators are looking into an enormous bribery scheme involving the construction of Olympic venues. And a wave that struck an elevated waterfront cycling lane in April sent two men tumbling to their deaths.

When the Games begin on Aug. 5, Brazilians who tune in to the opening ceremony on television may be forced to toggle between Olympic pageantry and the spectacle of their once-popular president on trial.

With the news that Russia’s formidable track and field team had been barred from competing, many Brazilians could only shake their heads and hope for the best.

“It’s an honor to have the games in our country, but I’m scared to death that Brazil will be embarrassed during the Olympic Games,” said Milton Neves, 65, a journalist at the Rede Bandeirantes television network. “Brazil does not deserve to have the Olympics.”

Hosting a multibillion-dollar international sports event is never an easy endeavor, but ordinary Brazilians, veteran sports officials and foreign analysts agree on one thing: As it prepares to host thousands of athletes and a half-million spectators, Brazil is juggling a head-spinning array of challenges.

The country is enduring its most severe economic crisis in decades, and an extensive corruption scandal involving the state-run oil behemoth Petrobras has ensnared many members of the political business elite. The suspension last month of President Dilma Rousseff, who faces impeachment over accusations that she manipulated the federal budget, has largely paralyzed the government.

“I feel very anxious to have the Olympics in our backyard,” said Fernanda Seiffert, 38, a technology consultant from São Paulo who has bought tickets to the Games. “People are quite disillusioned about Brazil economically and politically, so I don’t know if we will see much patriotism from Brazilian fans. This is quite sad.”

On the streets of Rio’s Copacabana neighborhood, there were few outward signs on Friday that the world’s most hallowed sport competition was about to begin. Still, many Cariocas, as the city’s residents are called, said they expected public enthusiasm to surge as the Games drew nearer.

“The Games will bring us more work; I have hope,” said Marilene Margarida do Nascimento, 47, who gives massages on Rio’s iconic Copacabana beach.

For many, news that the Russians have been barred for their nation’s role in a colossal doping conspiracy was viewed as a positive development.

Carlos Garcia, 35, an announcer for Rádio Transamérica, said the ban would send an important message to all Olympic athletes that doping is unacceptable.

“Sports competitions are full of good examples of overcoming obstacles,” he said. “Examples like these make up the beautiful history of the Olympic Games. Anyone who does not respect the basic rules of fair play and sportsmanship does not meet the requirements to be part of this story.”


