


“Black Orpheus”

(ECM)

Masabumi Kikuchi’s late solo-piano playing, all improvised, very little of it recorded, was a deep-blue nebula, formally abstract yet full of articulation and musical meaning, affecting on an almost primal level. Mr. Kikuchi died in July 2015 at the age of 75, after having lived in New York City for more than 40 years, gradually winnowing down his musical circle to a select few; “Black Orpheus” is a live recording from Tokyo made in October 2012, at one of his last public solo performances.

I write “public solo performances” because Mr. Kikuchi did record performative solo-piano music at home, privately, in his final years — a lot of it, still unreleased — and also because what he did in front of audiences seemed very private. He seemed to be going way inside. The results could seem perverse or beautiful — or healthily confusing.

His hands often didn’t move in predictable coordination. He played peacefully when moving through dissonance, and when he constructed a ballad phrase, his investment was lingering and extraordinary, as if the purpose were nothing less than to play the greatest ballad phrase ever.

All of “Black Orpheus” is improvised, in self-sustaining pieces of four to eight minutes (each called “Tokyo”), other than two ballads he’d recorded before. One is the title track, the Brazilian standard by Luiz Bonfá and Antônio Maria, which he’d recorded several times since the 1960s, and one is “Little Abi,” a pensive song that became a sort of standard for him.

A committed abstractionist and a generally unsentimental musician, Mr. Kikuchi could appear contradictory around songs, especially sentimental ones. About seven months before this concert, he spoke to me of how he didn’t like playing songs, and how happy he was to be “free” from having to play them anymore. “Except for the songs I’m crazy about,” he added. Which are those, I asked? “A lot,” he said. His rules weren’t for anyone else to hold him to.

When he played at slow tempos, his touch could be extraordinary, weaving between playing with purpose and conjuring aftereffects in real time: the footprints rather than the walk, the smoke stains rather than the fire. On this record, never mind the “songs.” The slow improvisations here are the stars: “Tokyo Part III,” which grows into a mild flurry of dissonance; “Tokyo Part IV,” with its Bill Evans-like, rootless chord voicings; and the super-slow, magisterial “Tokyo Part IX.” There is no steady rhythm and no single, coherent, load-bearing beam of song in any of them. On the other hand, they’re leaking song all over the place.


