


For months, the de Blasio administration has insisted that its top officials knew nothing about deed restrictions that were lifted by a city agency on a nursing home on the Lower East Side of Manhattan — learning of it only in late February, after the building was sold to luxury condominium developers for $116 million.

The closing of the home, a former AIDS hospice known as Rivington House, prompted outrage among community leaders, as well as a scramble by city officials to find out how a for-profit company made roughly $72 million and, in the process, replaced a needed nursing center with luxury apartments in a neighborhood already teeming with them.

The city halted all new deed modifications in early March. Three investigations began soon after.

In a pair of memos obtained by The New York Times, a top official in the de Blasio administration was apprised on the progress in removing the restrictions at Rivington House twice in the middle of 2015 — suggesting involvement and coordination by close advisers to Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, months earlier than the administration has acknowledged.

In the memos the Department of Citywide Administrative Services informed the first deputy mayor, Anthony Shorris, that it was working to remove the restrictions after Allure Group, a for-profit nursing-home company, had agreed to pay the city $16.15 million to do so.

The transactions that resulted in the lifting of the restrictions and the sale of the nursing home to condominium developers are the subject of parallel investigations by the state attorney general, the city comptroller and the city’s Investigation Department.

“Landau seeks to remove the restrictions but intends to use the property as a for-profit nursing home,” the department’s then-commissioner, Stacey Cumberbatch, wrote to Mr. Shorris in a memo dated May 6, 2015, referring to an owner of the company, Joel Landau. “The next step is a public hearing,” she added, “prior to requesting a mayoral authorization document.”

After the city removed the restrictions on the property, which barred any use other than as a nonprofit health care center, Allure Group sold the home to the developers in February for $116 million.

Officials at City Hall have said that Mr. Shorris did not know until after the sale that the city had lifted all deed restrictions on the property. The first deputy mayor “learned of the transaction and the lifting of the full deed restriction in late February,” according to background on the deal provided by City Hall in April, after the transactions became public. “He did not know D.C.A.S. had lifted the deed restriction for Allure.”

But in the May memo — and in another on July 8, 2015 — Ms. Cumberbatch updated Mr. Shorris as part of a weekly report on “items of interest.”

“D.C.A.S. is proceeding to remove two use restrictions that were imposed when the Rivington House property was sold by the city in 1992,” the July memo explained, one limiting use to nonprofits, the other to health care providers. The department “expects to have a formalized deed modification approved by the Law Department in July,” according to the memo, copied to two members of Mr. Shorris’s staff.

Allure Group went into contract to sell the building to developers on May 11, 2015, the same day that the city ran a public notice in the City Record about the plan to lift the restrictions, and five days after the May memo.

Mr. de Blasio has said he did not find out about the questionable deals surrounding Rivington House until he heard about it from the media. City Hall officials have said that Mr. Shorris and others, who were scrambling to address the issue in early March, did not bring it to the mayor’s attention because they were still gathering facts.

The subject also did not come up, City Hall officials have said, during a meeting between Mr. de Blasio and Mark G. Peters, the commissioner of the Investigation Department, at City Hall on March 1, the same day that officials have said the agency began its inquiry. The city also halted all new deed changes that day.

Mr. de Blasio has since said that the administration was misled by Allure Group, a contention bolstered early this week by the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, who, speaking to reporters on Tuesday, described the company as an “unscrupulous player” whose promises had been broken “in prior sales.” Mr. Schneiderman’s office has moved to block any new purchases of nonprofits by Allure Group as the investigation continues.

“Our responsibility to protect the integrity of ongoing reviews prevents us from commenting on this,” said Eric F. Phillips, who was appointed as Mr. de Blasio’s press secretary on Friday. Asked if the administration was walking back from its previous statement, he said no.

The memos, weekly agency reports that are usually circulated as attachments, touched on a number of issues being handled by the Department of Citywide Administrative Services; neither discussed the possibility of converting the nursing home into apartments.

A spokeswoman for Allure Group declined to comment.

The fate of Rivington House had been a concern for local elected officials and community members who had wanted the building to remain a nursing home. The question of what to do with the building was also discussed by the deputy mayors, including Mr. Shorris, early on in the mayor’s term, current and former officials have said.

“It looks like there is movement on the Rivington House issue,” wrote Ms. Cumberbatch’s chief of staff, Sally Renfro, in an email on Sept. 2, 2014, to the general counsel for the Department of Citywide Administrative Services. She added that a staff member “from DM Shorris’s office called to ask if there are any other steps required to remove the deed restriction on Rivington House, assuming Village Care pays the appraisal amount,” referring to the original nonprofit owner of the home.

The city typically sets the value of removing a deed restriction at 12 to 25 percent of the property’s appraised value.

But the nonprofit and the city never agreed on a price for lifting the restrictions. Village Care entered into contract in October 2014 to sell the property to Allure Group for $28 million.


