


The billionaire business tycoon Donald J. Trump established a winning pattern in Republican presidential primaries. He’d rip his rivals, then take a softer tone after he had beaten them.

“I like everyone once it’s over,” he said last week.

Unfortunately for Mr. Trump, too many Republicans have so far refused to reciprocate. Unless he can change their minds, defections from within his own party will prevent him from ever becoming competitive in a general election against the leading Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton.

Misgivings among Republican leaders dominated Mr. Trump’s first week as his party’s presumptive nominee. House Speaker Paul D. Ryan, the 2012 nominee Mitt Romney, both the former presidents Bush, and the recent Trump rival Jeb Bush have all declined to back him.

But their objections merely represent symptoms of Mr. Trump’s potentially crippling ailment: Though he managed to knock out all his primary rivals, he hasn’t won over enough rank-and-file Republicans to win in November.

Once, the United States’ two political parties were ideologically diverse, which allowed Democratic or Republican presidential nominees to offset defections by attracting like-minded voters from the other side. The modern era of polarization has largely erased that possibility, leaving liberals almost exclusively Democratic and conservatives almost exclusively Republican.

The result has been a sharp increase in internal cohesion, from partisan voting in Congress to rank-and-file behavior on Election Day. Exit polls from presidential contests tell the story.

In 1976, a significant number of conservatives still called themselves Democrats, and many liberals called themselves Republicans. Jimmy Carter won the presidency that year with support from just 80 percent of fellow Democrats. Since then, except for the three-way contest in which Bill Clinton defeated George H.W. Bush and Ross Perot in 1992, no one has won the White House while doing so poorly with members of his own party.

In the last four presidential elections, Republican nominees have drawn more than 90 percent of the votes from Republicans each time. The range for Democrats has been from 87 percent (Al Gore in 2000) to 93 percent (President Obama in 2012).

In the most recent NBC News/Wall Street Journal survey, Mr. Trump drew only 72 percent support among Republicans, while Mrs. Clinton drew 87 percent support among Democrats. That gap in party solidarity (each drew 40 percent from independents) left Mrs. Clinton with a lead of 11 percentage points.

The gap was equally stark when respondents evaluated the two candidates personally. The survey found that 63 percent of Democrats viewed Mrs. Clinton favorably, while 20 percent viewed her negatively. Republicans were split evenly on Mr. Trump, with 42 percent positive and 42 percent negative.

Most worrisome for the presumptive Republican nominee, 24 percent of Republicans reported “very negative” views of him. With 87 percent of Democrats reporting negative views of him, the opposition of one in four Republicans would be impossible to overcome.

So far, Mr. Trump has acted cavalier about discord in the party. He blasted Jeb Bush, Senator Lindsey Graham and Mr. Romney after they refused to back him.

When Mr. Ryan demurred, Mr. Trump said he wasn’t ready to support the speaker’s agenda either. He appeared to disavow two positions that appeal to free-market conservatives like the speaker — opposition to a minimum-wage increase and support for cutting the top rate of income tax paid by the most affluent Americans.

“I am confident I can unite much of” the Republican Party, Mr. Trump said last week in discussing the criticism from within his party. But, he added, “Honestly, there are some people I really don’t want.”

His problem is that “much” isn’t enough. Mr. Trump’s candidacy gives every sign of galvanizing opposition from leading elements of the modern Democratic coalition, including millennials, women, Hispanics, blacks and college-educated voters.

As a leading figure in Democratic politics for a quarter of a century whose husband presided over an economic boom, Mrs. Clinton remains broadly acceptable within her party. To have a reasonable chance to win, Mr. Trump must bring together much more of his own.


