


Continuing its run through the opposition ads of the “Never Trump” movement, the “super PAC” supporting Hillary Clinton released an emotional ad on Monday featuring an Ohio family with a disabled child who criticize Donald J. Trump for mocking a disabled journalist.

A husband and wife tell their story, side by side, of learning through an ultrasound that their daughter, Grace, would be born with spina bifida, a spinal condition. Images of young Grace flicker by — as a newborn in the hospital, sleeping near a cross, smiling and offering a hug from her wheelchair — while her parents tell of her loving personality: “She brings out the goodness in each person.”

Twenty seconds in, the mother shifts to Mr. Trump, saying, “When I saw Donald Trump mock a disabled person, I was just shocked.” A well-known clip plays in full of Mr. Trump imitating the journalist, a New York Times reporter who has a condition that limits the functioning of his joints. Then the mother offers a reproach: “The children at Grace’s school all know never to mock her. And so, for an adult to mock someone with a disability is shocking.” Visuals of Mr. Trump’s imitation are played again for good measure.

The husband concludes the ad: “When I saw Donald Trump mock someone with a disability, it showed me his soul. It showed me his heart. And I didn’t like what I saw.”

An emotional story told by a brave family, but the seams of focus groups show a little stronger than usual in this ad. Variations of the phrase “mocked someone with a disability” are spoken four times in about 30 seconds of the 60-second ad, almost as if taken right from a focus group response.

Nonetheless, the super PAC, Priorities USA Action, is obviously focusing on the issue because it believes it will resonate strongly in swing states. And the ad certainly drives it home, repeatedly.

Mr. Trump has denied that he was mocking the reporter, saying that he doesn’t even recall having met him. But news articles appear to contradict Mr. Trump’s memory.

The ads are part of a $20 million reservation that the group has pledged to run from Wednesday through the Republican convention next month in seven key swing states: Ohio, Virginia, Florida, New Hampshire, Iowa, Colorado and Nevada. It is spending $4.5 million in those states during the first week that the ad is running.

Many of Mr. Trump’s Republican primary opponents, including Jeb Bush, used Mr. Trump’s mockery of the reporter in negative advertisements, seemingly to no avail. But as Priorities USA showed with its first ad, which mirrored a similar effort by a “Stop Trump” PAC, it is not viewing the primary advertising efforts as indicative of what will work with a general election audience.

And aside from the message, the chosen swing states are a significant indicator of where Priorities thinks its air support will be needed. Most notably absent are Wisconsin and North Carolina, recently swing states, but perhaps ones that Priorities views as safer at this point in the campaign.


