


SYDNEY, Australia — The police opened fire on student protesters in Papua New Guinea’s capital, Port Moresby, on Wednesday, a member of the country’s Parliament said. Officials said that more than 20 people were wounded but that no one was killed.

About 2,000 students from the University of Papua New Guinea had gathered to make their way to Parliament to demand that Prime Minister Peter O’Neill resign, said the lawmaker, Gary Juffa. Mr. O’Neill has been embroiled in a long-running corruption scandal, and for weeks thousands of university students have boycotted classes and demanded his resignation.

“Paramilitary police and squad police told the students they needed to turn back because they did not have permission to hold the protest,” said Mr. Juffa, a critic of the prime minister. “Then they started firing.”

A spokesman for the country’s police force, Dominic Kakas, said that 23 people had been hospitalized, at least five of them in critical condition.

Noel Anjo, a demonstrator, said that students from the university had decided to take buses to Parliament to protest but that they were stopped at a police roadblock and asked to disembark. He said he later heard shots. “No one knows yet how many are hurt,” he said.

Video posted on social media showed a number of people running as shots rang out, and photos showed wounded people being carried. The authenticity of the images could not immediately be verified.

A statement from Mr. O’Neill’s office blamed “agitators” from outside the university for both the violence and the weeks of student protest, saying that members of the political opposition had been involved in the demonstrations.

“The facts relayed to me are that a small group of students were violent, threw rocks at police and provoked a response that came in the form of tear gas and warning shots,” Mr. O’Neill said in the statement. “The factors that led to students being injured are yet to be ascertained.”

The statement promised an investigation of what it called “external funding” of the protests. It made no mention of the police or of investigating the shooting, as Human Rights Watch has demanded.

Phil Robertson, the rights group’s deputy Asia director, said Mr. O’Neill “should immediately launch an impartial, thorough and transparent investigation, and all officials found criminally culpable for orders and actions resulting in injuries and deaths should be held to account, no matter what their rank.”

Demonstrators set fire to a university dormitory after the shooting, according to the police, who also said that some shops had been looted.

Mr. O’Neill, who was elected in 2012, has been accused of authorizing millions of dollars in corrupt payments to a law firm, which he denies. Opposition politicians have called for him to temporarily step down from his office while an investigation is conducted.


