


MOSCOW — The Russian parliament elected a retired police general, trained in Soviet times, as the country’s human rights ombudsman on Friday, prompting widespread criticism from the opposition.

The new ombudsman, Tatyana N. Moskalkova, worked her way through the ranks of the Soviet and Russian police for more than two decades, rising to become a major general of the Interior Ministry. Ms. Moskalkova retired in 2007 and won a seat in the parliament, or Duma, as a member of Just Russia, a left-leaning pro-government party.

The post of human rights ombudsman was introduced in Russia in 1993 and was first filled by Sergei A. Kovalyov, a prominent dissident who had been held in a Soviet prison camp for his political views.

Unlike most of her predecessors in the post, Ms. Moskalkova lacks experience as a human rights activist. This raised concerns not only among human rights advocates, but also from a Kremlin-friendly populist politician, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, who objected to her career path.

“Tatyana Nikolaevna is a very nice person, but her work in the Soviet police and in the police under Yeltsin cannot make us believe that she is able and wants to defend human rights,” Mr. Zhirinovsky said during debates in the Duma, referring to President Boris N. Yeltsin. “This mocks the post of a human rights ombudsman. Nowhere and nobody will nominate a former policeman to this post.”

Lev Ponomaryov, head of the For Human Rights movement, was also critical of her election. “Given her background, I don’t understand how we can communicate,” he told the newspaper Kommersant.

Sergei M. Mironov, leader of Ms. Moskalkova’s party, rose to her defense, saying that she “was defending human rights” during her tenure in the Soviet and Russian Interior Ministries.

Ms. Moskalkova herself did little to allay doubts about her qualifications.

“Today, human rights issues are actively exploited by Western and American structures to manipulate, blackmail and attempt to destabilize and pressure Russia,” Ms. Moskalkova told lawmakers in her speech before the vote. “We know how many lies there were about Crimea and Ukraine, and it is very important that we defend not only every single person, but the whole system of values in Russia.”

To no one’s surprise, the Kremlin endorsed Ms. Moskalkova’s election. “Undoubtedly, the Kremlin supports this candidate and this decision,” Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesman, told reporters.

Ms. Moskalkova holds doctoral degrees in law and philosophy. Her dissertation was titled “The Culture of Countering Evil in the Work of Law Enforcement Agencies.”

In 2015, Ms. Moskalkova suggested renaming Russia’s Interior Ministry as the Cheka, the name of the first Soviet state security organization, and infamous for its central role in Stalin’s purges.

“You won’t be ashamed of me,” Ms. Moskalkova told Russian lawmakers after her election.


