


SUBIC BAY, the Philippines — Rodrigo Duterte, the outspoken mayor of Davao City and the front-runner in the Philippines’ presidential election, told voters recently that he would settle territorial disputes in the South China Sea by taking on the Chinese Navy on a Jet Ski.

The candidate’s bravado worries some voters. “If Duterte wins, it will be frightening,” said Joyce Asilo, 30, a Manila resident who was visiting Subic Bay, a former American base. “He could start a war with China. He’s very inconsistent in what he says.”

The country’s relationship with China is one of the issues facing voters in the Philippines on Monday, when they will elect hundreds of government officials — from president to mayors — to address a raft of problems that threaten to derail the Philippine economy, one of the fastest growing in Asia. But the presidential race has descended into a series of off-color jokes, threats, name-calling and allegations about hidden bank accounts.

Mr. Duterte, who has a substantial lead in the polls, has joked that he would have liked to have raped an Australian missionary who was killed in a 1989 prison riot in Davao City and said disabled people should consider suicide. He has been accused of having a secret bank account containing ill-gotten wealth. He is running on a strict law-and-order platform and has denied accusations of corruption, but has also refused to reveal details about the account.

Another presidential contender, Vice President Jejomar Binay, is under investigation by the country’s top corruption agency in connection with allegations that he and his family siphoned large sums of money from a government project in Makati, where he was once the mayor. He has called the charges politically motivated.

Grace Poe, a senator, and Mar Roxas, who was endorsed by President Benigno Aquino III and is a grandson of a former president, are also trailing in the polls. Mr. Roxas has a distinguished résumé of government service, but he has been repeatedly mocked by Filipino social media users because of photo opportunities gone wrong, including one in which he took a spill on a motorcycle during a disaster relief operation.

“I don’t know what to believe,” said Carla Yanga, a 25-year-old resident of Pasig, on the outskirts of Manila. “I like Roxas, but my parents are voting for Duterte. I don’t know.”

The talk of scandals, allegations and ferocious social media posts has overshadowed the challenges facing the country. Despite strong economic growth and resurgent foreign investment, the Philippines still has high levels of poverty and unemployment, crumbling infrastructure, and a raging war in the southern part of the country against insurgents and kidnap-for-ransom gangs.

The new government must also grapple with territorial claims by China in the South China Sea, in an area that includes much of the Philippines’ 200-mile exclusive economic zone along its western coastline. Mr. Aquino, who cannot run again because of term limits, has responded by challenging China’s claims in a United Nations arbitration court and by making a deal with the United States that would increase the number of American ships and aircraft operating in the Philippines.

Mr. Aquino has refused to talk directly to China about the issue and has insisted that multilateral forums, like the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, deal with the matter so the claimants can present a united front against China.

The main presidential candidates support Philippine claims in the South China Sea and back the case against China at the international court, but Mr. Binay and Mr. Duterte also support holding direct talks with China. None of the candidates are calling for the cancellation of the military deal with the United States, though some have called for it to be re-examined.

Mr. Duterte and Mr. Binay seek a more conciliatory approach toward China and accuse Mr. Aquino of being too confrontational. Both candidates have suggested engaging in investment projects with the Chinese.

In a recent blog post, Ernest Z. Bower, a senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, in Washington, wrote that the next Philippine president should not enter into bilateral talks with China over the South China Sea.

Mr. Bower argued that such an approach would weaken the claims of other nations in the region and increase the likelihood of conflict. He said the international court was the best forum for resolving competing claims.

“If the decision is released and a new administration ignores it to pursue the bilateral negotiations that China has demanded all along, it decreases the incentive for other small nations to turn to international law and arbitration,” he wrote. “As other avenues for fair resolution of disputes are shut, states will increasingly turn to military buildup in order to defend their interests with force.”

Others have a more optimistic view. Julio S. Amador, the deputy director general of the Foreign Service Institute in Manila, a government-run think tank, said none of the candidates had indicated that they would abandon the international arbitration case.

“I do believe that the presidency will change whoever is elected, and his or her foreign policy will be more nuanced than the general statements that were let loose during the campaign,” Mr. Amador said. “After all, during elections in the Philippines, it’s common that the intended audience is internal.”

Gregory Poling, the director of the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, which tracks developments in the South China Sea, said support for international arbitration and the military deal with the United States was unlikely to change.

“No matter who is elected, the new president isn’t going to be able to engineer any sharp policy turns on the South China Sea,” Mr. Poling said. “It is simply too prominent an issue with the electorate.”

He added, however, that he was concerned about comments Mr. Duterte had made about the reliability of the alliance with the United States. It “could affect his decision making in any future crisis with Beijing, or his willingness to seek an eventual accommodation, if he assumes the United States doesn’t really have the Philippines’ back,” Mr. Poling said.

In Subic Bay, less than 200 miles from a shoal claimed by the Philippines but occupied by China, a taxi driver, Pete Simpao, seemed perplexed when asked about the South China Sea dispute.

“I don’t know about that,” Mr. Simpao, 74, said. “We need to control the drugs, the killings, the rapes, the corruption. I have a kid in Manila, and I’m always worried about the crime there. I’m for Duterte.”


