


Situated several stories above Bleecker Street, the fashion designer Autumn Hruby’s studio is a series of vignettes: Tchotchkes sit carefully grouped, lush plant leaves tumble out of a self-watering contraption and her dogs, Bob and Charlie, lay across the floor. Hruby and her editorial assistants are huddled together in front of a large computer monitor, finalizing the inaugural volumes of Hesperios Journal, Hruby’s art and literary publication, which launches this week. A cream-colored sweater pictured on the screen also hangs on a nearby clothing rack — alongside other pale pink, ecru, burgundy and navy knits — which are made under the same name, Hesperios, Greek for “the evening star.”

“I’m definitely the type of person who needs to do a lot at once; I like to keep stimulated, but I’m also determined to finish what I start,” Hruby says. Born in Chicago and raised in Northern California, she fully devoted herself to photography after high school graduation, which took her to Amsterdam, France and Italy. She relocated to Tokyo in the early aughts to help a friend launch a clothing line, then returned to the States in 2004 and formed a design agency between L.A. and Montreal. “In 2008, I got burned out,” she says. “I became tired of trying to meet the needs of clients and I wasn’t passionate about it anymore.” She returned to photography, picked up more freelance assignments and headed to New York — and toyed with the idea of launching her own clothing line.

She wanted to begin with a garment she loves: sweaters. “Last summer, I was in Martha’s Vineyard at an estate sale — they were selling everything from records to chairs — and a charming old man approached me,” Hruby recounts. “He had a coral cashmere sweater wrapped around his neck and, for some reason, he shared with me that his wife had just passed and he’d given everything away except for her cashmere sweaters. He had saved those for the women she’d played bridge with. That was a real confirmation for me. I wanted to start the collection on the basis of making something that would last a long time.” Hruby’s first Hesperios Knit offering, for spring/summer 2016, was inspired by the beaches of Martha’s Vineyard as well as the island of Gotland, Sweden, where she has spent time. The collection includes traditional silhouettes, including boxy and fitted pullovers and tank tops to button-down work shirts and dresses. (Her fall/winter 2016 knits consist of crop tops, long and short pleated skirts, striped and solid turtlenecks and unisex pullovers.)

The idea for Hesperios Journal, though, predated all of this: Hruby originally considered making an art book a decade ago, and began to gather content in 2012. “I really love what Rei Kawakubo created with SIX Magazine — it’s sort of journalistic — very inspiring,” she says, citing Cahiers d’Art, Lapham’s Quarterly, ACNE Paper and Visionaire as other sources of inspiration. She emphasizes that she wanted to make something non-disposable, that people would hold on to, like her knits. She found a partner in the Swedish graphic designer Henrik Nygren and now, the two volumes are available for preorder, packaged together and small enough to carry around. Volume 1, called “Eudaimonia,” is bound by the theme of personal happiness; Volume 2 centers on memory. Each comprises of short stories, interviews, collages, illustrations, photographs (of the Hesperios Knit collections and otherwise) and reading lists from a slew of contributors, Hruby among them. She plans to print 10,000 copies total.

She’ll soon introduce an online concept shop to sell pieces made by some of the Journal’s participants, like vessels from the Dutch ceramicist Babs Haenen and a limited-edition sweater with the mixed-media artist Jim Drain. She is learning about silks for her spring/summer 2017 collection and hopes to add more stores (Hesperios already counts Totokaelo as a stockist) to her roster. Although Hruby’s to-do list is endless, she can check off one item: launch a lifestyle brand. “Well, that wasn’t intentional,” she says, laughing. “I guess that I did create a world … I see myself as a documenter, a designer, an editor … but I like to make things and share them with people.”


