


LONDON — The British director Terence Davies paused mid-remark, closed his eyes and quoted from Siegfried Sassoon’s “Concert Interpretation”: “No tremor bodes eruptions and alarms/They are listening to this not-quite-new audacity/As though it were by someone dead — like Brahms.” He opened his eyes and burst out laughing. “I did that at my drama school audition,” he said.

Mr. Davies, 70, has an excellent memory. He remembers the poems he has read and reread over the years and long stretches of dialogue and images from movies he saw as a child. He remembers how cobblestones look after rain, how sun slants through clouds and how miserable he felt as a young man stuck in a clerical job. And he remembers, vividly and with some bitterness, the long and difficult path to making “Sunset Song,” his new film opening May 13 in the United States and based on the 1932 novel of the same name by the Scottish writer Lewis Grassic Gibbon.

“A movie with a catch or sob in its singing voice: a beautifully made and deeply felt adaptation,” Peter Bradshaw wrote in The Guardian when the film was released in Britain in December.

Getting there took awhile.

“Eighteen years ago, I first took the idea to the U.K. Film Council, and we were so shabbily treated,” Mr. Davies said. “It went on and on, and we had to jump through every kind of hoop, and eventually they said, ‘It hasn’t got legs,’ because all they wanted to do was make money and compete with America. It was appalling!”

Mr. Davies, white-haired and pink-complexioned, dressed in that great signifier of British rectitude — a cardigan — was sitting in the lobby of the British Film Institute here, animated and gesticulating. Although he possesses an Old World courtesy and charm, he is also boyishly passionate and frequently indiscreetly unfiltered.

“I told them, you’re idiots; we can’t do that here,” he said. “There have got to be stories which tell of a country’s soul.”

When money was finally denied, Mr. Davies gave an interview to The Guardian in which he was openly rude about the head of the council (a body that no longer exists) and a few other industry players for good measure. “I have never been able to play the career game,” he stated.

Sol Papadopoulos, who with Roy Boulter produced Mr. Davies’s 2008 documentary, “Of Time and the City,” agreed. “When we asked him, ‘What next?’ and he straightaway said ‘Sunset Song,’ we weren’t keen at all,” he said. “It had a history that almost ended his career the first time.”

But Mr. Davies had not given up on the film. “I don’t really know why,” he said. “There was something inside me that felt it was worthwhile. Perhaps films come about when you are mature enough to do them.”

The film, set before and during World War I, is a lyrical evocation of the Scottish landscape and the hard lives of the farmers who work it. It centers on Chris Guthrie (played by Agyness Deyn), the clever daughter of a farming family. “On a Sunday evening in the 1970s, there was always a book dramatization on the radio, and in 1971 it was ‘Sunset Song,’” Mr. Davies said. “I loved it. It is about the Scottish peasantry, about the land, about the family, which is the greatest source of joy and terror; all tragedies are about families really.”

Mr. Davies’s own family and upbringing in Liverpool — he was the youngest of 10 children in a working-class Catholic family — has been the central subject of much of his work. “Having been brought up a Catholic, I think death is preferable,” he declared at one point. Then there’s his take on being gay. “The presumption that gays are all happy and jolly about it is wrong,” he said. “Being gay, and religion, has ruined my life.”

Mr. Davies left school at 16, working 10 years as a clerk and trainee accountant before getting a place at a drama school in Coventry. Once there, he wrote the first part of three short films that would become known as “The Terence Davies Trilogy,” a semi-autobiographical account, from childhood to old age, of a tormented gay man.

He sent the script to the British Film Institute, which offered him money to direct the film. Although Mr. Davies described the experience and the film as “awful,” it led to his applying to film school in London. He scraped together the money to make the other films in the trilogy, and then his first feature films, “Distant Voices, Still Lives” (1988) and “The Long Day Closes” (1992), both of which gained acclaim. But, he said, “everything was a struggle.” (His work is the subject of a retrospective running through May 22 at the Museum of the Moving Image.)

The critical success of “The House of Mirth” (2000), based on the Edith Wharton novel, should have helped but didn’t. Mr. Davies didn’t make his next movie until 2008, and had remortgaged his house to keep going, when Mr. Papadopoulos and Mr. Boulter asked him to film a documentary to commemorate Liverpool as that year’s European capital of culture.

“Of Time and the City” proved a strong comeback. “Working with the most basic and most ethereal of cinematic materials — time and memory — Mr. Davies has devised a mosaiclike film language,” Dennis Lim wrote in The New York Times.

Mr. Davies said he had always been interested in “the way memory instinctively goes from one important moment to another,” a central device in his “The Deep Blue Sea” (2012), starring Rachel Weisz and Tom Hiddleston. Ms. Weisz’s performance won high admiration, as has Ms. Deyn’s in “Sunset Song,” perhaps because of Mr. Davies’s strong feelings about the social constraints on women — stemming, he said, from his mother’s difficult life.

Ms. Deyn, a model turned actress, said Mr. Davies was particular about “the way women are seen and how a story should be told.” By phone from New York, she added: “He allows you space and validates you in a way you don’t realize at the time. He knows beat by beat, shot by shot, what he wants. Sometimes there would be five or six takes, but he rarely does more than two, because his judgment is so specific.”

In an email, Mr. Hiddleston said he “conducts scenes like music (‘forte,’ ‘piano,’ ‘pianissimo’),” and added, “I have a hunch that he can only work on material which somehow expresses a part of himself.”

After long periods of being fallow, Mr. Davies seems to be on a roll. He has another film out later this year, a biopic about the poet Emily Dickinson, “A Quiet Passion,” starring Cynthia Nixon, and two other projects in the works. “I can’t do anything that I don’t passionately believe in,” he said. “I can’t see the frames.”


