


AFTER disasters like the recent earthquakes in Ecuador and Japan, people often want to help the victims. But they should take steps to make sure their donations are going to legitimate aid groups.

“Scammers follow the headlines,” said Colleen Tressler, a consumer education specialist with the Federal Trade Commission, which this week reminded consumers that urgent appeals for disaster aid made in person, by phone or online “may not be on the up-and-up.”

The 7.8-magnitude earthquake that struck Ecuador last weekend killed more than 400 people and injured more than 2,000. The temblor also left thousands more homeless, as it destroyed buildings and knocked out power. Two quakes that struck Japan killed more than 40 people and forced thousands into temporary shelters.

So how should consumers determine what organization deserves their cash? Research a charity on your own before making a donation, said Sandra Miniutti, vice president of marketing at Charity Navigator, a website that ranks charities on their financial health and transparency.

“If you see something on social media that tugs at your heartstrings,” Ms. Miniutti said, “go to the original website and check it out.”

Don’t respond to email solicitations, she said, and don’t follow any links in the emails, even if they appear legitimate. It’s also best to avoid requests made by telephone, she said. They are usually made by a for-profit company hired by the charity, and the cost of their services reduces the proportion of your donation that the charity will actually receive. Charity Navigator offers additional tips on its website.

The group also urges donors to keep tabs on how charities use their gifts. Charity Navigator has posted on its website a review of charities that solicited donations for the devastating Nepal earthquakes last spring.

While effective organizations spend more money on actual programs than on overhead, donors should also be skeptical of any appeal that claims to spend every penny raised on direct aid, said Bennett Weiner, chief operating officer of the BBB Wise Giving Alliance, an affiliate of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, which evaluates charities on 20 standards. “Watch for 100 percent claims,” he said, because they are probably exaggerated. “There are always some type of costs involved.”

Mr. Weiner urged donors to consider a group’s track record in helping with natural disasters, especially those in foreign countries. Efforts commonly spring up to solicit donations of food or clothing, but they lack the logistical infrastructure to deliver the items in a timely way. “Often we see activities that are well meaning, but not well planned,” he said. Without a distribution network to ship goods overseas, he said, “It’s not very effective.”

Other sites that offer research on charitable organizations include CharityWatch andGuideStar.

Here are some questions and answers about giving after disasters:

■ How can I find charities that are specifically helping in Ecuador and Japan?

Charity Navigator lists three highly rated groups providing earthquake aid and will update as more groups provide information.

Charity Navigator’s criteria include the ability of donors to designate their funds for a specific disaster, Ms. Miniutti said. Other legitimate charities may be providing disaster assistance in the earthquake zone, she said, but they are not listed because they may reserve the right to direct funds to other causes.

BBB Wise Giving Alliance directs donors to a list of groups helping in Ecuador, and CharityWatch offers a list as well.

The New York attorney general’s office lists charities helping in Japan and Ecuador on its website:

■ Is it faster to donate via text message?

Giving by text is convenient for donors, but it can take up to 90 days for the organization to get the funds, depending on the message service used by the charity, according to the Federal Trade Commission. “The charge will show up on your mobile phone bill,” the agency said in a notice about giving to help earthquake victims. “But be aware that text donations are not immediate.” The F.T.C. advises confirming the phone number with the source before donating by text.

■ What if I suspect a charitable request isn’t legitimate?

You can file a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission.

You can also complain to the BBB Wise Giving Alliance.

Report suspicious email solicitations or websites to the F.B.I.’s Internet Crime Complaint center.

You also can contact the National Center for Disaster Fraud, an arm of the Justice Department, at 866-720-5721.


