


HONG KONG — The president of Taiwan does not travel much. China, which claims the self-ruled island as part of its territory, tries to block its leaders from visiting other countries. So trips are largely limited to the 22 countries that recognize Taiwan, with occasional stopovers in other places on the way.

Less than one month after he stepped down, the former president, Ma Ying-jeou, has found that, even out of office, his travel is restricted. This week, Taiwan’s new government barred him from traveling to Hong Kong for a speech at a news association awards dinner.

The government made the decision based on a 2003 law that limits the travel of high-level officials for three years after they leave office. Concerns about Mr. Ma’s previous access to classified information and the short time between Mr. Ma’s application and the event, on June 15, prompted the decision, said Alex Huang, a spokesman for President Tsai Ing-wen of Taiwan.

“Hong Kong is a place with a high level of sensitivity for Taiwan’s national security, and the risk of a former president visiting Hong Kong is difficult to control,” Mr. Huang said in a written statement.

Mr. Ma is the first former president under which the law that governs travel by top officials applies. Another former president, Chen Shui-bian, was barred from traveling after he left office in 2008, because he was under investigation for corruption. He was later convicted and sentenced to prison. He was released last year on medical parole.

Mr. Ma, who described his trip as a way to bring attention to Taiwan, questioned the move. “This decision has aroused a lot of debate in society,” he told reporters in Taipei on Monday. “Is this necessary? Is it fair? Is this reasonable? People nationwide are looking at this. I believe society has its own just appraisal.”

Some politicians in Mr. Ma’s Kuomintang, or Nationalist Party, have accused Taiwan’s new government of “political manipulation” in blocking the trip. Mr. Huang, the government spokesman, cautioned against political interpretations and said the decision came after a recommendation by a task force that included representatives from several ministries.

As president, Mr. Ma pushed a series of trade deals with China and met President Xi Jinping of China in Singapore, the first-ever meeting between the leader of the People’s Republic of China and the leader of the Republic of China, as Taiwan is officially known. The two sides of the Taiwan Strait have been separately governed since 1949, when Chiang Kai-shek fled to the island after losing a civil war to Mao Zedong’s Communists. Mr. Ma’s efforts eased tensions between the two sides but also stirred concern in Taiwan about growing Chinese influence over the island.

Ms. Tsai’s Democratic Progressive Party has traditionally supported Taiwan’s formal independence. She has said that she wants to maintain the status quo between the two sides and is expected to be far more cautious than Mr. Ma was toward China. Even before she assumed the presidency, China had taken steps to put pressure on her new government, holding military drills before her inauguration, pursuing criminal suspects from Taiwan abroad and renewing diplomatic ties with Gambia, which formerly recognized the island. Beijing has repeatedly called on her to accept the “92 Consensus,” which holds that mainland China and Taiwan are part of “one China,” each side with its own interpretation of what that means.

One possible concern over the proposed visit to Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese territory, was that Mr. Ma might have engaged in his own cross-strait diplomacy at a time when Ms. Tsai’s government is trying to determine how it will handle relations with China, said Jonathan Sullivan, associate professor and director of research at the School of Contemporary Chinese Studies at the University of Nottingham.

“If Ma had asked to appear in a less sensitive venue, like Tokyo for example, permission may have been granted, although we shouldn’t forget the lack of trust that persists around Ma,” Mr. Sullivan said by email. “The D.P.P. does not trust him and nor does the public at large — as demonstrated by the support for denying his application request.”

An editorial in The South China Morning Post, a newspaper in Hong Kong, criticized the decision as a “blot on Taiwan’s image.”

“It is ironic that a place with a thriving democracy and with a vibrant media should be blocking the attendance of a twice democratically elected leader at a regional showcase for excellence in journalism,” the newspaper said.

The Society of Publishers in Asia, the news organization that invited Mr. Ma to Hong Kong, said it planned instead to arrange a video link for Mr. Ma on Wednesday. The New York Times is one of more than 30 members of the association.


