


George Zimmerman isn’t giving up.

After he failed in his first two attempts to auction the firearm he used in 2012 to fatally shoot Trayvon Martin, an unarmed black 17-year-old, the former Florida neighborhood watch volunteer said Wednesday that he was evaluating fresh bids.

Mr. Zimmerman’s third auction, hosted by the United Gun Group’s website, closed at noon with a high bid of $138,900 by one “John Smith.” It was not known whether the buyer was serious or another of the saboteurs who had foiled Mr. Zimmerman’s last attempt by driving the price up to a bogus $66 million.

The initial auction listing, placed last week on gunbroker.com, was removed after the company received a wave of negative attention.

United Gun Group released a statement shortly after auction, saying that Mr. Zimmerman was vetting several offers. (The company said it had actually conducted two auctions simultaneously, one open to prequalified bidders and another open to the public.)

“Our part in the process is over, and we are going back to business as usual,” the group said.

In his listing, Mr. Zimmerman touted the weapon, a Kel-Tec PF-9, as “an American firearm icon.” He said proceeds would be used in part to fight violence against law enforcement officers by members of Black Lives Matter.

Mr. Zimmerman, who was acquitted of murder charges in the killing of Mr. Martin, incited further outrage Tuesday by attacking the teenager’s parents during an interview.

“They didn’t raise their son right,” he told The Daily Beast. “He attacked a complete stranger and attempted to kill him.”

Benjamin L. Crump, a lawyer for Mr. Martin’s parents, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

He told The Times last week that the family was appalled by the planned auction.

“It’s insulting,” he said. “To everybody else — the public, the media — it’s a hashtag, it’s a cause, it’s a news story. To them, that’s their child.”

United Gun Group, based in Missouri, has sought to deflect anger over the sale by contending that the online marketplace has chosen to abide by the principles of individual liberty.

“The Constitution avoids moral judgment,” Todd Underwood, the company’s founder, said in an email on Wednesday. “We take our own subjective view out of the equation. Thousands of people have strong views on both sides; you tell me who is righteous.”


