


CLEVELAND — Knock me over with a feather: LeBron James still can play basketball.

The Cavaliers had lurched into a deep ditch in the past week, losing the first two games of the N.B.A. finals by massacre margins.

And the same tired old Greek chorus took up the same tired old dirge about James: Why doesn’t he take over games when the competition gets tough? Anyone with a vertical leap and basketball shorts could make his way through the powder-puff Eastern Conference to the N.B.A. finals.

A Yahoo writer this week offered a wonderful parenthetical insult of James: “The best player in the world, so called.”

You recalled that insult in the third quarter of Game 3 on Wednesday night, when James came loping like a Big Cat in pursuit of an antelope and stripped a pass to Stephen Curry. Curry bumped James and he fell to all fours, without ever losing control of the ball. Then James sprang to his feet and flipped the ball to Kyrie Irving, the little point guard, who faked out a Warrior defender and flipped the ball into the air.

Irving confessed this was not a great alley-oop pass. It soared too high, roughly in the direction of the fifth row in the stands. “You know, some people may say it’s a bad pass,” he said. “But I wanted to see something great.”

What happened next? James shrugged. “He threw it. I had to get it.”

James got it. He soared so high that his eyes were on a level with the basket. His right hand reached, Elastic Man style, and momentarily cradled the ball before slamming it through the basket.

Irving smiled, sardonically, and whistled.

“It was awesome.”

Irving was talking about the so-called star, the 31-year-old James, who finished the game with 32 points, 11 rebounds and 6 assists, not to mention a steal and 2 blocked shots. The Cavaliers won by 30.

Earlier, you landed in this handsome Great Lakes city, the sun glinting off shadowed waters, Canadian breezes washing through its streets, and it was as though the burg was seized by a collective nervous breakdown. You asked Cavalier fans what they expected in Game 3 and they squinted as if you were eyeing their wallets.

“Why?” asked James Fisher, who walked through the city’s Warehouse District in a purple Cavalier jersey. “Do you expect us to lose?”

Last year, the Cavaliers proceeded through the N.B.A. finals as a bird with two busted wings. Irving and power forward Kevin Love had fallen to injuries. It was LeBron James and 10 guys named Moe. His teammates were scrappy, and James was magnificent, and they won a couple of games, anyway. But they were no match for the jazz orchestra that is the Golden State Warriors, with its cool cat lead trumpeter Steph Curry.

The Cavaliers returned to the finals this year with Irving and Love healthy. Expectations rose. Golden State promptly blew them out in Oakland, winning those first two games by a combined margin of 250 points, more or less.

To sit in the Cavaliers’ arena before Game 3 was to watch 20,000 people try to convince themselves all was well. It was a revival house atmosphere, with the arena’s Humongotron taking the role of electronic preacher. There was a photo collage of Cleveland, and its native son James. There was Muhammad Ali talking about being the greatest, and then a quick cut to James.

There was a riff on the joys of Ohio, which finished with James reprising Judy Garland and saying, “There’s no place like home.” (An inspirational quote from President James Garfield was mixed in. Garfield was born in Ohio and assassinated in Washington.)

Not for the first time did you think that James might have had less agita had he elected to stay in Miami.

That’s surf washed across the beach, however. And as my colleague Harvey Araton has pointed out, James, an Akron native, has complicated his homecoming task by insisting on playing the Cavaliers’ de facto general manager, a role for which few stars are equipped.

He pushed management to obtain Love from the Minnesota Timberwolves. Love was a statistical marvel, accumulating points and rebounds. Unfortunately, he has the lateral movement of a marble relief.

Love was hammered in the head in Game 2, in part because he waited flat-footed for a rebound he might more wisely have jumped for. He sustained a concussion and sat out Game 3.

In his place, Coach Tyronn Lue started Richard Jefferson, who even at 35 is more athletic than Love.

Before the game, reporters asked Steve Kerr, the Warriors’ coach and a man with a pronounced analytic bent, what this meant for his team. “The difference is just the speed, the ability to get to the rim,” Kerr said. “They’re really going to spread us out and it should give them more driving lanes and more room for LeBron to operate.”

Kerr was as prescient as Nostradamus. Jefferson was a jumping jack presence, passing, rebounding and hitting the occasional shot. When J. R. Smith, the Cavaliers’ hallucinogenic guard, broke out of his baroque shooting slump, the Warrior defenders faced more hot hands than they had defenders.

As Kerr predicted, that opened the court for LeBron. He possesses a sui generis blend of balance, power and speed, and he sees the court as though with sonar radar. He takes more pride in spreading the ball than in dominating it in the style of Michael Jordan or Kobe Bryant.

“I’m not Michael. I’m not Ali,” he said in the days before Game 3. “I am who I am, and if I’m able to go out and put together a game like that, it wasn’t because I was possessed.”

James in fact willed himself into a terrific state of possession. When the deep and talented Warriors threatened to get back into the game, he hit jump shots, tossed down shake-and-bakes and grabbed rebounds. The Cavaliers pulled away.

James slipped into his chair at the postgame news conference in a leather dress jacket, white collar and tie, a business executive with no trace of sweat. “I didn’t change my approach and I didn’t take over the game,” he insisted.

He credited Irving for a prolific scoring spree. “I just sprinkled in, you know, my production along.”

Irving, who can be a moody presence on a good day, gave a sideways glance at James. Then he gave a snort of a laugh.

None of this is to argue that the West Coast cool cats are in a world of hurt. They remain in control, even if it is intriguing that Curry and Klay Thompson, those two expertly crafted grenades, have yet to explode.

The two scorers promised Wednesday to bring their most ferocious game to the next contest on Friday. If they are good to their word, they could put the Cavaliers in a 3-1 hole. Then we can wait and listen for the Greek chorus to tune up once again.


