


LONDON — Britain has been one of the most active markets for initial public offerings in Europe in recent years as a flurry of companies have sought to list their shares in London — far outpacing the level of activity in Paris, Frankfurt and other European financial capitals.

A vote by Britain to exit the European Union, however, could change all that, at least for the short term.

Investors have been reluctant to invest in new London listings, and several companies have delayed announcing their intention to file until after the vote on Thursday.

Uncertainty over the outcome of the vote has kept many in the market on the sidelines as the margins in the polls have seesawed between the “leave” and the “remain” camps in recent weeks.

The most recent polls, however, pointed to growing support to stay in the European Union. On Monday, global stock markets rallied and the British pound strengthened against the dollar.

Still, Edward Sankey, the co-head of equity capital markets for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at Deutsche Bank, said he expected little activity in new stocks for a while.

“If there is an exit, a number of issuers will take time to figure out the market reaction before deciding to press ahead,” he said.

Bankers here say that several companies that had privately planned to go public have delayed their plans to list until after the outcome of the referendum, to avoid the uncertainty that can lead to wild swings in the financial markets and stock prices.

Although the London market has had relative success — Jimmy Choo, WorldPay and Pets at Home are among its most notable listings in recent years — it has already been a challenging year for initial public offerings globally.

Turbulent markets in the first quarter, driven in part by uncertainty about the Chinese economy, have weighed on I.P.O.s in Europe and around the world.

“Between now and end of July, the pipeline is not huge,” Tom Johnson, the co-head of Barclays’ equity capital markets business for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, said. “There will be quite a few in the second half potentially. I think the second half will be materially larger.”

A handful of European companies have warned that a Brexit could affect their listing plans. The chief executive of Enav, the state-owned Italian air traffic control company, told a parliamentary committee in Rome this month that it had delayed its listing until July to avoid any distraction from the Brexit vote, according to Reuters.

The number of new listings in Europe this year is at its lowest level since 2013. There were 77 initial public offerings that generated $15.7 billion in proceeds in Europe through June 17, according to data from Thomson Reuters.

That compared with 113 offerings that generated $32.7 billion in proceeds in Europe in the period last year and 113 offerings that generated $33.1 billion in proceeds in the region through June 17 in 2014, according to Thomson Reuters.

London accounted for 34 percent of all listings and has been home to two of the top 10 biggest deals in Europe this year, in terms of proceeds.

The five largest offerings this year, however, have all come in Continental Europe.

The biggest listing this year, by far, was Dong Energy, the Danish utility and the world’s largest offshore wind power operator.

It generated about $2.6 billion in proceeds as the signature transaction in what has been a down year for initial public offerings in Europe and could stand as the biggest listing in the region this year.

The offering on Nasdaq in Copenhagen valued Dong Energy at about $15 billion.

The next three largest deals, in terms of proceeds, were the Dutch government’s sale of a stake in the insurer ASR Nederland, the sale of the lighting business of the Dutch electronics giant Philips and GE Capital’s sale of Moneta Money Bank, its former banking business in the Czech Republic.

Moneta listed in Prague, while ASR and Philips Lighting had their offerings in Amsterdam.

The biggest deal in Britain this year has been the spinoff of National Australia Bank’s British unit, Clydesdale Bank. That transaction generated about $570 million in proceeds.

Globally, the I.P.O. market remains well above the level where it was during the financial crisis as private equity firms exit investments they made in the years before the crisis.

And privatizations by European governments and companies seeking to separate noncore businesses are expected to drive initial public offerings this year, but an uptick in activity might not come until the fall, no matter how Britain votes, financial industry experts say.


