


Dangerous Dust

My building is being repointed, and seven of the 11 windows in my apartment are on walls undergoing work. For the last six weeks or so, I have been experiencing tightness in my chest, some wheezing and a deep cough. Otherwise, I am not ill. Have respiratory problems among apartment dwellers ever been linked to this type of masonry work?

Gramercy, Manhattan

Some days, it seems like the dust is inescapable — another indignity New Yorkers endure during this era of rampant construction. “The dust is everywhere: It’s in the hallways, it’s in the windows,” said Samuel J. Himmelstein, a Manhattan lawyer who represents tenants. “There could be different kinds of irritants in that dust.”

Pointing involves grinding mortar joints to remove the damaged mortar. Then new mortar is installed. The grinding can generate mineral dust fine enough for you to inhale, which could inflame your airways, said Edward Olmsted, the president of Olmsted Environmental Services, an industrial hygienist. If waterproofing materials were inserted behind the brick, chemical vapors could seep into your apartment, irritating your respiratory system and causing headaches and sinus problems.

If you and your neighbors inhale silica particles found in the dust, you could experience short-term and even long-term respiratory problems, said E. Neil Schachter, the Maurice Hexter Professor of Pulmonary Medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

An otherwise healthy person may experience coughing, shortness of breath and mucus. The dust could also exacerbate underlying health conditions like allergies, asthma or cardiovascular disease, requiring treatment that could outlast the pointing work. And if water seeps into cracks in the brick and infiltrates the building, bacteria and mold could grow, leading to chronic allergic conditions, Dr. Schachter said.

Pointing work can be done safely, but you need to compel your landlord to act. A lone complaint from one disgruntled tenant will probably be ignored. So enlist your neighbors, particularly those whose windows face the work. If they are reluctant to join the fight, educate them about the health risks they face. As a group, hire an expert to inspect the work.

“It’s one thing to say that you’re having these symptoms; it’s another thing to send it to a lab to have it tested,” Mr. Himmelstein said, referring to the air sample such an expert would take.

Once you’re armed with that information, insist that the landlord make safety improvements. The pointing work might be necessary, but that is no excuse for jeopardizing your health.

•

The Super’s Access

My building’s superintendent enters my apartment without notice, sometimes with a crew, claiming there is an emergency, although the emergencies are unclear to me. He takes pictures in my apartment and makes outlandish claims about his political ties. Our co-op has a policy about signing keys in and out with the doorman, but the super does not follow protocol. I worry about what happens when I am not home. I am spooked and feel as if my privacy is being violated. What can I do?

Tudor City, Manhattan

No one, not even the super, can waltz into your apartment without permission. Management should enter only if there is a genuine emergency like a fire, said Ron Kaplan, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.

A real emergency should go something like this: “They know for sure that they or the police or the fire department should be going in,” Mr. Kaplan said. “No questions asked — no time to ask — no time to call attorneys, accountants or priests.”

In the absence of such a dramatic episode, the super is trespassing, which violates the proprietary lease and the law. And the doorman is aiding and abetting him by handing out your keys, Mr. Kaplan said.

As for the photography, no one should take pictures inside your apartment without your permission. “Is he posting them somewhere?” asked Maureen Curtis, the vice president of criminal justice and court programs at Safe Horizon, a victims’ advocacy agency. If he is posting them online without your permission, and continues to do so after you have told him to stop, that could amount to stalking, an often unpredictable crime, but one that you can report to the police. “It can be one of the most dangerous crimes,” Ms. Curtis said. “It’s also one of the most underreported.” Threatening statements might also be criminal.

At the very least, report these actions in writing to the co-op board and the managing agent, and demand that the board take steps to reprimand the super and the doorman and ensure your safety.

You may also want to file a criminal complaint against the super. A crime victims’ advocate could help you to understand your rights and options, develop a plan to protect yourself and navigate the criminal justice system, if it comes to that.

•

Mysterious Landlord

A limited liability company owns my market-rate apartment. My lease recently came up for renewal, and I would like to renegotiate the terms with the landlord. The people who work in the management office refer to him simply as “he.” When I ask for a name, they say, “That information is not available,” and hang up. How can I find out his name and contact information?

Morningside Heights, Manhattan

With a little digging, you could probably figure out who owns your building. The Department of Housing Preservation and Development has a building information portal where multifamily buildings are registered. Type in your address, and you will find information about the property owner. “This will provide you with the name of an individual and the address for your building’s registered managing agent,” said Kevin R. McConnell, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.

You could also find deed, tax and mortgage documents for your building on the Automated City Register Information System, or Acris, website. Some of these documents may contain an owner’s name, Mr. McConnell said.

But while finding a name might satisfy your curiosity, it will not help you achieve your goal of negotiating the terms of your new lease.

For that, continue to work with the management company, which the landlord hired to speak on his behalf. “A tenant must assume that the lease renewal terms accurately reflect the landlord’s position,” said Andrew Jon Wagner, a Manhattan real estate lawyer. You would be taking a big risk if you cold-called your landlord, as he has obviously made a great effort to remain anonymous.

One angry phone call from him to your property manager and you may not get offered a new lease at all when the current one expires.


