


A recent Times article asked readers to name everyday words that repelled them, and “slacks” was one of the front-runners. But the word for pants couldn’t compete with a term for female underpants.

Dozens of readers commented on their dislike of the word “panties.” It was the most commonly cited word in a comments section that drew more than 1,600 responses.

Amanda Danielle, of Fairfield, Calif., wrote, “When I hear anyone use this word in any way, I feel so disgusted and violated that I actually become nauseous.

“I have no explanation as to why this happens to me,” she added. “I know it is a perfectly normal word, but I personally prefer the word underwear.”

“Makes my skin crawl,” another commenter from Memphis wrote. “Grown women wear underpants.” (Underpants, though, was mentioned by several people as an unpleasant word itself.)

Researchers have been exploring what is known as “word aversion,” a phenomenon that causes people to be repelled by common words. Late last week, we asked Times readers to share those that inspired disgust in them, avoiding “moist,” which was already the focus of one of the studies.

A commenter from New York said, “I have a ‘slacks’ aversion and always have since I was a child.”

A great deal of the words mentioned in the comments section were related to body parts and bodily functions. Terms for male and female genitalia appeared multiple times, as did groin, crotch, belly, flesh, flabby, tummy, turd, pimple, pustule, piehole, fart and flatulence.

Other words seemed only to summon images related to the body, including chunks, discharge and plop.

Words describing various sorts of vocalizations were mentioned so frequently that they could be cataloged in alphabetical order. The G’s alone would include the words gulp, gargle, grunt, groan and gasp.

Some readers strung together multiple words to form aversive sentences.

“I read this just after stroking my moist slacks to remove phlegm that must have come from a crevice on the luggage in my Ford Probe,” wrote Clyde, from North Carolina, adding “It left me in a lather.”

Others rattled off their least-favorite words in a kind of poem of aversion. Dee Davis, a New Yorker, composed this piece of blank verse:

Sara, from Maine, was also troubled by “fiduciary,” which she grouped with other bothersome “oosh” words such as “crucial,” “douche” and “whoosh.” She was one of several readers who could identify specific sounds that bothered them.

She was also not a fan of “garbage.”

But many of the words mentioned bothered people for no discernible reason. “Ointment” was cited more than a dozen times, and its less common relatives, “salve” and “unguent,” also made appearances. Readers objected to “orchards,” to “drawers,” even to “velvet.” At least five could not stomach “meal.”

Some used the exercise to trot out some fancier offenders. “Pulchritude” and “pulchritudinous” made the list several times. “Lugubrious,” “cornucopia,” “charcuterie” and “logorrhea” (fittingly) were also included.

Others may have had trouble expressing their disgust, because the words they said they were repelled by were “ick” “yucky” and “ew.”

As for “moist,” the linchpin of the recent study exploring why people find some terms repellent, many readers agreed that it was distasteful. But others embraced the word.

“There is something wrong with the person who doesn’t like the unctuous sounding ‘moist,’ ” Dale, a Wisconsin resident, wrote. “I think of my mother’s chocolate cake just frosted before the birthday party and so delicious. Nothing wrong with moist at all.”

Perhaps predictably, many people were bothered by the very idea that words could bother others.

“This outpouring of often kooky sensitivity makes me want to curl up in a ball,” Eric F. Frazier, a writer from Kernersville, N.C., wrote. “Word aversion seems like the language equivalent of food allergies. Somewhere, Webster and Roget are weeping.”

Adam, from New York, put it this way: “I think I have more of a word aversion to ‘word aversion.’ ”


