


BALTIMORE — The Baltimore Orioles took batting practice Tuesday in the late-afternoon sunshine. The Yankees expected to do the same. But the sky started spitting just as Manager Joe Girardi spoke with reporters in the dugout. He peeked through the thicket of cameras and notepads and noticed the grounds crew springing to action.

“They’re covering the field?” Girardi muttered. “Of course.”

The sky is falling on these Yankees, it seems, to judge by their wretched start. They went on to lose, 4-1, and have now dropped two-thirds of their games. This time, starter Luis Severino allowed two homers and made two errors, and Alex Rodriguez hurt his hamstring while running out a grounder.

It was another dreary day for the 8-16 Yankees, who are eight games below .500 for the first time since May 2007. They recognize the urgency of the moment.

“I guess it’s never a must-win game in May, but it feels like it,” Brett Gardner said. “It’s important for us to get things going in the right direction.”

Girardi said it was puzzling to see such inconsistency, but the Yankees have actually been fairly predictable. Their starters rarely last long or pitch very well, and their offense gasps for runs.

Tuesday’s game was the first in a stretch of 20 in a row against Baltimore, Boston, Kansas City, the White Sox, Arizona and Oakland. It is a grueling stretch, another test for a team that may not be up for it. General Manager Brian Cashman emphasized again on Tuesday that Girardi’s job was safe, and took the blame instead.

“The bottom line is I’m the general manager,” Cashman said. “I’m not used to sitting there watching this type of baseball, just like our fans aren’t used to watching this type of baseball. It’s certainly a reflection of me, and I take it personally.”

He added: “I know that this is a very difficult game, it’s a very humbling game, and periods of time when things don’t go as anticipated — that’s part of the game. But for the collection of talent that we have, to have it go on for this extended period of time — that’s abnormal.”

Much more abnormal, though, is the Yankees’ performance the last 23 seasons, which have all ended with winning records. That success, and the unmatched collection of titles that preceded it, creates the illusion that the Yankees simply cannot endure a full season like this.

Winning, after all, is what they do. It is right there on Girardi’s back: 28, the number he has worn since 2010, signifying the next Yankees championship. He wore No. 27 in 2009, the last year the Yankees won it all. That was also the only season in the last dozen that ended with the Yankees in the World Series.

The baseball landscape has changed. The Kansas City Royals have won two pennants in a row, of course, and beat the Mets in the World Series last fall. Both teams benefited greatly by staying disciplined through a rebuilding process. They traded veterans for prospects and made smart choices near the top of the draft.

The Yankees’ refusal to go this route is their blessing and their curse. They annually spend $200 million or more on payroll, a good-faith gesture to their demanding fans. But in an industry flush with cash — and with rules that increasingly promote competitive balance — the Yankees’ financial advantage is not as important as it once was. And for a team that never tears down, it is much harder to stockpile high-impact, prime-age talent.

“Whatever changes have happened, you just work around them,” Cashman said, referring to the industry. “I don’t think that way.”

Maybe the problem is the Yankees’ strategy for their workaround. Yes, they sat out the free-agent market last winter, but the Yankees rarely confront the hard choices nearly every other team has to make. Even when they resisted a reckless 10-year commitment to Robinson Cano after the 2013 season, they plowed a fortune into contracts for Jacoby Ellsbury, Masahiro Tanaka, Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran, doubling down on high-priced imports as the path to October.

Cashman, the general manager since 1998, has a history of resuscitating teams that looked dead. His 2005 and 2007 editions started just like this and recovered to reach the playoffs. But Cashman finds no hope from those examples.

“In some of those cases, we had some injuries, a collection of injuries,” he said. “This is a collection of underperformance. That can self-correct organically. You’re always looking to improve the club, but in the meantime it’s trying to get the guys that are capable going.”

In 2005 and 2007, Rodriguez was the single biggest reason for the Yankees’ surge, capturing the American League Most Valuable Player Award both times. If these Yankees have a serious M.V.P. candidate, nobody knows who it is.

Yet this is largely the same cast that won the first A.L. wild card last season, and it is healthy. The players cannot have all turned this bad, this quickly — can they?

That is the essential question the Yankees face. Maybe they turn to the farm system for a savior — Nick Swisher, the prodigal bro, is hitting .306 at Class AAA — but maybe this is the year the Yankees actually fall flat.

It happens to everyone else, now and then. Everyone but the Yankees, who are finding, perhaps, that they may not be so different from the rest of the pack.


