


HONG KONG — Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan’s new president, made a rare appearance in Chinese online videos this week. The flag of Taiwan, officially the Republic of China, did not.

The two flags that were standing behind Ms. Tsai and Marcus D. Jadotte, the United States assistant secretary of commerce, as they met in Taiwan were pixelated and appeared as grainy blobs in footage carried by Tencent Video, a Chinese website. The clip was later posted by the English-language website of People’s Daily, the flagship newspaper of the Communist Party.

The Chinese news media focused on a stumble by Ms. Tsai in her meeting with Mr. Jadotte. She paused awkwardly while reading the Chinese version of Mr. Jadotte’s name in the prepared text, then ad-libbed in English, “I have problem saying it in the Chinese language.”

The Chinese state- and party-run news media have been critical of Ms. Tsai in her first week in office. One report even suggested that her status as a single woman made her “extreme.” That article, carried on the website of a newspaper run by Xinhua, the state news agency, was widely criticized and quickly removed from most Chinese websites.

China considers self-ruled Taiwan to be part of its territory and says it must eventually be united with the mainland. Ms. Tsai heads the Democratic Progressive Party, which is traditionally pro-independence, but she has said she wants to maintain the status quo between the mainland and the island.

China has censored images of Taiwan’s flag before. Last year, when Ma Ying-jeou, then Taiwan’s president, spoke about plans to meet with President Xi Jinping of China in Singapore, a flag pin on Mr. Ma’s lapel was blurred out in mainland news coverage.

And when Chou Tzu-yu, a Taiwanese member of a Korean pop group appeared in a video in January waving the flag, some mainland Chinese fans were incensed and called her a separatist. She issued an apology online.

But later, a WeChat account affiliated with People’s Daily said there was nothing separatist about Taiwan’s flag, which is a symbol of the Republic of China. “Chou Tzu-yu brandishing the ‘national flag’ is emphasizing the ‘Republic of China,’ ” the commentary said. “The ‘Republic of China’ includes the principle of ‘One China.’ ”


