


International Dance Festival Birmingham 2016 Various venues, May 1-22

Companies from around the world will be in Birmingham for this festival, a celebration of traditional and experimental dance. Cloud Gate Dance Theater, a spectacle-heavy group from Taiwan, will appear, as will Ballet BC from Canada and Britain’s trendy Hofesh Shechter Company. Sébastien Ramirez and Honji Wang, who make up the duo Wang Ramirez will perform their piece “Monchichi,” which blends classical elements with breakdance. idfb.co.uk

Paul Klee: L’Ironie à l’Oeuvre Centre Pompidou, through Aug. 1.

This exhibition examines the work of the Swiss-German artist Paul Klee (1879-1940), known for minimalist paintings that tinkered with the artistic conventions of the day and helped establish the tenets of modern art. Hundreds of his works are on view in the show, which looks at his relationship with Cubism, his interest in the Bauhaus movement and his use of parody in his work. centrepompidou.fr

EVA International — Ireland’s Biennial Various venues, through July 17

This year’s edition of this art biennial is called “Still (the) Barbarians.” Curated by Koyo Kouoh, an arts administrator from Cameroon, the festival looks at the legacy of colonialism (especially British colonialism) in Ireland and abroad. Artists in the show hail from around the world and include Tiffany Chung, Theo Eshetu, Liam Gillick and Carsten Höller. Venues include city galleries and a medieval fortress known as King John’s Castle. eva.ie

Le French May Festival Various venues, May 1-June 30

This annual celebration brings an array of top-notch French art to Hong Kong. Some works are imported, and some (like a May 6 performance of French classical music featuring the cellist Trey Lee) feature locals paying tribute to French traditions. Performances include a modern ballet take on “Cinderella” by the Malandain Ballet Biarritz, and “Bliss,” a hip-hop piece by the group Compagnie Rêvolution. Art exhibitions include shows dedicated to Edgar Degas, Claude Monet and the lesser-known painter Auguste Borget, some of whose work focused on China. 2016.frenchmay.com

A Day at the Lake Rudyard Lake, April 30-May 2

On a lake in the north of England, this festival recreates the 19th-century summer festivals that drew large crowds to the leafy region. Acts include a tightrope walk, a juggling show and a performance by members of a local symphony orchestra. Ukelele-playing mermaids will make an appearance. Visitors can take boats out on the lake. dayatthelake.org.uk

Solidity and Beauty: Miguel Blay at the Museo del Prado Prado Museum, through Oct. 2.

The show explores the life and work of the Spanish sculptor Miguel Blay, who was born 150 years ago this year. It includes some of his major sculptures, as well as sketches, engraved medallions and keepsakes. A separate show dedicated to the French painter Georges de la Tour is showing at the museum through June 12. museodelprado.es

Histórias da Infância Museu de Arte de São Paulo, through July 31

This wide-ranging exhibition looks at depictions of children and childhood in art. Works on view come from around the world, from little-known artists and major names alike, like Renoir. One section of the exhibition focuses on perhaps the best known artistic renderings of childhood of all: Pictures of the Virgin Mother and child. “Playgrounds 2016,” another show featuring interactive artworks by contemporary artists including Ernesto Neto and Rasheed Araeen, is also running at the museum. masp.art.br

Pixar: 30 Years of Animation Museum of Contemporary Art, through May 29

This exhibition, a version of which appeared at the Museum of Modern Art in New York about a decade ago, looks at the work of the computer-animated movie studio Pixar, which has made films for children like “Toy Story,” “Finding Nemo” and “Inside Out.” The show includes models, sketches and drafts of digital paintings. It looks at how a team of artists working across several media create a final film product. The show has been updated for its Tokyo run, as Pixar marks its 30th anniversary. www.mot-art-museum.jp/eng

Saint Lucia Jazz and Arts Festival Pigeon Island National Park, April 29-May 8

The DJ and reggae singer Shaggy, the pop singer Marc Anthony and the classic funk band Kool & the Gang will appear at this outdoor event near the coast. There also are theater performances, an art show and a market where locals sell their work and clothing. Hot Couture, a catwalk show, will showcase fashion from the region. stluciajazz.org

Utagawa Hiroshige: Landscapes along the Tokaido Road and Mt. Fuji Ota Memorial Museum of Art, April 29-May 26

This is a showcase of the work of the Japanese printmaker Utagawa Hiroshige (1797-1858), one of the most famous practitioners of the country’s Ukiyo-e tradition of painting, and a major rival to the style’s most famous practitioner, Hokusai. The show focuses on two of Hiroshige’s series: The early breakthrough works “Fifty-Three Stations of the Tokaido Road,” which show people contending with the unruly natural world, and “Thirty-Six Views of Mt. Fuji,” renderings of the famed mountain. “Thirty-Six Views” were made after Hokusai created his own celebrated depictions of the mountain. ukiyoe-ota-muse.jp


