


BOSTON — Hours before the first runners crossed the finish line of the Boston Marathon on Monday, a uniformed police officer ambled near the blue and yellow marker across Boylston Street. He seemed at first glance unremarkable, barely distinguishable from the legions of law enforcement officers keeping watch over New England’s biggest sporting event.

But the officer in the navy blue uniform and bright vest was Mark Wahlberg, the actor, here to film “Patriots Day,” the forthcoming movie about the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing and its aftermath.

Debbie Gilligan, 49, a postal worker from Lowell, Mass., stopped to watch Mr. Wahlberg standing on Boylston Street, flanked by crew members and extras who were playing race officials and wore badges that read, “2013 Official Staff.” It was, oddly, like looking into the past.

“I don’t think there’s a need for this,” said Ms. Gilligan, who ran the marathon in 2013 and was just a mile shy of completing the grueling 26.2-mile course when the bombs exploded. “I just look at it as publicizing the terrorists,” she said of the film. “They took away that whole day.”

Movies about the marathon bombing have seemed inevitable, and now there are two in the making: in addition to “Patriots Day,” there is “Stronger,” in which Jake Gyllenhaal plays Jeff Bauman, who lost both legs in the bombing and was rescued by Carlos Arredondo, now known as the man in the cowboy hat.

Many Bostonians have been bracing for the films. After the lengthy trial last year in which Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the surviving bomber, was sentenced to death, they had hoped they were done with the ordeal. When the “Patriots Day” crew wanted to recreate a violent shootout scene in suburban Watertown earlier this year, with gunfire into the night, the town said no. So did officials at the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, which Mr. Tsarnaev attended.

Some of the scenes for “Patriots Day,” including explosions, will be filmed on sets, but the real marathon provided a rare opportunity for verisimilitude. Even the sunny weather and blue skies looked like those in 2013.

And so on Monday, art was imitating life, and life was reflected back in art, as the finish line became a film set.

“We’re collaborating with them,” David McGillivray, the race director, said, adding that he was withholding his judgment about the movie until he knew more about it. “We just want to make sure, from the operational side, that we’re able to conduct the race without a lot of imposition on the runner.”

But some in this city, where the lives of those most grievously wounded have been changed forever, said the scars were still too fresh.

“It still sits in everybody’s mind who were here that day,” said Joe Fallon, an employee of a nearby hotel, who paused to watch the film crew work while walking a dog.

“It’s too soon,” he said.

Joyce Cadena-Hannon, 40, a graphic designer who was working in a nearby office building when the blasts went off, passes the finish line on her way to work. “I’m still a little traumatized,” she said before the race. “I was here, so I don’t need to see the movie version.”

To others, the filming added a thrill to a resplendent, celebratory day. Spectators craned to catch a glimpse of Mr. Wahlberg, sticking their phones in the air to take video and cheering when, on a few occasions, he waved in their direction.

“I find it exciting,” said Erin Carroll, a registered nurse from Nashua, N.H., who ran the marathon last year and was here to watch on Monday. “The marathon is just such a staple of Boston, and he is, too,” Ms. Carroll said, referring to Mr. Wahlberg, who was born in Dorchester.

Kevin Brown, 61, the Boston carpenter who tended a makeshift memorial in the weeks after the bombing, said on Monday that the film could be a fitting way to remember the events of that day.

Standing next to the crosses he had tied to a tree near the finish line, Mr. Brown watched the filmmakers work and observed, “They’re trying to get as close as they can to the real thing.”


