


RE: H IS FOR HAWK

Mark Landler analyzed Hillary Clinton’s aggressive foreign-policy record in an adaptation of “Alter Egos,” his book about Clinton and Barack Obama.

I am struck by the degree to which the excerpt from Mark Landler’s book completely ignored Hillary Clinton’s real strength in foreign policy: her deeply considered understanding that the U.S.’s global interests are best served by a three-legged stool — defense, development and diplomacy.

When Senator Clinton was first appointed secretary of state, she sought to generate support in Congress by commissioning the first Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, in direct emulation of the Department of Defense’s Quadrennial Defense Review. It took over a year to solicit views and turn them into coherent policy and administrative recommendations, but those in the know think it was worth doing.

The lengthy presentation of Hillary as a potential commander in chief, while perhaps a political necessity, sells her and the country short. In a global economy with few means of dealing with multiple cross-border existential threats, “foreign policy” should not be limited to discussion of military operations nor relegated to the sidelines amid arcane, and partially informed, discussions of trade agreements. I expect more and better coverage. Leni Berliner, Washington

After reading this article about Hillary Clinton becoming a hawk, I find the fact that Hillary’s finger would be near the nuclear button to be disturbing.

This article describes Hillary as a person who would be more like Gen. Douglas MacArthur than Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower. President Harry S. Truman had to fire General MacArthur for his insubordination concerning the conduct of the war on the Korean Peninsula. Who would fire a President Hillary Clinton?

The critical characteristics of a president seem to be good judgment, profound wisdom and good decision-making using incomplete information — not having a hair-trigger finger on the war/nuclear button. Hillary’s learned foreign-affairs attributes are more like George W. Bush’s cowboy-based attitude than President Obama’s deliberate, measured approach.

Only fools and/or people who have not experienced war are eager to go to war at the expense of diplomacy. We need neither as president of the United States. John Scott, Washington

This article doesn’t really tell us how Hillary became a hawk — and that’s too bad. It would be genuinely interesting to get some insight into how (or if) her views have evolved over time and what motivates them....

Taken as a whole, this is a portrait of a would-be president who a) fundamentally believes in displays of force, b) is eager to give the military everything they ask for and c) doesn’t believe that military intervention is a last resort, no matter what she might say in public.

If anything worries me about Hillary Clinton, this is it. It’s not so much that she’s more hawkish than me; it’s the fact that events of the past 15 years don’t seem to have affected her views at all. How is that possible? And yet, our failures in Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen, Syria and elsewhere apparently haven’t given her the slightest pause about the effectiveness of military force in the Middle East. Quite the opposite: The sense I get from Landler’s piece is that she continues to think all of these engagements would have turned out better if only we’d used more military power. I find it hard to understand how an intelligent, well-briefed person could continue to believe this, and that in turn makes me wonder just exactly what motivates Hillary’s worldview. Kevin Drum, in an article for Mother Jones

RE: FIRST WORDS

Amanda Hess parses the current usage of the word “woke,” now a label for political awareness.

I think the author missed a crucial nuance embedded in “woke.” Whiteness has co-opted “woke” as an I’m-not-a-racist card, but that is neither its original meaning nor the context in which it was intended to be used. Black people have used “woke” not to describe being aware of current events but being wise to, and ever on guard against, the Ways of Whiteness, particularly how racism can be embedded in what stories media decides to tell and how it tells them.

And yes, it absolutely is eye-rolling at white folks overeager to identify as woke without even fully understanding what it means to be woke. Sheri M. Whitley, New York


