


For more than 50 years, Chris Strachwitz has been one of the music world’s great pack rats and champions of American folk styles, as a record collector and the founder of Arhoolie Records. Since 1960, Arhoolie has released hundreds of albums of blues, gospel, Cajun and Mexican folk music that have caught the ear of musicians like Bob Dylan and Ry Cooder.

Now 84, Mr. Strachwitz has found a new home for the label: Smithsonian Folkways Recordings, which has acquired the Arhoolie catalog and will be adding more than 350 Arhoolie albums to its collection, the labels announced on Tuesday. In keeping with the longstanding policy at Smithsonian Folkways, the nonprofit label associated with the Smithsonian Institution, the catalog is to be kept accessible in a variety of formats.

“Arhoolie changed American culture,” said Daniel Sheehy, the curator and director of Smithsonian Folkways. “The fact that we can play some role in keeping that legacy alive in the future is a dream scenario.”

The acquisition was made as a result of a donation from Laura and Ed Littlefield of the Sage Foundation; terms of the deal were not announced, but Mr. Strachwitz said that the Littlefields essentially bought the label and donated it to Smithsonian Folkways. A 40 percent share of the label was held by Tom Diamant, Mr. Strachwitz’s longtime business partner.

Mr. Strachwitz, born in Germany to an aristocratic family, came to the United States after World War II. In the 1950s, he joined the loose network of collectors and sleuths who tracked down and recorded folk and blues musicians who had made their first recordings decades before. Arhoolie’s first release was by Mance Lipscomb, a blues singer and guitarist, whom Mr. Strachwitz and his fellow researcher Mack McCormick located in Texas.

Partly inspired by Folkways, the label run by Moses Asch that released records by Lead Belly, Woody Guthrie and the landmark 1952 “Anthology of American Folk Music,” Mr. Strachwitz took a scholarly approach to releasing records. The Smithsonian acquired Folkways in 1987, a year after Asch’s death, and in an interview this week Mr. Strachwitz said that it was Mr. Asch who once gave him advice about setting up his legacy.

“It was the late Moe Asch of Folkways Records who told me, ‘Chris, when you kick the bucket you’ve got to think about what you’re going to with all your stuff,’” Mr. Strachwitz recalled.

Over the years, Mr. Strachwitz has also built a voluminous collection of old records and other memorabilia like ethnic record label catalogs, pieces of which can be viewed on the website for the Arhoolie Foundation, a separate organization whose advisory board includes figures like Mr. Dylan, Bonnie Raitt and T Bone Burnett. That material is not included in the acquisition, nor, Mr. Strachwitz said, are the music publishing rights that he controls.


