


In your latest book, “Listen, Liberal,” you argue that wealthy Democrats justify their anti-­working-­class policies by playing up social liberalism. I call it a microclimate of virtue: these wealthy liberals making themselves feel good despite the kind of awful anti-­labor policies that they have.

The book also contains a couple of asides that you are somewhat of an Alexander Hamilton critic, which would put you on the opposite side of the cultural zeitgeist right now. Ha! I mean Hamilton had a lot of admirable qualities as well. I haven’t seen the “Hamilton” musical yet, but he was probably the most capable of the founding fathers. I read somewhere that he was the only man in the 13 colonies that knew how to do double-entry bookkeeping.

There’s this myth that we can solve income inequality by making everyone rich. You don’t actually like the term “income inequality,” though — you prefer the term “the social question.” “Income inequality” sounds technical. It sounds like an economic problem, something you can work out with an equation or on a spreadsheet, or something that you can solve with a twist of the knobs back in the command center. And it’s much, much, much more than that.

Hillary Clinton does a good job of saying the right things about income inequality and the working class now, but you make a good case that she seems, temperamentally, to be the kind of liberal you study in the book. Do you think that’s what she will return to? That’s who she is. Her identity is bound up with professionalism, more so than her husband, and more so than Barack Obama. She is a characteristic figure of professional-­class liberalism. She is a lifelong supporter of microlending, which is something that a lot of Americans don’t know about. The idea is that you can end poverty and save the world by hooking everybody up with a credit line from Citibank or someone.

And that’ll change everything for them. That’s a form of idealism for her. On the other hand, I’ll be purchasing that liberalism offset in November.

Do you worry that if Clinton becomes the nominee and defeats Donald Trump, it would basically give her an opening for anti-­working-­class, anti-­labor mischief, because she defeated the big bad guy? I think that’s right. But think about it from a different perspective: If Trump does have a chance, it resides with working-­class voters. The obvious Democratic move would be to reach out to those voters and tell them to come home to the Democratic Party, offer them all sorts of New Deal-­style benefits. I doubt she is going to do that.

Journalists are mostly members of the professional class that you skewer in the book. Do you think that’s one reason journalists did not see Donald Trump’s rise coming? Look, I didn’t pay any attention to Trump all through 2015, because I’ve always thought he was a buffoon. Then I finally watched a bunch of videos of his speeches, and I was surprised to see that he’s obsessed with trade issues. Up till then, that had been largely overlooked by the media. It was all about what a bigot he is. And he is a bigot, but there’s more to him than that.

You mention in the book that the Clinton administration was discussing plans to partly privatize Social Security when the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke, which was news to me. Imagine putting a big piece of Social Security in the stock market in the late ’90s. You’d have millions of retirees who would have gotten hammered, because the Nasdaq collapsed. And then a couple of years later, there’s the collapse of the housing bubble, and then the financial crisis. I mean, I thank God every day for Social Security. And Franklin D. Roosevelt.

And you have to thank Monica Lewinsky, right? Yeah, although she didn’t know that’s what she was doing.


