


When the dealer Leslie Waddington died in 2015, the Josef and Anni Albers Foundation decided to seek new gallery representation with a request for proposals akin to an architectural competition.

“We told them what we were looking for and what our goals are,” said Nicholas Fox Weber, the foundation’s executive director and a cultural biographer (“Le Corbusier: A Life”).

Ultimately, Mr. Weber found David Zwirner’s responses to be the most “intelligent and thoughtful,” he said, choosing that gallery over three other finalists — Pace, Dominique Lévy and Hauser & Wirth — to represent the work of the great colorist Josef Albers.

“He’s really one of the few artists of the 20th century whose life and work span both halves of the century, connecting the idealism of the German Bauhaus in Europe with postwar America,” said David Leiber, a director at Zwirner, who with Mr. Zwirner went to Milan in February to see an Albers show and to meet with Mr. Weber.

In November an exhibition at Zwirner’s gallery at West 20th Street in Chelsea, will focus on Albers, including pieces from his “Homage to the Square” series, which Mr. Leiber called “one of the great achievements of the 20th century.” Mr. Weber once wrote that the works were “hymns to the infinite possibilities, both physical and spiritual, of hue and light.”

Mr. Leiber recalled Albers’s arrival at the Black Mountain College art school in North Carolina, having left the Weimar Bauhaus, when the artist was asked what he planned to teach. He responded, “To make open the eyes.”

During the auctions last week, Christie’s sold Frida Kahlo’s 1939 oil-on-metal painting “Dos Desnudos en el Bosque (La Tierra Misma),” for $8 million, an auction high for Kahlo and reputedly the most ever paid at auction for a Latin American artist.

Now Phillips says it has topped that record with the private sale of Diego Rivera’s 1928 canvas “Baile en Tehuantepec” for $15.7 million to Eduardo F. Costantini, founder and president of the Museo de Arte Latinoamericano de Buenos Aires (Malba).

“This is, by my estimation, the best easel painting in private hands outside of Mexico, a celebration of indigenous culture,” said August Uribe, Phillips’s deputy chairman of the Americas. “Rivera made a purposeful break from European modernism to create a national identity through the visual arts.”

Out of view in the Americas for more than 30 years, the exuberant painting was first exhibited in the United States in 1930 at the Met and in MoMA’s Rivera retrospective in 1931.

In October, the painting will be on view in the Philadelphia Museum of Art exhibition “Paint the Revolution: Mexican Modernism 1910-1950.” In March 2017, the work will travel to Malba.

Among the gems in Robert B. Menschel’s extensive photography collection are works by the pictorialist Alvin Langdon Coburn, as well as by the postwar photographers Harry Callahan and Aaron Siskind. Now examples of these are coming to MoMA as part of a 162-piece gift from Mr. Menschel.

In October, the museum will mount a photography exhibition drawn from the 511 works that the museum has acquired through Mr. Menschel’s support. The latest acquisition includes images by 69 photographers, spanning more than 150 years — including a 1843 Paris scene by William Henry Fox Talbot and a 2002 staged portrait by Carrie Mae Weems — with a focus on the modern period.

“It enables us to write a small history of photography,” said Quentin Bajac, MoMA’s chief curator of photography. “Bob is very interested in postwar modernism from the ’40s, ’50s and early ’60s. His collection mixes a straight documentary approach with a more experimental one.”

With his recurring installation “Yes,” Urs Fischer invites volunteers to create sculptures from unfired clay. In June he will mount this project in what is said to be his first exhibition in Russia.

It is part of a show at the Garage Museum of Contemporary Art in Moscow, which will feature nearly 100 new pieces by Mr. Fischer, along with recent paintings and sculptures.

“Rather than large monumental statements, he wants to populate it with small characters — a mouse playing the piano, a tulip falling over in its vase, a motorcycle helmet,” said Kate Fowle, the museum’s chief curator. “He’s literally developed a whole universe.”

Two of the Frick Collection’s monumental Turner paintings — “The Harbor of Dieppe” and “Cologne, the Arrival of a Packet-Boat: Evening” — which were purchased by Henry Clay Frick in 1914 — will be shown for the first time in a Frick exhibition this fall with a third canvas from the Tate depicting Brest, another northern European port. The three canvases may have been intended to form a series.

“Turner’s Modern and Ancient Ports: Passages Through Time,” in spring 2017, will feature about 35 works from the 1800s, mostly loans. For the first time, the two Frick canvases will be shown with sketchbooks of Turner’s original on-site drawings, and with watercolors of the same subjects, some of which have not been seen in the United States.

“Our paintings have always been recognized as a turning point in Turner’s work in a movement that began in the teens and accelerated in the ’20s,” said Susan Grace Galassi, the senior curator at the Frick Collection who organized the show, “moving away from naturalism towards a more poetic treatment of topographical subject matter, and towards a more imaginative treatment of light and color.”


