


OAKLAND, Calif. — Draymond Green, equal parts power forward and carnival barker, was annoyed with an official’s call, which is something that happens with regularity whenever Green plays basketball for the Golden State Warriors. So he broke out one of his hallmark after-the-whistle moves, swinging his arms like an orchestra conductor.

Green’s theatrics are usually free of consequences, but this time he made accidental contact with the official, Ken Mauer, whose right hand paid the price for getting in the way. Both men had to seek emergency courtside treatment, a late subplot to Wednesday’s game at Oracle Arena as the Warriors eliminated the Portland Trail Blazers from the N.B.A. playoffs.

“They were both bleeding,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said.

Kerr could not have sounded less surprised about the episode. He might as well have been describing his breakfast. But he knows Green by now — all the drama, all the intrigue, all the extracurricular activities that fuel teammates, irritate opponents and occasionally injure referees.

“It’s just what Draymond does,” Kerr said. “His mind works in an interesting way.”

The Warriors, of course, would not be nearly as dynamic without him. On a team full of basketball chemists (are those lab coats in their lockers?), Green wears an artist’s smock. Sure enough, he packed another postseason series full of layups, passes and postgame pledges, a diverse set of skills that ought to be known as the Draymond Special.

“He provides the edge that this team needs,” said Kerr, whose team will host the Oklahoma City Thunder on Monday in Game 1 of the Western Conference finals. “Without Draymond, we would be in trouble. We would be too quiet and too nice.”

The Warriors needed just five games to get past the Trail Blazers in the conference semifinals, but it was a slog. The Warriors trailed at halftime in each of the final four games of the series. After injuries and ejections, Stephen Curry returned with his usual brand of sorcery to help nudge the Warriors one step closer to a second consecutive title.

Through it all, though, there was Green, who guaranteed a victory after the Warriors lost Game 3 and then predicted that the Trail Blazers were “done” after Game 4. It was more than talk. Over the course of the series, Green averaged 22.2 points, 11.2 rebounds and 7.4 assists. The Warriors outscored the Trail Blazers by 49 points when he was on the court.

“Just happy to be done with this series,” said Green, who spoke highly of the Trail Blazers. “I gained a lot of respect for those guys because of the way they fought.”

In addition to the Trail Blazers’ emergence and Curry’s brilliance, the series included an undercurrent of pseudo-psychology. Green was the primary practitioner.

After the Warriors won Game 2, Green advised his teammates to keep quiet. Sensing that the Trail Blazers were already on the ropes, Green did not want to motivate them.

“So I told our team, ‘Don’t give them any bulletin-board material,’ ” Green recalled. “Everyone looked at me crazy, like ‘What? Who is saying this?’ Because I’m usually the guy to do that.”

Green realized that he had erred, he said, when the Trail Blazers won Game 3. The Warriors had come out “soft,” Green said, and he felt that it was his fault — his fault, he said, because he had told his teammates to clam up and their play had suffered. As he made his way to his postgame news conference, Green turned to Curry. Green was about to guarantee a win in Game 4.

“I’m going to go into this news conference and give them all the bulletin-board material they need,” Green recalled telling Curry. “It wasn’t no disrespect to them. It was more so at our guys, to make our guys respond to what I’m saying. Not to say, ‘Oh, we don’t have any respect for the Blazers’ or ‘They can’t beat us.’ They proved they can beat us.”

Stuff like this comes as a mild source of amusement to his teammates and coaches. Kerr said he would not mind if Green chose to keep some things to himself. But it is not how he operates, and Kerr has come to accept the entire package. Kerr compared Green to the former baseball star Manny Ramirez, who was known for his — how to put this? — authenticity.

Teammates turn to Green, a first-time All-Star selection this season, to rely on his playmaking and to borrow from his bottomless well of emotion. As for his mental warfare with the Trail Blazers?

“He had a really interesting explanation for why he was doing it,” Kerr said. “It was like reverse psychology or something. It doesn’t mean anything. Everyone has to prepare and motivate themselves for the game, and he’s our guy who’s going to do a lot of talking. I don’t think there’s any damage done, and I don’t think there’s any offense taken, either.”

The season is long, so Green does what he can to ward off complacency and boredom — kryptonite for teams with championship aspirations.

Last month, when Kerr accepted the N.B.A.’s award for coach of the year, he went so far as to encourage Green to “keep yelling” at him. And last week, when Shaun Livingston, an otherwise mild-mannered point guard, was ejected from Game 4 against the Trail Blazers for screaming at an official, Green sounded like a doting parent.

“It was needed,” Green said. “It was fun to see.”

Green, who had been dealing with soreness in his left ankle, aggravated the injury in Game 5 against Portland. Afterward, he said he was grateful to have a semi-extended break before the start of the conference finals. But he also expressed confidence in his ability to push through any pain.

“If it happens again, just deal with it,” he said.

Curry said much the same about his tender right knee. Curry shared the postgame dais with Green, whose ensemble — black leather jacket, purple fedora — made it look as if he had arrived straight from the set of “The Wild One.” Green is aware that he and Curry might come off as an odd pairing.

“We carry ourselves a little different,” Green said. “But at the same time, it’s one of the reasons why he’s one of my best friends, because we understand each other. We understand that competitiveness and doing whatever it takes to get to a certain level. It would surprise a lot of people, but it wouldn’t surprise us.”


