


ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — When Manager Joe Girardi arrived at the pitcher’s mound with an outstretched hand, reliever Nick Goody placed the baseball in it.

But as Goody began the walk back to the dugout, Girardi went the same way. When Goody recoiled and stepped the other way, so did Girardi, and they bumped into each other.

It was that kind of afternoon for the Yankees as they lost to the Tampa Bay Rays, 9-5, on Saturday: They could not get out of their own way.

Nobody hindered the cause more than Michael Pineda, who after an encouraging performance last Sunday at Oakland reverted to dispiriting form with his briefest outing this season.

Pineda gave up three runs in another rough first inning — his season-long bugaboo — and allowed a two-run homer by Evan Longoria in the second. By the time Longoria singled with two outs in the fourth, driving in the Rays’ sixth run, Girardi had seen enough.

“It’s very frustrating to me to start the season like this,” Pineda said through an interpreter. “I’m putting the team in a tough spot.”

As Pineda left, he carried with him a 6.92 E.R.A. — which stood as the worst mark in baseball among qualified starters — and questions about how long he might maintain his spot in the starting rotation. (Pineda has an option to be sent to the minor leagues.)

“As of right now, there’s no changes,” Girardi said, adding that he was speaking daily with the pitching coach Larry Rothschild and General Manager Brian Cashman.

Carlos Beltran said he had repeatedly heard from opponents how uncomfortable Pineda’s slider, changeup and fastball were to hit.

“Every time I hear something from a player on the opposite team, I let him know,” Beltran said.

Beltran reached a career milestone with a flourish, with his 2,500th hit coming on his team-leading 12th home run of the season. But fitting for the Yankees’ afternoon, he left the game shortly afterward when a muscle in his upper back knotted up while he was checking his swing.

Alex Rodriguez, another aging slugger, dropped to 1 for 13, with seven strikeouts, since returning Thursday from three weeks on the disabled list, his only hit a monstrous home run on Friday night. On Saturday, with the bases loaded, he chased a fastball from Enny Romero to end the seventh.

The Yankees had another prime opportunity in the eighth, cutting their deficit to 9-5, but Jacoby Ellsbury and Aaron Hicks grounded out with two runners aboard.


