


It was a night of milestones.

“America, Hillary clinched it!” Lena Dunham yelled across the room. She was addressing America Ferrera, the actress at the next table, not the nation.

“Hillary’s coming?” Ms. Ferrera yelled back.

She was not. Mrs. Clinton had secured enough delegates to earn the Democratic presidential nomination, according to The Associated Press. But she would have been in good company had she been. Ms. Dunham and a dense crew of fellow celebrities were at Hammerstein Ballroom on Monday night for the CFDA Fashion Awards.

Confusion duly untangled, Ms. Dunham and Ms. Ferrera soon alerted the rest of America, via bouncy Instagram video. Anna Wintour announced it again from the podium later in the night, inviting (or commanding) applause.

The room was filled with American fashion’s grandees and the stars who depend on them for the endless red carpet circuit that now consumes whole weeks of the year. Some, like Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez of Proenza Schouler, five-time winners and nominees once again, are old hands. For others, like the model Hari Nef, in a Gucci gown embroidered with a giant panther, and the actress Sarah Paulson, who was accompanying the doubly nominated designer Joseph Altuzarra, it was a first.

Ms. Paulson called Mr. Altuzarra’s clothing “incredibly sexy and very wearable.” “It sounds like a trite, pat thing to say, but it’s applicable here,” she added. “You actually go: ‘Oh. I can wear this right now. I don’t need to take it to have it altered to something I wish it was.’”

Compared with her usual award show circuit (she has been nominated for Emmys, Golden Globes and a Screen Actors Guild award), the CFDAs represented a night off. “The pressure is off me,” she said. “I feel like I’m at the prom.”

It did have the feeling of a prom, one where, like a high school fantasy come true, many of the dates also happened to be Victoria’s Secret models (Adriana Lima, Irina Shayk, Taylor Hill) or movie stars (Jessica Chastain, Olivia Wilde). Then there were those who cast further afield. “I admired her from afar,” Wes Gordon, the designer, said of his date, Donna Tartt, the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist who is not a regular on the fashion circuit (and persuaded out of her customary trousers for an evening).

“We played dress-up,” Ms. Tartt said. “I like fashion very much, and this is a special night.”

The purpose, of course, was not mere schmoozing, but award-getting, a fact that preoccupied some of the nominees.

“We’re trying not to think about it,” said Samantha Orley of Orley, who was, with her husband and brother-in-law, nominated for the Swarovski Award for emerging men’s wear designers.

“I’m thinking about it,” her husband, Matthew Orley, said.

The awards began after dinner, and, like all awards shows, dragged on. (The Orleys won. So did Marc Jacobs, Thom Browne, Brandon Maxwell, Paul Andrew and the designers of Mansur Gavriel.) It was not, as initially planned, televised, but there were TV-friendly moments all the same.

Mr. Maxwell, a stylist for Lady Gaga who won for his new collection, gave a teary, adorable speech about his salvation by fashion. “He’s having a Sally Field moment,” said Sarah Jones, the elastic performer who appeared in the CFDA’s promotional videos.

Mr. Browne delivered a heartfelt appreciation to his partner, Andrew Bolton, then promised to do tequila shots with his design team back at their table.

The tributes continued. Gucci’s Alessandro Michele won the International Award. Tilda Swinton read a letter in praise of David Bowie, who received a posthumous tribute award on the night of what would have been his and Iman’s 24th wedding anniversary. Calvin Klein saluted Donna Karan.

But the undisputed highlight was the unannounced arrival of Beyoncé, there to receive the Fashion Icon award. (Not much was made of it at the time, but Rachel Roy, popularly believed to be “Becky with the good hair” of “Lemonade” shade, was also present.)

Beyoncé, who tends to let her music and her Instagram speak for her, gave a lengthy speech about fashion’s place in her life, encouraging designers (“You all are fairy godmothers and magicians and sculptors, sometimes even our therapists”) to remember the power they have to shape perception.

But she saved her longest tribute for her mother, Tina Knowles, who, with her uncle Johnny, made her stage costumes and clothes (including her wedding dress, prom dress and first Grammy dress) when no one would lend her clothes. They made her feel “like Khaleesi,” she said, of the “Game of Thrones” warrior queen. “I had an extra suit of armor.”

Outside after the awards, Tina Knowles proclaimed herself overwhelmed. “I turned into a crybaby,” she said. “It was so beautiful.”

She has mostly given up the mantle of American fashion designer. “I’m retired now,” she said.


