


LONDON — One of the best-known depictions of Queen Elizabeth I is the “Armada Portrait,” which celebrates the British navy’s improbable 1588 victory over the Spanish fleet. Painted around 1590 by an unknown artist, it was first owned by Sir Francis Drake, and remains in the hands of his descendants.

Now those heirs have decided to sell the work, one of three versions of the portrait, and in response, British museums and the Art Fund announced on Monday that they have started a campaign to raise 10 million pounds, or about $14.5 million to ensure the painting remains in Britain.

The portrait, unusual in its time for its large size and horizontal format, shows the bejeweled queen, regal and poised, in front of two seascapes; one of the English fleet preparing for battle, the other of the defeated and wrecked Spanish Armada. Her right hand rests on a globe.

“It is the painting that represents everything about the Elizabethan age, including Shakespeare, the moment when England began to rule the waves, and Elizabeth’s reign,” said Christine Riding, the head of arts at Royal Museums Greenwich, which together with the Art Fund, a national fund-raising group, is leading the campaign to buy the painting for the national collection. “It indicates a gear shift in the national identity, the idea of the plucky English, punching above their weight, of the mythology of Gloriana, and the idea of the queen as a strong and just woman.”

The Art Fund has pledged £1 million, and Royal Museum Greenwich said it would use its entire annual acquisition budget of £400,000 toward the purchase.

“We are very anxious that it shouldn’t go out on the open market, which will inevitably happen, I’m afraid, if we fail to raise this sum,” Stephen Deuchar, the director of the Art Fund, told The Guardian.

The Art Fund, which raised £10 million in 2014 to buy a Van Dyck self-portrait for the National Portrait Gallery in London, has been successful in raising money for campaigns of these kinds, said Madeline Adeane, a spokeswoman. The aim is to raise the money in about two months, during which time the painting will be on display at the National Maritime Museum.

If the campaign is successful, the portrait will be relocated to the Queen’s House, on the site of the original Greenwich Palace where Elizabeth I was born. The other two versions are housed at Woburn Abbey and at the National Portrait Gallery.


