


Mets reliever Addison Reed spun a slider into the ground, and even though catcher Rene Rivera dropped to his knees, the ball scooted past him. By the time Rivera found the ball and dived back to home plate, Atlanta Braves center fielder Ender Inciarte had slid in safely.

Inciarte’s alert and aggressive base running in the eighth inning, coupled with the Mets’ late-game miscues, dealt the Mets a 4-3 loss against the lowly Braves at Citi Field on Saturday night.

“This is a tough one,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “Especially with what’s going on right now, with a bunch of guys down. You can’t lose these kinds of games.”

The defeat moved the Mets, who squandered a three-run lead, six and a half games behind the National League East-leading Washington Nationals, who played late Saturday. The Mets never trailed the Nationals by more than four and a half games during their magical 2015 season. The season is not even half over, but the Mets know they need to keep the deficit manageable until reinforcements arrive or their play improves.

“It’s definitely a tough loss,” Mets third baseman Wilmer Flores said. “I’m not going to lie.”

The Mets’ Steven Matz twisted his way through Saturday’s start. He threw plenty of fastballs up in the strike zone, but the Braves could not take advantage until later in the game.

In the fifth inning, with the Mets leading by 3-0, the Braves notched their first run on high Matz pitches. In the sixth inning, Jeff Francoeur trimmed the Braves’ deficit to one run when he smashed a belt-high, first-pitch changeup off the facing of the second deck in left field.

Collins took Matz out after six innings and 99 pitches. Matz felt elbow tightness, which he and Collins played down. Matz said it was different from his previous elbow problem this season.

“Just a little tender,” Matz said. “A little fatigue. Stuff you go through during the season.”

Collins inserted reliever Jim Henderson. On his first pitch, Henderson gave up a tying home run to Tyler Flowers. With his velocity down, Henderson left the game after a mound visit from the pitching coach Dan Warthen. Henderson referred to the injury as a biceps issue.

The Mets’ homer-dependent offense stayed true to form. Yoenis Cespedes gave the Mets a 1-0 lead in the third when he unloaded a powerful swing on a hanging curveball from the Braves’ rookie starter, Aaron Blair, for a solo home run. An inning later, Flores laced a low fastball over the left field fence for another blast.

The Mets took a 3-0 lead when James Loney hit his first triple since 2011 and scored on a sacrifice fly by Rivera. But by the time Blair exited the game, the Mets had only a 3-2 lead. Their offense could do no more against a rookie pitcher who entered the game with a 7.59 E.R.A.

The Braves took the lead in the eighth inning thanks to Inciarte’s legs. He led off the frame with a double. When right fielder Curtis Granderson caught a lineout, he nonchalantly flipped the ball back into the infield, not thinking Inciarte would run. But Inciarte tagged up and took third base.

“You’ve got to give credit to him for making a heads-up play,” Granderson said. He added that he possibly could have “made a harder throw and might’ve changed the situation.”

This set up the winning run two batters later when Reed’s slider skipped past Rivera and Inciarte blazed home.

The Mets had a chance tie the score in the bottom of the ninth but stumbled. Flores reached base on an error by Braves shortstop Erick Aybar, and Loney followed with a double. But the Mets’ third-base coach, Tim Teufel, waved Flores home, and he was thrown out easily.

“We can’t get him thrown out in that situation,” Collins said.

Granderson struck out looking with two runners on base to end the game.


