


Most borrowers who take out a single-payment car title loan end up borrowing again because they can’t afford to make the payment when it’s due, new federal research shows.

That’s why much auto title business comes from borrowers who end up taking out multiple loans in a row and remain in debt for months, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau found in a study released on Wednesday.

Car title loans are a type of short-term, high-interest loan used by consumers who are short of cash to pay bills or meet unexpected expenses. The title is used as collateral.

But what may be intended as a short-term loan often turns into long-term debt because extra fees and interest are added to the original amount owed, the report found. Most car title loans are due in 30 days, but in some states they can come due in as little as two weeks.

About one in five auto title borrowers has a car seized for failure to repay a lender, the report found.

“The collateral damage can be especially severe for borrowers who have their car or truck seized, costing them ready access to their job or the doctor’s office,” Richard Cordray, the bureau’s director, said in a call with reporters.

For its report, the bureau examined about 3.5 million single-payment loans issued by nonbank lenders from 2010 to 2013.

Single-payment car title loans, which are repaid with a balloon payment, are available in 20 states; five other states permit only auto title loans that are repaid in installments, the report said.

Car title loans are usually based on a percentage of the car’s value, as determined by the lender. The lender holds the title to the borrower’s car, truck or motorcycle, and returns it when the loan is repaid. The borrower retains use of the vehicle while the loan is outstanding, but the lender can repossess it if the borrower fails to repay.

The typical car title loan is $700, and the effective annual rate is about 300 percent, the report said.

The report found that just 12 percent of the borrowers managed to be “one and done,” meaning they repaid their loans with fees and interest in a single payment within 30 days.

Car title loans are akin to payday loans, although they are often for larger amounts of money. They will probably be covered by new payday lending regulations the bureau is expected to propose in coming weeks.

A report last year from the Pew Charitable Trusts urged policy makers to adopt reforms to make auto title loans less risky, such as adding a requirement that lenders assess a borrower’s ability to repay the loan, based on income and expenses.

The Pew report found that more than two million people, or about 1 percent of American adults, use high-interest automobile title loans each year.

Borrowers spend about $3 billion annually, or $1,200 each, in fees for loans that average $1,000, Pew found.

Here are some questions and answers about car title loans:

■ Are car title loans used mainly for emergencies?

Only a quarter of borrowers use title loans for unexpected expenses, according to Pew’s research, while half report using them to pay regular bills.

■ What alternatives are available to borrowers?

Delvin Davis, senior research analyst at the Center for Responsible Lending, said even a high-interest credit card might be a better option than a car title loan. “I would avoid them at all costs,” he said. “Once you are into it, it’s hard to get out of it.”

The Federal Trade Commission urges consumers to consider tapping any savings accounts they may have, or even borrowing from family or friends.

Some credit unions offer “borrow and save” programs, which allow borrowers to take out small loans if they agree to have part of the money set aside in a savings account, to help provide cash for future needs.

■ Where can I complain about a car title lender?

If you have a complaint, you can contact your state attorney general’s office. You also can file a complaint with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.


