


Christopher Ahnberg cannot quite put his finger on the moment he started identifying as a feminist. But his appreciation for women who aren’t the shrinking-violet type goes way back, and for the sake of his future happiness, it should probably go way forward, too.

“Growing up, my favorite shows always had strong female leads, like ‘Kate & Allie,’” Mr. Ahnberg said. “In my fifth-grade yearbook, I wrote down ‘Murphy Brown’ as my favorite show. Plus, I grew up with two strong older sisters. So I never saw women as anything but very strong people.”

The effect Mr. Ahnberg’s sisters and Candice Bergen had on his views of gender roles may help to explain, at least partly, why he fell in love with Cristen Conger, who is part of a duo of “girls-next-door gender experts” who host a popular podcast.

“I’m always trying to impress Cristen, because she knows so much about everything,” Mr. Ahnberg said. “I’m not talking feminism or current events, I’m talking history, everything. I can’t keep up with her. She makes me step up my game.”

Mr. Ahnberg, 33, met Ms. Conger, 31, when both were students at the University of Georgia in 2004. But it wasn’t until August 2012, when Ms. Conger was in need of someone to go with her to the wedding of a friend, that they began dating.

By then, both had moved to Atlanta and settled into careers, he as an executive at a company that installs home theaters and smart-home technology, and she as a journalist with a decidedly feminist point of view.

Ms. Conger, who also grew up in Georgia, is a host, with Caroline Ervin, of “Stuff Mom Never Told You,” a weekly podcast that has attracted a loyal audience, mostly of young women. The show, known as Smnty to its viewers, trains a cleareyed focus on subjects like fashion, differences between the sexes, and women in the workplace and beyond. Titles of recent episodes include “Free the Nipple,” “Period Pride” and “Are Women Bigger Whiners?”

Ms. Conger describes herself as a “liberal feminist” — one who believes that women should be free to pursue the lives they want. The recent dust-up over the somewhat tongue-in-cheek suggestion by former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright that damnation awaits women who fail to vote for Hillary Clinton caused Ms. Conger more frustration than anything.

“I thought it was completely understandable within the context of history, if politically foolish,” she said. “What upset me the most was that it only spurred more narrow media coverage of feminists being pitted against feminists.”

And despite her status as an emerging feminist voice, Ms. Conger had to concede that mustering up the courage to ask Mr. Ahnberg to be her date was a little unsettling.

“I was nervous because I liked him,” she said. “I tried to play it off as a friend-date, like, ‘I have to go to this wedding; can you come with me?’ But I didn’t tell him I had been counting down the days, that it was really such an event for me.”

The evening turned out to be less feminist than fairy tale.

“We had a magical night,” said Ms. Conger, who is tall and slim and has a tendency to wave her hands to make a point. “I bought a new dress and had my hair done, and he showed up all dressed up in a suit and sunglasses, and he looked very studly, and the setting was this beautiful home in Marietta with a beautiful garden.”

Ms. Conger knew early on that Mr. Ahnberg had a sharp, quick sense of humor. But it was only after a few dates, when she and Mr. Ahnberg were drinking Bloody Marys during brunch on an Atlanta restaurant’s rooftop patio, that she began to realize he had more to offer her than punch lines and someone to be her plus one at events like her friend’s wedding.

“We started talking about feminism, and it was the first conversation I had ever had with a guy my age about feminism that was in-depth and engaging,” she recalled. “And he was not at all nervous about the term. I just remember sitting there thinking, ‘This is incredible.’ I had never experienced that with a guy.”

Ms. Conger grew up in a fairly traditional home, but she credits her mother with instilling in her a can-do feminist mind-set.

“She was usually working, but she also home-schooled my siblings and me,” Ms. Conger said. “Her philosophy was, ‘If you can read, you can do anything.’”

Mr. Ahnberg says that feminism is a factor for him when voting and when he’s choosing which businesses to support. His feminist umbrage may be most on display when someone suggests that women cannot be funny.

“I’m always shocked when anybody says that,” he said, and understandably so, when you consider that his partner does what, despite her protestations to the contrary, looks and sounds vaguely like a very good Russell Brand imitation.

His older sister Jenn Fisher said he and Ms. Conger can break out into an improv comedy routine at a moment’s notice.

“They make a comedy routine out of everything they do,” she said. “They could be slicing peppers to make fajitas and all of a sudden they’re breaking into a fajita song, trading verses.”

Ms. Fisher, who lives in Atlanta and is a devoted Smnty listener, has her own ideas about how her little brother learned to be a feminist.

“In our house, there was never, ‘I’m a woman so I can’t mow the lawn,’ or ‘I’m a man so I can’t cook a meal,’” she said. “Also, I started working when Chris was in high school, so he’s seen me go through things as a working woman that wouldn’t happen to men. It’s made him sympathetic.”

During that rooftop brunch with Ms. Conger, that sort of attitude was on full display. But she was not the only one who felt the stirrings of love that day.

By then, something had occurred to Mr. Ahnberg, who usually carries a warm, wide smile atop an athletic frame. “I realized I had been an idiot the entire time I had known her,” he said, “because we had been on-and-off friends since college, but she was everything I ever looked for in a woman. I wasn’t going to let her slip away.”

He eventually decided to do what one of Ms. Conger’s feminist icons has famously suggested in song: Put a ring on it.

Ms. Conger’s love of Beyoncé is no secret. She has praised the singer on the podcast, and last year, she performed a comedy routine she wrote, “The Gospel According to Yonce,” at Song Missing, an Atlanta literary variety show. In it, she apologizes in advance to Mr. Ahnberg, who may not be fully aware that she is “beysexual.” Her disciples read not Bibles but “beybles.”

Ms. Conger has chosen to keep her own name, but both she and Ms. Ervin agree that it is also possible to find power in a woman who takes her husband’s last name, an issue that has been a hot topic among Smnty listeners since an episode titled “A Practical Wedding” aired in January.

The wedding expert Meg Keene, who was a guest on the show, insisted that brides should keep their names. “She was passionate about it, and a lot of listeners felt betrayed that we didn’t step up and say, ‘It’s O.K. for people to make their own choices,’” Ms. Ervin said.

For Ms. Conger, deciding which elements of a traditional wedding to keep and which to toss in the name of feminism involved careful consideration.

“Ultimately, we’ve moved away from the wedding-industrial complex to do what honors us,” she said.

But some rituals proved trickier to excise than others.

Accepting an engagement ring, for example, required some soul-searching. “In its historic sense, the ring signified possession rather than partnership,” she explained. “But I also knew it meant a lot to Chris to make the gesture. And I know that does harken back to old-school gender norms, but I wasn’t going to trivialize something that was important to him.”

Mr. Ahnberg’s proposal, made during a December 2014 trip to China, was certainly memorable, if not particularly radical.

Ms. Conger said: “The first big excursion we went on was to the Great Wall of China, and we climbed to the highest point we could go, which is this lovely outlook. Chris snuck around the corner and handed off our camera to someone in our tour group. Then he got down on one knee and pulled the ring out. A number of tourists there with us were very happy.

“It just summed up all this incredible love I know he has for me that I honestly never imagined having in my life. His support for me personally and professionally is a rare thing to find if you’re an ambitious woman.”

They were married on May 7 at the Goat Farm Arts Center, a former cotton-gin factory turned creative hub in the Westside neighborhood of Atlanta. Ms. Conger and Mr. Ahnberg live together in a studio not too far from the altar.

One hundred and fifty friends and family from as far as New Zealand and Paris found seats in a long courtyard nestled between two historic brick buildings. A classical guitarist strummed selections by Fernando Sor and Mauro Giuliani but transitioned to the Beatles’ “In My Life” as groomsmen in blue suits and bridesmaids in light blush dresses and, finally, Ms. Conger walked down the aisle. The bride’s father, Dan Conger, escorted her.

Ms. Conger’s oldest brother, William T. Conger of Baton Rouge, La., a recently retired Army captain, officiated. He addressed Mr. Ahnberg directly. Mr. Conger reminded the groom about the educated and witty woman he was about to marry, but said he knew Mr. Ahnberg’s love was true. When the two look at each other, the captain said later, it is with complete attention and affection.


