


It started as a fairly simple proposition: There were two schools on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, one overcrowded, the other underused. The city’s Education Department proposed to redraw the schools’ attendance zone so that some blocks assigned to the crowded school would be shifted to the emptier one.

But while most of the children at the crowded school, Public School 199, are middle class and white, most of the children at the other school, P.S. 191, are poor, and black or Hispanic. P.S. 191 has much lower test scores, and last year, the state labeled the school persistently dangerous, though many of its supporters argued that this was a mistake.

The proposal became complicated as families in the blocks that would be affected objected to the change. The department ultimately dropped the idea.

Now, instead of a simple solution, the department is considering a convoluted one that amounts to an educational game of musical chairs: First, P.S. 191 would move a block west, taking over a building under construction that was originally intended for a new school. The hope is that the move would provide a symbolic fresh start for P.S. 191 and that the gleaming campus would make it more appealing to the families moved there. Then, another school on the Upper West Side, P.S. 452, which shares a building with two other schools, would move into P.S. 191’s current home, giving it room to grow. The school that had been envisioned for the new building would not open.

The appeal to the Education Department is clear: P.S. 452’s student population closely mirrors P.S. 199’s, and its principal, David Scott Parker, used to be an assistant principal there. Families moved out of P.S. 199 might be more open to P.S. 452 than to P.S. 191, and persuading them to go to P.S. 452 could be easier than getting them to take a chance on a completely new school.

“It’s always challenging to attract families to a brand-new school, particularly in a community that has a variety of well-established schools,” Elizabeth Rose, the department’s deputy chancellor for operations, said. Moving P.S. 452, she said, “would allow an existing, strongly community-supported school to grow.” She said the department was “in a very early stage of assessing this as one of the possible options for moving forward.”

The proposal, to be discussed at a zoning meeting at P.S. 452 on Monday, has already been met with a divided reaction.

The principal of P.S. 191, Lauren Keville, supports the idea of moving to the new building.

“A new school building will come with exciting new technology and expansive resources, so we look forward to discussions about this opportunity,” she said in an email.

P.S. 452 would move 16 blocks, from 77th Street to 61st Street. While Mr. Parker, the principal, and some parents support moving, since it would give the school its own building, other parents say that the longer commute would deprive their children of the benefits of attending a true neighborhood school, such as bumping into classmates on the playground.

Brian Byrd said that his twins, in first grade at P.S. 452, walked to school with their friends, just as he did growing up in New Jersey. He said he was not sure whether he would keep them in the school if it relocated. He might move his family to the Upper East Side.

“For us, it’s almost a 20-block difference in an area that we have no connection to, none whatsoever,” Mr. Byrd said.

Some believe that the opposition is about more than just the commute. P.S. 191’s building is across the street from a public housing complex, where many of its students live. If P.S. 452 moved into that building, its new attendance zone would probably include part of the complex.

Parents opposed to the move have had to defend themselves against the suggestion that they oppose a change to the school’s demographics.

“The thing is, I really do believe in integration; I really do think every child that goes to public school deserves a good education and deserves to be safe and stable and all of those things,” Sara Roucloux, a member of the Parent-Teacher Association at P.S. 452, said.

But she said she did not understand “why this little school on 77th Street” might be moved 16 blocks south.

Melissa Birnbaum, who has a son and a daughter at the school, said of those against the idea, “They’re terrified what that would look like if the school were to be in that area abutting the projects.”

She said she supported the proposal.

But Scott Edelstein, who has two sons at P.S. 452 and opposes the relocation, said he did not think that a high-performing school could move into a poor area and not change.

“My limited anecdotal understanding of American society is that a school is ultimately and eventually a reflection of its community,” he said.

“Who does a school belong to?” Mr. Edelstein asked. “Does a school belong to its principal? Does it belong to its current faculty?”

“The only idea that makes any sense to me personally is that a school belongs to the neighborhood where it resides,” he said.

The meeting on Monday will be held by the zoning committee for the Community Education Council of District 3, which includes the three schools. The council votes on zone lines, but the building moves would have to be approved by the Panel for Educational Policy, a citywide body.

Mr. Parker, the principal of P.S. 452, said in an email: “While this is only the beginning of the process and no proposal was set forth, we value that the D.O.E. is evaluating ways that we can serve the children of District 3.”


