


FRONT PAGE

An obituary on Friday about Prince referred imprecisely to which elements of the character he played in the movie “Purple Rain” were autobiographical and which were fictional. Although the character, known as the Kid, is biracial, Prince himself was not. (Both his parents were African-American.)

INTERNATIONAL

The Kingston Journal article on Feb. 19, about efforts by farmers in Ontario to reopen a prison farm that the government closed in 2010, misstated the number of years that Pat Kincaid, one of the inmates who worked on the farm, spent in prison for various crimes. He was behind bars for about 40 years, not 47. While the error was promptly corrected online, editors failed to follow through on this print correction.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Tuesday about a donation to the University of California, San Francisco from the former Citigroup chairman Sanford I. Weill and his wife, Jane, misstated the portion of the university’s revenue that comes from state funds. It is 3 percent, not 97 percent.

•

A picture caption on Friday with an article about start-ups that offer improved menstrual products described the material of the Lola tampon incorrectly. It is made of 100 percent cotton, but not organic cotton.

SPORTS

An article in some editions last Wednesday about the Yankees’ 3-2 loss to the Oakland Athletics misstated, in some copies, the given name of the Oakland player who drove in the winning run in the 11th inning. He is Mark Canha, not Stephen. The article also misstated, in some copies, the number of years Canha has been in the major leagues. He is a second-year player, not a rookie.

•

Because of an editing error, an article last Wednesday about the success of the Islanders line of John Tavares, Kyle Okposo and Frans Nielsen during their playoff series against the Florida Panthers misstated, in some copies, the circumstances of Nielsen’s goal in Game 3. He scored late in the second period to tie the score, 3-3 — not two minutes after Ryan Pulock’s power-play goal made the score 2-1 early in the period.

THE ARTS

An article on Monday about a new “super PAC” run by artists misspelled the given name of one who is among those contributing works that will be displayed. He is Bayeté Ross Smith, not Bayaté.

•

A picture credit on Monday with a music review of a concert in the Trinity Wall Street Revolutionaries festival, using information from a publicist, misspelled the photographer’s surname. The picture, of the conductor Julian Wachner leading a performance, is by Saskia Kahn, not Khan.

WEEKEND

A picture caption on Friday with a report in the Antiques Column about 19th-century ledger books, which American Indians used to record tribal history in picture form, omitted a credit for the imprisoned Cheyenne warrior who produced an image of ledger art in the 1870s. He was Bear’s Heart.

•

Because of an editing error, a picture credit on Friday with a film review of the documentary “Keepers of the Game” omitted the photographer’s given name. The photograph of a girls lacrosse team chronicled in the documentary was taken by Peter Eliot Buntaine, not Eliot Buntaine.

•

A picture caption on Friday with an article in the Gallery Guide about art galleries in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan misstated the title of a series of works by Anne Collier on display at the Anton Kern Gallery. It is “Women Crying,” not “A Woman Crying.”

FOOD

The Good Appetite column last Wednesday, about Persian cuisine, referred incorrectly to the location of a shop in Los Angeles where Naz Deravian, an actor and food blogger, bought fresh green almonds. It is on Westwood Boulevard, not Westwood Avenue.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


