


The Cincinnati police have handed over to a prosecutor the results of their investigation into the actions of the family of a boy whose foray into an enclosure at the city’s zoo led to the killing of an endangered gorilla, officials said on Thursday.

The Hamilton County prosecuting attorney said in a statement that the office would review the case and make a determination about whether to file charges as early as Friday.

“No decision has been made at this point,” Tiffaney Hardy, a police spokeswoman, said on Thursday.

Also on Thursday, the police released an audio tape of the 911 call placed by the 3-year-old boy’s mother on Saturday after he crawled into the Gorilla World exhibit and ended up in the arms of Harambe, a male silverback gorilla weighing around 420 pounds.

The woman’s frantic conversation with an emergency dispatcher brings to light the panic that gripped onlookers as Harambe hovered over the child, at times dragging him by the ankle, for about 10 minutes until zoo workers fatally shot the animal.

“My son fell in the zoo exhibit!” the mother, whose name has not been released, says on the call. “My son fell in with the gorilla!”

“There’s a male gorilla standing over him. I need someone to contact the zoo, please,” she says.

“We do already have help started there, O.K.,” the operator tells her.

The mother then calls out to the boy, “Be calm, be calm,” she says. “He’s dragging my son. I can’t watch this. I can’t. I can’t.”

The killing of the majestic, 17-year-old ape drew widespread outrage online, directed in part at the zoo over the integrity of its barrier as well as its decision to use live rounds instead of a tranquilizer dart.

The zoo’s director, Thane Maynard, has defended the integrity of the enclosure’s barrier, saying that they passed regular checks by an accrediting agency. On Thursday, however, the zoo said that it had modified the barrier, raising it to 42 inches with wooden beams and knotted rope netting. It said the exhibit would reopen on June 7.

“Our exhibit goes above and beyond standard safety requirements,” Mr. Maynard said in a statement, “but in light of what happened, we have modified the outer public barrier to make entry even more difficult.”

Mr. Maynard has also stood by the decision to kill Harambe, saying that a tranquilizer would have taken several precious minutes to knock out the animal. The impact of a dart, he added, could have startled the gorilla, with possibly deadly consequences.

The boy’s mother, who has declined to be interviewed, has faced the brunt of the public anger. By Thursday morning, an online petition calling for her to be investigated for negligence had drawn more than 470,000 signatures.


