


William Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, may well be the most powerful policy maker in America who is neither elected nor confirmed by Congress. Mr. Dudley serves as vice chairman of the Fed’s policy-making committee, the Federal Open Market Committee, and he is the only regional reserve president who holds a permanent vote on monetary policy.

Mr. Dudley, a close adviser to the Fed chairwoman Janet Yellen, is a leading figure among the new generation of Fed leaders who have made reducing unemployment the central bank’s priority in the post-crisis period. On Friday morning, shortly after the release of the latest jobs report, he sat for a wide-ranging interview at the New York Fed’s grand, dungeon-like headquarters in Lower Manhattan.

Mr. Dudley managed to speak more than twice as many words during the hourlong interview as one of his colleagues, the St. Louis Fed president James Bullard, managed last week. New Yorkers really do talk faster.

The fast-paced interview has been lightly edited for clarity.

Does the latest jobs report, showing the American economy added 160,000 jobs in April, fewer than expected, suggest a loss of momentum?

I wouldn’t make too much about the headline payroll number being a little softer, because there’s other things in the report that are more positive. For example, total hours worked were up quite a bit; average hourly earnings were up quite a bit. So there’s actually a lot of income being generated from the labor market. And the data on payrolls is quite volatile month to month — 160,000 sounds like a lot weaker than the 200,000 people were expecting, but it’s actually well within what you’d expect in terms of normal volatility. It’s a touch softer, maybe, than what people were expecting, but I wouldn’t put a lot of weight on it in terms of how it would affect my economic outlook.

You said in a speech last month that events so far this year have not shifted your economic outlook. Does that remain the case?

I think the first quarter was weaker than expected, but in terms of the outlook, when I look at the fundamental forces driving the U.S. economy, I still think that they’re pretty much in place.

Employment is growing at a reasonable clip even with the slightly weaker payroll employment gain that we saw. Incomes are rising; wages are on a flat to maybe gently accelerating trend. So I think the fundamentals supporting consumer spending are quite good even though consumption was a little weaker in the first quarter than anticipated.

Another positive is the fact that financial conditions, which had tightened very substantially in January and February, have eased considerably since that time. That provides better support for things like the housing sector. Also in terms of people looking at their balance sheets, their balance sheets look better than they did a few months ago. The fact that fiscal policy is going to be a little stimulative adds a little additional support for the economy. And while there are still a lot of question marks about the global economy, it still looks like the global economy is growing at a reasonable clip. So I think the U.S. economy is still on a decent trajectory, above-trend growth, growth that will cause the labor market to continue to tighten, which is what we would like, and I think we’ll see gradual upward pressure on wages, which is desirable, and then hopefully inflation will start to track back toward our 2 percent objective.

So what should we make of the ongoing divergence between the strength of job growth and the reported weakness of economic growth?

Typically what happens is the labor market data tends to be the more reliable set of data, so you’d expect that G.D.P. would tend to converge to the labor market, but it doesn’t always have to be that way. My view is still that we’re looking for 2 percent real G.D.P. growth over the next year. If that’s right, the labor market should continue to improve. We should continue to see tightening of the U.S. labor market, probably a gradual acceleration in wages as the labor market gets tighter. And if that’s how the economy plays out, then I think we’re going to see further moves by the Fed to gradually normalize interest rates.

Where do you expect your benchmark rate at the end of the year?

I don’t know, because it depends on the data. The expectations that were shown in the March summary of economic projections, the median of two rate hikes, seems like a reasonable expectation. But it depends on how the economy evolves. Two seems like a reasonable number sitting here today, but it could be more if the economy is stronger and inflation comes back more quickly, or it could be less if the economy disappoints.

You’ve highlighted the persistence of long-term unemployment as an enduring legacy of the financial crisis. Are we making progress?

The news from this latest payroll unemployment report was actually quite positive in terms of the long-term unemployed. I think what’s happening is, as we’ve run the labor market to a higher degree of utilization, the long-term unemployed are getting picked up and getting more employment opportunities.

I was up at a place that works with the long-term unemployed, The WorkPlace in Bridgeport, Conn., a couple of weeks ago. There’s no question that there is bias against the long-term unemployed. In other words, when you have a stack of résumés, the long-term unemployed tend to be shunted aside. However, when the labor market tightens, so the stack of résumés isn’t quite as thick as it was before, the long-term unemployed get the attention that they deserve and then their prospects actually can improve at this point in the economic cycle. One reason you’d want to let the economy run a little bit hot in terms of putting a little bit of pressure on the labor market is not just because that’s what you need to do to push inflation back to 2 percent but also because it will help to bring the long-term unemployed back into the labor force and give them opportunities.

The New York Fed created a new survey of inflation expectations a few years ago and, basically since its creation, it has shown a steady deterioration in consumer inflation expectations. At what point is that fall large enough to cause concern that you’re losing credibility?

It is concerning that a number of indicators of inflation expectations have come down a bit, but they haven’t come down that much. So the direction of travel is concerning, but the magnitude of the decline isn’t that great at this point. I view it as concerning, but against that we have to weigh a number of other things in terms of inflation. One, the labor market is gradually tightening up and I think we are making progress in our objective of getting closer to full employment. Two, wage inflation looks like it’s stable to gently rising. And three, if you actually look at the inflation data over the last year, despite a stronger dollar and despite lower energy prices, core inflation has been quite stable. Now it’s been a bit below our 2 percent objective for the core personal consumption expenditures deflator but not that much — 1.6 year over year for the core deflator isn’t a big miss, especially given that there are a number of forces in play probably pushing that down. Now you look at the last couple of months, energy prices seem to have stabilized and actually increased a little bit and the dollar has actually weakened. So I’m pretty confident that as long as the economy continues to grow at an above-trend pace, the labor market continues to tighten, I am reasonably confident that inflation will get back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. So inflation expectations? It’s a mild concern.

What are the questions marks about global growth?

We know that there are a lot of uncertainties in the world. There always are. I wouldn’t want to state that this is a particularly uncertain period. But as you look at events over the last year, there are questions about Chinese growth, there are questions about Chinese currency policy. There was stress on emerging economies due to the weakness in global commodity prices. There were questions about the efficacy of negative interest rates in Europe and Japan, how effective would they be in supporting those economies. The fact is inflation, inflation expectations are still very low in a number of places around the world. A little bit low in the U.S., quite a bit low in Japan and Europe. So that’s a concern that it’s harder to get inflation back to central banks’ objectives because inflation expectations are on the softer side of where we would like them. So there’s still plenty of issues. Brexit [Britain’s June referendum on continued membership in the European Union] is another issue that’s on the horizon. So far if you look at the polls, if you look at the predictive markets, it looks like they’re going to vote to stay as opposed to leave, but if they were to vote to leave that would probably be a market event that could actually lead to some change in financial conditions. There’s always some things, but the situation today is dramatically better than it was in the first two weeks of February.

Are the potential consequences of a Brexit vote sufficiently significant that you are less likely to raise rates are your next meeting, in June, so you can wait and see what happens?

I think it’s one more thing that’s in the mix. Obviously it’s going to depend on 1) An assessment of what’s the economic outlook for the U.S. at the time of the meeting. 2) What’s the probability of a vote to leave. 3) If there was such a vote, how much turbulence should one reasonably expect in financial markets. So it’s just another variable in the mix. But what’s unusual about this particular variable is we’ll have a pretty good understanding on June 24 about how it plays out. That’s different.

If the Fed starts raising rates while other central banks are moving in the other direction, expanding their stimulus campaigns, how much does that constrain you by weighing on the domestic economy?

It really depends on how the divergence feeds back into U.S. financial market conditions. The big question always when there’s a divergence in monetary policy is what’s the consequence for currency valuation. If the U.S. were to follow a much more aggressive, tighter monetary policy than the rest of the world, one would expect in that environment the dollar probably would appreciate. But that doesn’t necessarily have to happen. There’s lots of factors that affect the currency valuation.

Monetary policy convergence could have consequence for financial market conditions, and if it did we’d have to take that into consideration. But I don’t think a priori I have a view that U.S. monetary policy can’t diverge from Japan and Europe. I don’t feel there’s some clear constraint on the U.S.

Do you think the Fed has been successful in convincing financial markets that the path of policy is data dependent?

It’s probably not for me to say whether we’re communicating effectively. We’re certainly trying to communicate clearly. The Summary of Economic Projections, where we show our short-term interest rate projections and we have the median short-term projections, I think we try to make it very clear that there’s no commitment to that. That’s just the current expectation based on what we know at the time of that particular meeting. So at the time of the December meeting, the median expectation was four rate hikes in 2016. And by the time we got to the March meeting, the situation had changed, at least in the minds of many F.O.M.C. participants, and so the median expectation was two rate hikes. I think people should understand that as economic circumstances change our expectations about what we’re going to do are going to change. It’s just what we think we’re most likely to do at that moment based upon the information we have in hand at that moment in time. But if the information changes, and that affects the economic outlook, then our view of how much monetary policy accommodation is appropriate will change.

The market fixates on the median because that’s a summary statistic, but all that is is an expectation at that particular moment in time based on the available information. If the information changes, then people’s expectation about what is appropriate is going to change. In my mind there’s no commitment whatsoever in the dot plot.

But last year the Fed seemed perfectly happy to use those same projections as a kind of forward guidance about how long it was likely to keep interest rates near zero.

I think forward guidance was an important tool of policy when we were at the zero lower bound for interest rates. Because there’s a question of, if the economy is weak, how can I actually add additional monetary policy accommodation? One way you can do that is you can commit to keep short-term interest rates low into the future — that can affect long-term interest rates and that can provide stimulus to things like mortgage rates, support the housing sector. So at the zero lower bound that makes a lot of sense.

And now?

One of the challenges that we face is that we are transitioning from a period where there was forward guidance to a period where there’s in my mind not much forward guidance any longer. I think the only forward guidance we’re giving right now is very, very soft. It’s just the notion that we expect the rate path is likely to be quite gradual, but even that is not a commitment, that’s just our expectation. And I think the market is having trouble adjusting to that fact that after years of having forward guidance, they don’t have forward guidance any longer. So how the economic information unfolds and how that affects the outlook for economic activity, for the labor market, for inflation, that then will drive the monetary policy decisions. So the challenge is for the Federal Reserve to get the markets to think right along with us so as the economic information comes out they revise their expectations about what we’re likely to do as we do in reaction to the economic information.

Do you think you’ve contributed to the confusion by using the same tools to communicate a different message?

It’s on us to communicate it as effectively as possible, and I think we’re trying to do that. The Federal Reserve today is much more transparent than it was even seven or eight years ago in terms of statements, press conferences, testimony, interviews like this one. So I think we’re trying to communicate as clearly as possible. Unfortunately the world is uncertain, the outlook changes in relationship to a lot of developments that are hard to anticipate, and so the world is a little bit messier than what we would like it to be, but that’s the world we live in.

Does it bother you that investors discount the possibility of policy moves at meetings with no scheduled news conference?

I don’t think it’s a real problem, because if there was some compelling reason to raise interest rates at a meeting, we would do so regardless of whether there was a press conference or there wasn’t a press conference scheduled at the meeting. In the current environment, with the economy growing slowly and inflation below our objective, slow and gradual seems like an appropriate monetary policy regime in that environment. So if you wait a meeting, it doesn’t have much consequence. But I think if there was a reason to move at a non-press-conference meeting we absolutely would.

After almost eight years of low rates, do you see signs of dangerous distortions in financial markets or in the broader economy?

We look at this very carefully. Financial stability is definitely a part of how we think about monetary policy now, much more so than before the financial crisis, because without financial stability you can’t actually have an effective monetary policy over time. The two are pretty much joined at the hip. So of course looking for places where there might be excesses in terms of financial markets are important because that creates potential vulnerabilities in terms of future financial stability.

I would say at this point I don’t see a lot of things that disturb me. The things that would disturb me would be things that are very excessive in terms of valuation and very large in terms of the weight that they carry for the economy. If you think back to the financial crisis, you had a big bubble for the U.S. housing sector which was very large and affects lots of people, so that was a huge bubble in terms of the consequences for the economy. Obviously it was magnified by the fact that there were structural weaknesses in the financial system that, rather than dampen the impact of the decline in housing, actually tended to amplify it. I don’t see anything like that today. There are some areas you might point to and say that those look excessive, but some of the areas you might have pointed to six months ago, they’ve actually sort of self-corrected.

Some people see a new structural weakness in the post-crisis decline in the liquidity of financial markets. Do you share that concern?

The bottom line is that the data on market liquidity is mixed. Some evidence points to no change in market liquidity, but other evidence — more indirect evidence — suggests there has been some decline. The question is how concerned should we be about that.

The fact is, liquidity was probably underpriced in 2004 and 2005. It’s certainly appropriate that we’ve raised capital and liquidity standards for major and systemically important firms, and if that has had some consequence on market liquidity that may be a very appropriate price to pay for having a more stable financial system.

Unfortunately there’s a lot more work we need to do on this market liquidity issue. We don’t have good data on this, for example in the Treasury market, on dealer-to-customer interactions. We just need to do a lot more work on this to understand how much market liquidity changed, what are the factors driving it, how much of a role if any has regulation played and is there something we need to do about it.

I personally think people are perhaps a little overly concerned about changes in market liquidity in terms of their consequences for the macro-economy. At the end of the day, if liquidity is a little more expensive but the financial system is a little more stable, the benefits on the financial stability side are probably much more important than the fact that market liquidity might be a little more expensive.

Another possible weakness you raised recently is that the Fed remains constrained in its ability to lend to securities firms.

This is not a new-standing issue. The ability to lend to large systemically important securities firms was a problem before and during the crisis as well. So the Fed had to invoke special authority to engage in lending to some firms that if they had failed violently would have threatened to take down the entire financial system and led to, in my opinion, a global recession. That authority has been made more limited by the Dodd-Frank Act, but the difficulty existed before. What’s changed is the large securities firms are now subject to prudential regulation, and so the question I raised in the speech I gave a week ago is, given that we have this lender of last resort gap, and the fact that they are now subject to tough prudential regulatory standards, maybe it makes sense to think about whether the lender of last resort function should be extended to these entities. What we found in the financial crisis is that we could lend to banks but the banks were not always willing to lend to the large securities firms, and so I think that’s a potential shortcoming of our system that we should re-evaluate.

Do you expect to normalize interest rates before the next recession?

I don’t have a strong view of how likely or unlikely that is. I don’t think the risk of a U.S. recession right now is high. There’s not a lot of imbalances in the U.S. economy in terms of leverage build-up; monetary policy is quite accommodative; fiscal policy this year is stimulative. The consumer is in good shape with rising payroll employment and rising household income. I don’t see a lot of recession risk over the near term. That said, things could change.

The idea that the expansion is long-lived, a pretty long expansion by historical standards, I don’t think that tells you anything about how much longer it’s going to last. If you look at economic expansions historically, they don’t die of old age. They die for two reasons. One, because the Fed tightens monetary policy because there’s a potential inflation problem. That’s obviously not going to happen over the near term, at least on purpose, because we don’t have an inflation problem, so why would the Federal Reserve be forced to act and tighten policy in such a manner? The second way is a large adverse shock, something that happens to the U.S. economy that’s unanticipated or it could be an external shock. That’s a harder thing to forecast. There’s always a risk of a shock that could push us into a recession. But in the current environment, given that the monetary policy one doesn’t seem to be a big risk, in my own mind the overall risk is quite low.

Are you concerned about the Fed’s ability to deal with a shock, given that rates remain so low?

I think we have quite a bit of ammunition. In some ways we have more ammunition that we had 10 years ago because we’ve developed new tools that we actually know are effective. We could lower short-term interest rates. We could engage in additional quantitative easing, we could extend the duration of our portfolio, we could go back to forward guidance and make commitments about the path of short-term rates. In some ways we’re in better shape because we actually have tools that we know are effective and we have a monetary policy regime that we shown is very workable even with a very large balance sheet.

One of the nice things about the December tightening is we got to test the proposition that we can manage monetary policy even with a very large balance sheet. And we’ve been very effective as we implemented that first move of moving the Fed funds rate up into the new target range. That’s an important thing to know for sure. We were highly confident it would work, we had done a lot of testing, but now we know it works.

You didn’t mention negative interest rates.

I would never say never to any potential policy tool. But when the U.S. economy was weak several years ago and we were far away from our unemployment and inflation objectives, we did not pursue a negative-rate policy, so I would take some signal from that. I think there are questions about the net positives and benefits of negative short-term interest rates. Clearly it can make financial conditions more accommodative, but also it has consequences potentially for bank profitability, and I think households wonder about what kind of a regime we’re in if we’re in a regime of negative interest rates. We also have a very large money market, which also raises questions about how well it would work in the United States.

This is not something I’m spending any time thinking about, and it’s not something I contemplate doing now or in the future. But at the same time it would be crazy to say I’m going to rule out categorically a whole set of policy tools. It depends on the circumstances.

Is it possible that we’re trapped in a world of low interest rates?

Anything is possible, but let’s look at how the U.S. economy is performing: If the economy is growing at an above-trend pace, and job gains are sufficient to tighten the labor market, then one would certainly expect that that would be consistent with monetary policy normalization over time. I think the issue that arises in the current environment is, if the economy is growing just a little bit above trend, not a lot above trend, and we’re not really certain where the full employment rate is — we’re approaching the full employment rate at a very shallow angle of attack. That means that small changes in the growth rate, small changes in what we see in terms of how the labor market is translating in terms of wages, can affect the timing of monetary policy by several months. But I think the general story of the economy over the last few years is very much intact. So I think I’m not that worried about the issue that we’re not going to succeed in our objectives. I think we’re still on track.

Why have we not seen overheating?

I think there are residual headwinds from the financial crisis that affect the appetite for people to take on debt, for example. There’s headwinds from the financial crisis that affect the extension of credit to borrowers in the housing sector. For example, prior to the crisis your credit score didn’t seem to have much consequence for your ability to get mortgage credit, but now there’s a really strong bifurcation of the mortgage market by credit score.

Also I think that the demographics of the U.S. economy are changing and we’re getting older. That may also be a factor.

And of course we exist in a global world and the rest of the world has been growing more slowly than what it was 10 to 15 years ago. And that has a consequence for us.

How about the local economy? You’ve said that New York is doing pretty well; some of its suburbs less so.

Younger people really seem to like to live in urban centers, and New York City is a great city. It’s a huge magnet for people to come to live and work, and the suburbs of New York just don’t have that same degree of attraction. You see this around the whole country. There’s a lot of economic development going on in city centers. There does seem to be a shift in taste in terms of where people want to live and work. It disadvantages the New York City suburbs a bit. That said, the suburbs do benefit by the vitality of New York. Many, many people, myself included, commute from the suburbs.

The Fed in general, the New York Fed in particular, and Bill Dudley, by name, are often accused of focusing too much on Wall Street and not enough on Main Street.

We absolutely care about Main Street. That’s the whole goal of policy is maximum sustainable employment and price stability. There’s absolutely nothing about the stock market, there’s nothing about Wall Street in our dual mandate. The reason why financial markets matter is because they are our transmission mechanism for how monetary policy affects the economy. If credit spreads widen dramatically, if mortgage rates go up, if the stock market plummets, that will have real consequences for household and business spending that will affect real G.D.P. growth, that will feed into the labor market and inflation. I’m never in my mind targeting a given level of any financial market. I’m looking at financial conditions broadly and asking myself the question, “Are they broadly consistent with the objectives that I want to achieve in terms of employment and inflation?”

You worked at Goldman Sachs before you joined the Fed, and this is often cited as evidence that your sympathies are with Wall Street.

I can’t wipe out my employment history. But I know through my actions — the monetary policy decisions that I’ve voted on and the commitment I think I’ve shown to the community in terms of spending a lot of time traveling around the New York district and trying to really understand what’s happening on the ground, on Main Street — hopefully deeds speak more powerfully than words and I hope people judge me on my actions and I hope my actions are very much consistent with the view that I care completely about Main Street.

There is a lot of talk lately about whether the Federal Reserve’s structure should be changed to increase its accountability. Some people would also like to change the Fed’s mandate. Do you see any merit in the view that things aren’t working as well as they could?

The structure of the Federal Reserve is very much consistent with the way the whole country is set up, in terms of the federalized structure. As time has passed, that structure of the Federal Reserve has evolved, often in response to financial crises. I think that it’s always appropriate to ask yourself the question: Could the Fed be structured in a different way so it could do its job better? But I think people should actually be asking themselves a slightly different question: How is the Fed actually doing its job today? Are we actually making progress toward our dual mandate objectives? What is the unemployment rate in the U.S. relative to full employment? It’s pretty close. Where is inflation in the U.S. relative to our 2 percent objective? It’s pretty close. Things aren’t perfect. I would have liked a stronger recovery. I would have liked if we’d gotten here a lot sooner. I would like the long-term unemployed to be employed a lot sooner. But we’re making progress on our mission. If you look at how the Fed has actually behaved over the last few years, I would not want to trade places with a lot of other countries around the world.

The second thing I would say, it’s very, very important that any changes that are made to the Federal Reserve are made to make the Fed function better, not because we’re unhappy about how the financial crisis played out. I completely understand why people are unhappy about the financial crisis. As I’ve said many times, there’s something fundamentally unfair about the fact that large firms had to be rescued to prevent the financial system from collapsing as people lost their homes and jobs. There’s something totally unfair about that. However, the consequence of letting those large financial firms fail would have been worse for everybody. I’m absolutely convinced that we would have had a global depression. But it’s really important not to let that unfairness lead to a response that could potentially hamstring the Fed in terms of its ability to achieve its objectives. I just ask that people ask themselves the question, how is the Federal Reserve actually performing in its mission?

Why has the U.S. bounced back from the crisis more quickly than Europe or Japan?

I think it’s hard to say. We have quite a different financial system, much more dependent on the capital markets and less on the banking system. That may have caused us to have a lot more pain early, but then a recovery sooner.

The fact that we were very aggressive in recapitalizing our banks early I think was important. We got the banks in a much better place of health sooner than many other countries.

We also have a more flexible economy. In the United States I think it’s much easier for resources to flow from one use to another pretty quickly, and so if there are mistakes that are made in terms of the allocation of resources those mistakes get corrected quite quickly.

And I think the Fed probably had a role. I wouldn’t want to overstate our role, but we were very aggressive in terms of monetary policy. Coming out of the financial crisis, we were very concerned about the U.S. ending up in a situation where inflation expectations ended up anchored to the downside, that they could be come trapped at the zero lower bound and monetary policy could lose its effectiveness. To guard against that risk, we were very aggressive in terms of how we pursued monetary policy through the financial crisis and in the aftermath. I think there are a lot of factors and I like to think the Federal Reserve played its part.


