


JERUSALEM — In a sign of growing cooperation, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has agreed to return to Israel a tank that was seized during a disastrous 1982 battle with Syrian forces in southern Lebanon, an episode that left three Israeli soldiers missing in action and has haunted Israel for more than 30 years.

The gesture of good will was announced before a visit to Moscow, starting Monday, by Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, to commemorate 25 years since the resumption of diplomatic relations between Israel and Russia. The Soviet Union had severed ties in 1967, after the Arab-Israeli War.

This will be Mr. Netanyahu’s third visit to Moscow since September. After his most recent visit, in April, Mr. Netanyahu said the two sides also planned to sign an agreement dealing with state pensions for tens of thousands of immigrants to Israel from the former Soviet Union. The April visit focused on security coordination between the Israeli and Russian militaries to avoid any mishaps as they operate in the Middle East.

But it is the promised return of the tank that will have symbolic value for many Israelis. “There has been nothing to remember the boys by and no grave to visit for 34 years now,” Mr. Netanyahu said, referring to the families of the missing soldiers. “The tank is the only evidence of the battle, and now it is coming back to Israel thanks to President Putin’s response to my request.”

Mr. Netanyahu said last week that Mr. Putin had signed an order to return the tank, which the Syrians sent to Moscow for examination, and which has been on display at the armored corps museum in Moscow. Mr. Netanyahu said he had raised the issue during his meeting with Mr. Putin at the Kremlin in April after a request from the chief of staff of the Israeli military, Lt. Gen. Gadi Eisenkot. A delegation from the Israeli military’s armored corps has been in Moscow discussing the logistics for transferring the tank.

The battle near the village of Sultan Yakoub, in the eastern Bekaa, occurred in the opening days of an Israeli invasion. An Israeli armored brigade entered a narrow valley, apparently unaware that Syrian forces were positioned in the surrounding hills.

Survivors described scenes of chaos as tanks were abandoned and soldiers tried to escape on foot. A rescue mission was attempted, and about 20 Israeli soldiers were killed in the clash. One of the captured Israeli tanks was later paraded through the streets of Damascus, according to news reports at the time.

The three Israeli soldiers — Zachary Baumel, Zvi Feldman and Yehudah Katz — were in two tanks when they were ambushed, according to relatives. Mr. Baumel was in one, and Mr. Feldman and Mr. Katz were in another. Israeli officials could not immediately specify which tank the Russians had pledged to return.

Zvi Magen, Israel’s ambassador to Moscow in the late 1990s, said he had been shown the American-made tank at the museum. The Syrians had transferred it because the Soviets wanted to study its defense and weapons systems, he said. Mr. Magen said he had asked for details about anything that was found in the tank, but had been told that it arrived without any signs of the soldiers who had been in it, or of any remains.

Mr. Magen, who is now a senior research fellow at the Institute for National Security Studies at Tel Aviv University, said the more important background to what he called the “confidence-building measures” of the return of the tank and the pension deal were Russian and Israeli interests given the “new reality” of Russia’s presence in Syria.

Still, the families of the three soldiers have never stopped searching for information about their fate. “They were probably taken in the battlefield,” Osna Haberman, the sister of Mr. Baumel, said in a telephone interview on Sunday. “There is still a chance that he could be sitting somewhere in a Syrian jail.”

Mr. Baumel, 22 at the time of the battle, also held American citizenship, having moved to Israel with his family from Brooklyn in 1970.

Ms. Haberman, a high school teacher who lives in Jerusalem, said Mr. Netanyahu called her a week ago to tell her of Mr. Putin’s promise.

The families believe that it was the tank that Mr. Katz and Mr. Feldman had been riding in, Ms. Haberman said. “In any event,” she said, according to witness accounts the three young men were captured after they abandoned their tanks. “It doesn’t solve our problem,” Ms. Haberman said of the Russian gesture. “We are waiting for information. Something solid, like an eyewitness report. Nothing else will serve.”


