


CHICAGO — We had just finished the mathematician Eugenia Cheng’s splendid demonstration of nonassociativity where the order of operations counts — as it does in, say, subtraction.

Now she wanted to forge ahead with the next lesson, in knot theory.

I suggested we wait until later. “Why?” she asked.

“Well, we shouldn’t eat two desserts before dinner, should we?” I said, and giggled nervously.

“Why not?” she replied, not giggling. She tightened her apron strings and walked over to her stove.

Of course. What was I thinking? Hadn’t Dr. Cheng already made clear her conviction that in mathematics, rules are like eggs: meant to be broken, stirred, flipped over and taste-tested? And that day, we had broken a lot of eggs.

“You’re absolutely right,” I said, rushing to her side for the grand unveiling of another mathematically themed confection.

Dr. Cheng pulled from the oven a perfectly baked specimen of what she calls Bach pie, named for the great composer beloved by mathematicians everywhere: an oblong rectangle of creamy dark chocolate studded with banana slices and topped by an Escher-like braid of four glazed pastry plaits that followed divergent trajectories, never quite crisscrossing where you expected them to.

The filling was a clever concatenation — “BAnana added to CHocolate gives you Bach,” Dr. Cheng said. The braiding illustrated the structure of a Bach prelude and the sorts of patterns that knot theorists study “to see how looped up the braids are,” Dr. Cheng said, “and whether you can transform one braid into another by wiggling the different strings.”

The pie was a true union of art and math, too beautiful to besmirch, and besides, you’re not supposed to untie knots with your teeth, are you?

Another rule, easily broken.

Dr. Cheng, 39, has a knack for brushing aside conventions and edicts, like so many pie crumbs from a cutting board. She is a theoretical mathematician who works in a rarefied field called category theory, which is so abstract that “even some pure mathematicians think it goes too far,” Dr. Cheng said.

At the same time, Dr. Cheng is winning fame as a math popularizer, convinced that the pleasures of math can be conveyed to the legions of numbers-averse humanities majors still recovering from high school algebra. She has been featured on shows like “Late Night With Stephen Colbert,” and her online math tutorials have been viewed more than a million times.

The hardcover edition of her first book, “How to Bake π: An Edible Exploration of the Mathematics of Mathematics,” has sold about 25,000 copies in this country and been translated into six languages, a surprising hit for a text visibly if judiciously seasoned with numbers, graphs and equations. The book is being released in paperback this month.

“I spend a lot of time explaining mathematics on blogs, and I try to cut through the technicalities and make things easier to understand,” said John Baez, a professor of math at the University of California, Riverside (and yes, a cousin of Joan). Still, his posts are aimed at scientists and others with some quantitative background.

“Eugenia has gone all the way in,” he said. “She’s trying to explain math to everybody, with or without pre-existing expertise, and I think she’s doing wonderfully.”

So committed is Dr. Cheng to mass math demystification that she recently left a tenured professorship at the University of Sheffield in Britain to take a position at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, where she teaches math to art students, lectures widely and continues her research in category theory on the side.

Dr. Cheng adopts a literal approach to making math more appetizing. “Math is about taking ingredients, putting them together, seeing what you can make out of them, and then deciding whether it’s tasty or not,” she said.

Every chapter in “How to Bake π” offers recipes for desserts and other dishes that encapsulate mathematical themes. To demonstrate how math seeks to identify underlying similarities across a broad set of problems, for example, Dr. Cheng starts with a recipe that can be readily tweaked to make mayonnaise instead of hollandaise sauce.

“Books might tell you that hollandaise sauce needs to be done differently,” she writes, “but I ignore them to make my life simpler. Math is also there to make things simpler, by finding things that look the same if you ignore some small detail.”

Her recipe for lasagna illuminates the importance of context to math. Dr. Cheng lists among the basic ingredients “fresh lasagna noodles,” and then points out that another cookbook might deem the noodles not truly basic and instead describe their preparation from scratch.

So, too, do numbers change their character and degree of basicness depending on context. The number 5, for example, when viewed among the natural, or counting, numbers is one of those elemental creatures: a prime number, divisible only by 1 and itself.

But in the context of the so-called rational numbers, which include fractions, 5 loses its prime identity and gains versatility, able to be divided into ever tinier slivers, like a cake at a dieters’ convention.

The number 1 in its multiplicative identity is practically bedridden, leaving other numbers unchanged: 6 times 1 equals 6. In its additive capacity, however, 1 is unstoppable: if you keep adding 1 to itself, Dr. Cheng noted, you can generate all the natural numbers, out to infinity.

Context can prod numbers to defy grade-school verities: 2 plus 2 equals 4, and that’s that. But not if you’re talking about a clock face with only three numbers: 1, 2 and 3. In that case, 2 plus 2 equals 1 – if you start at the 2 and move clockwise by 2, you reach 1.

“I admit I was skeptical at first about her analogies to cooking, but I ended up being completely sold,” said Steven Strogatz, a professor of applied mathematics at Cornell University who also writes popular books.

“She conveys the spirit of inventiveness and creativity in math that all mathematicians feel but do a very poor job communicating when teaching math. Refreshing is the word that keeps coming to mind.”

Dr. Cheng wears glasses, has long black hair and walks with an elegant, upright posture, like a dancer. She is alternately outgoing and reserved, passionate and matter-of-fact. She is a classically trained musician and owns a 1910 Steinway grand piano.

She is also an extremely good cook. On a recent afternoon, we are in her well-stocked kitchen, and she is stirring a mix of egg yolks, sugar and cream — my lesson in nonassociativity, otherwise known as custard. This is something where the way you combine ingredients counts, she said.

If you’re making a cake, you can throw together the flour, sugar, butter and eggs however you please, and the cake will come out fine — that’s an associative process. Not so for preparing custard. You must first combine the sugar and egg yolks and whisk them into a froth before you pour in the cream.

Blend the ingredients in a different order, she said, “and you end up with a runny mess.”

In math, too, you have associative operations like addition and multiplication, where you can change how your numbers are whisked together as you calculate and still emerge with the same answer: (4+5) + 6 is the same as 4+(5+6).

Subtraction, division and exponentiation are nonassociative operations: Who’s clumped with whom matters. So, while 10-(6-4) will give you 8, (10-6)-4 leaves you with nothing.

Dr. Cheng continues stirring the custard, peering into the pot to ensure that lumps aren’t forming. “People ask me, do you eat your custard warm or cold?” she said. “I tell them, I eat it all at once.”

She adjusts the temperature of the burner, up and down, up and down. Getting the custard to come out just right can be tricky, she said — harder than doing math, and more like living life.

Dr. Cheng insists that the public has it all wrong about math being difficult, something that only the gifted mathletes among us can do. To the contrary, she says, math exists to make life smoother, to solve those problems that can be solved by applying math’s most powerful tool: logic.

Science may depend on forming hypotheses, doing experiments and gathering evidence that support or refute your hypothesis, but math is simply a matter of stating the terms of your argument and then defending those statements using logic.

“The great thing about math is you don’t need much to start exploring it,” Dr. Baez said. “No expensive equipment, just pencil and paper, and you can start fiddling around with patterns and numbers.”

The key to thinking logically is to get comfortable with abstraction. Numbers are one type of abstraction that we take for granted: The number 3 can stand in for 3 bananas, 3 pies, 3 Bach partitas.

The next step up in abstraction is to replace specific numbers by symbols like x and y, a powerful maneuver that allows you to apply your argument more broadly, just as a general-purpose recipe for pie can be the vehicle for banana, blueberries, pumpkin, nuts, knots, you name it.

As an example of abstraction at work, “How to Bake π” presents this little brain teaser: My father is three times as old as I am now, but in 10 years’ time, he will be twice as old as me. How old am I? It then takes the reader through the solution by way of x-y abstraction.*

Dr. Cheng recognizes that people can feel uncomfortable with some of the abstractions required by mathematical thinking, by the need to ignore the particulars of, say, this green round pillow and that square purple pillow in favor of an abstract ideal of a pillow that you’re going to call x.

But it’s just a matter of practice, she said, before the idea starts to feel like a real object that you can manipulate with ease. “You become very good at separating what’s relevant from what isn’t, and that can be very useful in daily life,” she said.

Sometimes, she finds it “oddly satisfying” to mentally shave a bearded man or imagine how a furry dog would look like after a swim in a lake. “That’s what abstraction is,” she said. “You reveal the structure underneath.”

Dr. Cheng’s upbringing in rural Sussex as one of two daughters led her readily to math love. Their mother, a statistician who had been considered the most brilliant math student at her Hong Kong high school, would keep her girls entertained at the beach for hours with books of logic puzzles.

And because their mother commuted each day to a London accounting firm while their father had a child psychiatry practice near home, the girls grew accustomed to the idea of a briefcase mother and a father who made dinner.

“I think Eugenia and I both benefited from the atypical setup,” said Alethea Cheng Fitzpatrick, Dr. Cheng’s older sister and now an architect in New York. “We didn’t go into adulthood with any preconceptions about gender roles or gender abilities.”

Later, during graduate school at Cambridge University and three postdoctoral fellowships in Europe and the United States, Dr. Cheng would often find herself in a tiny minority. “I’ve been to conferences where there were more cubicles in the women’s bathroom than there were women to use them,” she said.

Today, in the United States, less than 30 percent of graduate students and about 12 percent of tenured faculty members in math are women. Dr. Cheng is striving to change attitudes across the board. “I want to be a role model for men as well as women,” she said.

The custard is ready. The ideal becomes real. I finish the first bowl, and ask for more.

* Let x be me and y be my father. Today, y=3x. In 10 years, my father will be y+10 and twice my age, so y+10=2(x+10). Since 3x=y, we can get rid of the y in that equation, as 3x+10=2(x+10). And since 2(x+10) is the same as 2x+20, we can now say 3x+10=2x+20. Finally, subtract 2x from both sides of the equation and you get x+10=20. Therefore, x=10, and I am 10 years old.


