


The squids are all right — as are their cephalopod cousins the cuttlefish and octopus.

In the same waters where fish have faced serious declines, the tentacled trio is thriving, according to a study published Monday.

“Cephalopods have increased in the world’s oceans over the last six decades,” Zoë Doubleday, a marine ecologist from the University of Adelaide in Australia, and lead author of the study, said in an email. “Our results suggest that something is going on in the marine environment on a large scale, which is advantageous to cephalopods.”

Dr. Doubleday and her team compiled the first global-scale database of cephalopod population numbers, spanning from 1953 to 2013. It included historical catch rates for 35 cephalopod species, including the Japanese flying squid, the giant Pacific octopus and the common cuttlefish. The species inhabit marine ecosystems all over the world, from Australia and the United States to Morocco and Madagascar, among other countries.

“When we looked at the data by cephalopod group we were like ‘Oh my God — they’re all going up,’ ” she said.

She said it was remarkable how consistent the increases were among the three cephalopod groups, which included species that swim in the open seas and creatures that scuttle through tide pools. They published their findings in the journal Current Biology.

According to a 2015 World Wildlife Fund report, some 1,200 marine vertebrate species, including fish like mackerels and tunas, declined by nearly half between 1970 and 2012.

“That’s not just the loss of some fish and some turtles,” wrote John Tanzer, the director of the W.W.F. International Marine Program, in the report. “That’s the unravelling of the fabric of an ecosystem that sustains life on Earth.”

But cephalopods, which are invertebrates, have increased across the board.

Dr. Doubleday and her team are currently investigating why the cephalopods are doing so well while the numbers of other marine animals like fish are falling. She suspects that climate change and overfishing are two causes. Warming oceans, while detrimental to some fish, may be creating beneficial growing conditions for some cephalopods, and overfishing could potentially reduce the numbers of fish that prey on the squishy snacks, she said.

Finding the answer, she said, “may tell us an even bigger story about how human activities are changing the ocean.”


