


Who would not be eager to take a drug that could help fend off age-related disease, to confer extra years of a healthy life?

In fact, many readers of our article about rapamycin claimed they would just say no to such a drug. Rapamycin was tested during a study of dogs at the University of Washington to see if it could slow aging without too many harsh side effects.

Lisa Wesel of Maine spoke for many who argued that trying to extend life was like playing God.

“This is disturbing on so many levels,” she said. “You can’t cheat death. Period. Nor should you try. Live a good life. Live a decent life. That should be the goal. The world cannot sustain billions and billions of people who have the arrogance to believe that the world is better off with them than without them.”

Librarian, writing from California, felt similarly.

“Old age, sickness and death, however frightening and alarming they may be to each of us as we consider our own fates, are the natural order of things,” she wrote. “Why do we spend so much time, money and angst battling the inevitable instead of accepting with grace the course that all lives must take? Of course we do not want to be sick and miserable and suffer pain and indignity, but those fears have led us to look on death as some kind of cruel, almost shameful, obscenity that we must resist and deny, all too often with treatments that are in themselves terrifying and horrifying.”

Others expressed concern about the environmental and economic implications of a longer life span.

“Ah, the unintended consequences of extending life — overpopulation, increasing stress on an already stressed environment, increasing stress on an already stressed retirement system,” wrote Thomas G. Smith, in Cadillac, Mich. “Humans are the most destructive of all species, and the rate of the earth degrading continues to accelerate by the selfishness of us. I have been a family physician for 32 years and already have seen the change brought on by life extension of just 10 years. We will need strict policies to counteract the negative effects of life extension of 30 years.”

One reader acknowledged the appeal of being able to play with one’s great-great-grandchildren. “But how in blazes am I supposed to be able to afford to live that long?” asked FJP in Philadelphia. “If the answer is I would have to work to age 85 so I can afford to make it to 120 or beyond, I’m not sure I’m going to sign up for that.”

Still, a number of readers found the study intriguing.

“I’m not sure how I feel about the idea of a drug to make people live longer, but I’m puzzled by all the comments against it,” Al Maki from Burnaby, British Columbia, said. “I’m 66, and I exercise regularly and pay attention to my diet in the hope that I will live longer and healthier. Many people do this and many others wish they had the self-discipline. I’m surprised so many people think this is a selfish goal. It’s seems quite normal to me.”

Patrick, from Chicago, agreed: “Why, oh why, are so many people commenting that we’re somehow ‘meant’ to live a finite life span, and that we should just deal with it, and not try to find ways to extend our life? I say that’s ridiculous. I enjoy my life, and if I could have an extra couple decades, during which I’d be healthy, I’d be thrilled. So, I suspect, would many of the naysaying commenters, if actually given the option.”

Another reader put the current research into historical context.

“It’s not about living forever,” David Bird from Victoria, British Columbia, explained. “It’s about a holistic approach to dealing with age-related illnesses, such as Alzheimer’s and many cancers. For those who dismiss or condemn it, life expectancy, at birth, for a white American male rose from 47 to 75 from 1900 to 2000. For black males it rose from 33 to 68. You don’t think this is unnatural because it is our norm, but it wasn’t the norm for our great-grandparents. If the results found for the mice could be replicated in humans, we’d live only 12 percent longer, less than 10 years, but our last years would be healthier, putting much less strain on ourselves, our families, and our medical resources.”

Wendy from Wyoming added: “I work very closely with individuals who are trying to navigate the Social Security disability process, most of whom are 45-64 years old. During the most productive time of their financial lives, they are literally impoverished by diseases of early aging — early heart disease, advanced osteoarthritis, early cancer. … I strongly support any treatment which will keep people productive and out of nursing facilities until their 80s and 90s. Everyone talks about ‘the nature of aging,’ but one of the truths about the human condition is that we already cheated nature many times over our evolutionary development. The first hack occurred when the human species was able to grow old enough to transmit valuable survival information from grandparent to grandchild, which corresponded to a dramatic improvement in human survival.”

Perhaps the most passionate voices, though, came from readers completely unconcerned about human life span.

“Not sure I want to live forever, but my dog? YES!” exclaimed Brian from Montana.

“I don’t want to live longer, but if dogs could live longer that would be wonderful,” a reader named Mary mused. “Beloved dogs are too soon gone from our lives.”

“The heck with human research — I just want my dogs to live longer,” Durt from Los Angeles said.

A reader whose dog was among the 40 studied chimed in. “My dog Rascal is featured in the article, and I’ve been thrilled with the results of the clinical trial,” Rose and Rascal wrote from Seattle. “This drug made Rascal’s heart beat more efficiently again like it did when he was a younger dog. He’s happier and friendlier and has more energy. If it buys me an extra year or two with my big dog — who will not live as long as smaller dogs — then I’ll take it. One thing which did not make it into the article: Rascal is my service dog, as I am disabled. … Rascal is the love of my life, and I have worked hard his entire life to ensure he get high quality food, lots of exercise, and rigorous training to make him the healthiest and happiest dog he can be. … Getting an assist from science nearly 10 years later is a BONUS.”

Finally, Concerned Citizen from Anywheresville gave voice to the issues inherent in prolonging either canine or human life.

“I lost my dearest and most beloved ‘heart dog’ four years ago,” she explained. “I loved her so much, I would have done literally anything legal or safe to keep her with me a few more years. If I had the resources, I would have had her cloned. I was nearly crazy with grief at the loss. But … if she had not died, the dog I have now would have probably died in a shelter. As it was, she was waiting for eight months and running out of time, and going ‘kennel crazy.’ She was older, and overweight; nobody wanted her. I wouldn’t have gotten a second dog. So this dog would have died, had my other dog lived.”

She added: “See? it is all a cycle and it is all connected. Is there meaning and purpose behind this? A grand design? I guess I won’t know myself until the end.”


