


Though not nearly as famous as the beautiful orange and black monarch butterfly, the Eastern tiger swallowtail is a spectacular butterfly to look for throughout New York City. With sharply patterned, swallow-tailed wings nearly five inches wide, the insects often outshine the flowers they service. By contrast to the well-traveled monarch, the Eastern swallowtail is a homebody, spending its several weeks as a winged adult flitting through a few flowery summer acres — if nothing eats it first. Unlike the monarch, birds find the tiger delicious.

The tiger swallowtail (Papilio glaucus) can be abundant wherever deciduous woods include red maple, black cherry, spicebush, sassafras, tulip poplar or other suitable foods for its caterpillars. With this many local host plants, it is no mystery that the butterfly is seen so regularly.

It ranks high on my personal list of the oddest places for wildlife sightings. I can recall thinking as I watched one flit past a traffic jam on the Bruckner Expressway that crossing the Bronx is not nearly as challenging on pretty yellow wings. I have also been inches away from another sipping nectar from a flower growing from the brickwork of the interminable Gowanus Expressway. On a whale watch, one fluttered past over the open Atlantic; still another lapped up something leaching from behind a portable toilet in eastern Queens.

Fortunately, I have also had far more “classic” encounters, enjoying these insects up close as they nectared in parks from Van Cortlandt in the Bronx to the Conference House in southernmost Staten Island.

These butterflies are not shy, and their large size is an invitation to examine the subtle color variations they use to communicate. With a little practice, we humans can learn the basics.

Male tigers have more intense black markings than females: four black bars playing prominently across yellow-orange forewings. Females, by contrast, exhibit two very different color forms; one is similar to the male’s yellow and black, but it includes a shimmering splash of blue along her rear wing’s trailing edge.

Other females are nearly black with the same light blue scales — these are insects, not birds — dramatically sprinkled along the trailing edge of their rear wings. This dark form is thought to mimic the related but toxic pipevine swallowtail. Females of this color phase can be found where pipevine swallowtails are more abundant.

Swallowtail caterpillars are quite interesting in their own right, feeding voraciously until they reach about two inches long. For their first two or three molts, the animals look like bird droppings, with all the appropriate brown and white markings. But as they continue to develop, their colors morph into a beautiful emerald green with a pair of blue and yellow false eye spots.

These eyespots are part of an elaborate defense. When the animal is disturbed, it tucks its real head under to reveal its eye spots to their best advantage. At the same time, two bright orange horns suddenly flare out from behind its head. To me, these bright orange glands look, and even smell, just a little like cheese doodles. There may be no better symbol of summer’s promise for the curious child in all of us.


