


Mayor Bill de Blasio, faced with new questions about deed restrictions lifted by the city with little public input, said on Wednesday that he would personally sign off on all such decisions going forward.

In an unusual scene at City Hall, Mr. de Blasio addressed the subject while seated with top city lawyers — the corporation counsel, Zachary W. Carter, and the mayor’s counsel, Maya Wiley — as well as top officials from the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, which handles changes to deed restrictions.

Mr. de Blasio told reporters that a process in place since at least 2010 had been followed in the decision to remove the restriction on a lot in Harlem at Saint Nicholas Avenue and 152nd Street in exchange for $875,000, paid by the nonprofit Dance Theater of Harlem.

“But that’s a different question from whether that’s the right process,” said Mr. de Blasio, who released memos and emails related to the Harlem property, which was sold by the nonprofit to a developer last month. “We want more community engagement.” Neither the community board nor elected officials in Harlem were made aware of the change, which was approved in November.

The sum received for the change was in line with the city’s approach to valuing protective covenants at a quarter of a property’s total appraised value, Mr. de Blasio said. In this case, the developer, BRP Companies, bought the property from the Dance Theater of Harlem for $3.1 million in April after the city removed the restriction that limited its use to nonprofit cultural organizations in the area.

According to a memo, BRP Companies had been in talks for “the last few years” about creating a 30-unit residential building on the lot with space for the nonprofit. According to documents, the nonprofit approached the city about lifting the restriction in April 2014. It was not clear if that plan would go forward.

Months before BRP Companies entered into contract to buy the lot in May 2015, a company controlled by the developer donated $10,000 to the Putnam County Democratic Committee, coinciding with a fund-raising effort by Mr. de Blasio to help Senate Democrats in the 2014 campaign.

Mr. de Blasio said decisions surrounding the Harlem lot were made to help the Dance Theater of Harlem pay off debt. “Clearly, in this case, public benefit was achieved,” he said.

He contrasted it with the removal of a protective deed on Rivington House, a nursing home on the Lower East Side that was sold for $116 million after a deed change. The city received $16 million — far less than a quarter of the sale price. Those transactions remain the subject of investigations.


