


Radek Faksa scored the tiebreaking goal on a rebound with less than five minutes left in the game, helping the Stars open the second round of the Western Conference playoffs with a 2-1 victory at home over the St. Louis Blues on Friday night.

As Antoine Roussel had on a second-period goal on which Faksa had an assist, Faksa started the rush that led to his winner.

Blues defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk tied the score at 1-1 in the third period with a shot from the top of the left circle after Dallas failed to clear the puck out of the zone.

Game 2 is Sunday in the best-of-seven series matching the Western Conference’s top two teams from the regular season.

After Faksa pushed the puck up the ice, Brian Elliott stopped, but did not secure, Ales Hemsky’s initial shot. Faksa was there to score his second goal of the playoffs.

Along with the Western Conference’s top two teams, this is a matchup of the Stars’ Lindy Ruff and St. Louis’s Ken Hitchcock, coaches who became friends after being assistants for Team Canada when it won gold medals in the last two Winter Olympics.

Hitchcock was coach of the Stars when the franchise won its only Stanley Cup in 1999, complete with a disputed clinching goal in triple overtime of Game 6 against Ruff’s Buffalo Sabres. They also went head to head in the 2006 playoffs, in which the Sabres beat Hitchcock’s Philadelphia Flyers.

Kari Lehtonen stopped 31 shots, withstanding a final surge when the Blues pulled Elliott out of the net and had an extra skater for the final 1 minute 40 seconds.

Elliott, who has played all eight playoffs games for the Blues, had 40 saves.

Dallas took the lead midway through the second period when Roussel started a rush down the right side and then had a cross-ice pass to John Klingberg before Faksa’s wrist shot from the left slot. Roussel was there to knock in the rebound.

It was Roussel’s second goal of the playoffs, but the first in which he got a stick on the puck.

Roussel scored from behind the net in Game 2 of the first-round series against Minnesota. A puck ricocheted off a teammate’s skate and then hit Roussel’s, popping over the net and into the back of the goalie’s head before falling to the ice. The strange goal was initially waived off before being overturned following a lengthy review.

SHARKS 5, PREDATORS 2 Joel Ward scored the tiebreaking goal against his former team with 8:11 remaining in regulation to help host San Jose rally past Nashville in Game 1 of their second-round series.

Ward also set up Tomas Hertl’s power-play goal that tied the game earlier in the period before scoring one of his own to help San Jose win its first playoff game when trailing after two periods since 2011.

Logan Couture added a power-play goal and an empty-netter, before Tommy Wingels sealed it with another empty-net goal as the Sharks showed some rust after having six days off since beating Los Angeles in five games in the first round.

DUCKS DISMISS COACH The Anaheim Ducks fired Coach Bruce Boudreau on Friday, two days after their first-round exit from the playoffs.

While announcing the move, Ducks General Manager Bob Murray expressed much more anger at his players than at Boudreau, who has not been able to pair postseason success with steady excellence in his two N.H.L. jobs in Anaheim and Washington. Boudreau has won 409 regular-season games and eight division titles, but just five playoff rounds in his coaching career.

The Ducks, four-time Pacific Division champions, have lost a Game 7 on home ice in four consecutive playoff years, culminating in Wednesday’s 2-1 loss to Nashville in the first round.

“I just think the last four years, the way they’ve ended, all very similar, that I didn’t think it would be a good situation to go forward in,” Murray said. “In no way, shape or form is this pointing a gun at Bruce’s head. Let’s make that perfectly clear. But you’ve got to start somewhere.”

Boudreau had spectacular regular-season success with the Ducks, leading them to four consecutive division titles while going 208-104-40 in nearly five seasons in charge. He had similar success in his first N.H.L. coaching job in Washington, going 201-88-40 and winning four Southeast Division titles in parts of five seasons.

But the Ducks’ last four seasons have ended in much the same disappointment as experienced by the Capitals, who won just two playoff rounds in four postseasons under Boudreau. The coach is an inexplicable 1-7 in Game 7s in his career, including six consecutive losses in the decisive game since 2009.

Compounding the pain, the Ducks also blew a 3-2 series lead in each of the past four postseasons, missing two opportunities to eliminate their opponents.

Murray acknowledged no complaints about Boudreau’s job performance while firing him, essentially acknowledging it was easier to fire the coach than the players.

“Regular-season success is O.K.,” Murray said. “Making the playoffs is the most important thing.”

Anaheim lost the first two games against Nashville at home but won the next three before losing the series. The Ducks outshot the Predators by 28-10 over the final two periods of Game 7 but could not overcome two early goals in a gut-wrenching loss.


