


Patric Hornqvist and Tom Kuhnhackl scored a minute apart in the first period, Matt Murray stopped 47 shots and the Pittsburgh Penguins took control of their Eastern Conference semifinal series with a 3-2 win Monday over the Washington Capitals.

Carl Hagelin added his third goal of the playoffs for Pittsburgh, which took a two-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven series on another night guaranteed to keep the N.H.L. player safety office busy.

One day after Washington’s Brooks Orpik received a three-game suspension for an illegal hit on Pittsburgh’s Olli Maatta, Penguins defenseman Kris Letang took a shot at Capitals forward Marcus Johansson that is sure to be reviewed before Wednesday’s Game 4.

Alex Ovechkin and Justin Williams scored for Washington in the third period, but the Capitals find themselves in a deficit against a franchise they have beaten just once in eight playoff meetings.

Before the game, Orpik reflected on the illegal hit. He said he was trying to be physical. Yet the instant he made contact with Maatta’s head early in Game 2 on Saturday night, Orpik said, he knew he had crossed a sometimes vague line between aggressive and illegal.

The N.H.L. suspended Orpik three games for a hit that the director of player safety, Patrick Burke, described as “forceful, unacceptably high and excessively late.”

Looking back, Orpik agreed.

“It was a bad hit,” he said Monday. “It was intended to be a hard hit, definitely not at his head, but I don’t think there is anything that you can argue that it was definitely late. I think that was pretty black and white.”

RANGERS RE-SIGN RAANTA The Rangers agreed to a deal with the backup goalie Antti Raanta, who appeared in 25 games this season after being acquired from the Chicago Blackhawks in June.

Raanta, 26, had an 11-6-2 record, with a 2.24 goals against average, a .919 save percentage and a shutout playing behind Henrik Lundqvist.

Raanta, who is from Finland, tied his career high in appearances and was eighth in the league in goals against average. He allowed two goals or fewer in 13 of his 18 starts.


