


For the New York City schools and their governance structure, annual cliffhangers seem to be here to stay.

As the State Legislature wrapped up the legislative session on Friday, Mayor Bill de Blasio for the second consecutive year came away with only a one-year extension of mayoral control of the city’s schools, after a battle so protracted that some wondered whether his opponents in the State Senate were actually willing to let the system revert to its old structure.

But the Republican-led Senate appeared to feel that giving Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, just a year was no longer a sufficient rebuke. It first suggested creating an education inspector, appointed by the governor, to scrutinize and challenge the mayor’s leadership of the schools. When that idea was dropped, the Senate proposed onerous new reporting requirements for individual school budgets, which the mayor and his allies in the Assembly resisted.

In the end, though, none of the parties were willing to end the session with mayoral control lapsing.

The mayor and the Assembly, which is controlled by Democrats, accepted the one-year extension, which was much shorter than the seven-year term the mayor had originally requested and the three years that the Assembly had supported. The Senate managed to extract a couple of additional concessions, but they were less severe than what some had proposed.

Mr. de Blasio said in a statement, “While one-year extensions are no way to treat our children, families or educators, this action is a crucial acknowledgment by State lawmakers that the education progress we have made in New York City could not have happened without our accountable control of the school system.”

The city will have to publicly report the budget allocation for each of the city’s 32 community school districts, in a format dictated by the director of the state’s Division of the Budget. However, the timetable for the reporting is more flexible than what the Senate had initially proposed.

The mayor’s office, which protested the original budget requirements, appeared at ease with the final requirements.

“These latest provisions are in line with the already transparent reporting requirements by which we currently and willingly abide,” a spokesman for the mayor, Austin Finan, said.

The legislation also included provisions that may benefit charter schools, but it was unclear which schools they might help. Starting next year, the legislation will make it easier for charter schools to ask to be overseen by a different entity. Charter school proponents had suggested this idea in each of the last two sessions, mostly with the goal of allowing schools authorized by the city’s Education Department to be overseen by the State University of New York or the Board of Regents. But the suggestion had been a low priority, and no one hailed the change included in this year’s legislation as a major triumph for charters.

Another provision gave the State University of New York board of trustees’ charter school committee new latitude to regulate the schools it oversees. But because SUNY’s regulations must still comply with the state’s charter law, the provision did not appear to have major implications.

The most significant setback for the mayor was the length of the extension, which reflected the uneasy relationship between Senate Republicans and the mayor, who tried in 2014 to help elect Democrats in the Senate to switch the balance of power.

Dennis M. Walcott, who served as chancellor of the city’s schools under Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, said that a series of one-year renewals was bad for the school system.

“I think it should have been multiyear,” he said in an interview. “It gives the system a little stability and allows people to plan appropriately, and it just leads to better management.”

While it was understandable for the legislature to want to revisit mayoral control periodically and fine-tune it, he said, the decision about whether to renew it “shouldn’t be based on one individual, one mayor.”

StudentsFirstNY, an advocacy group that supports charter schools and education reform, also said that a multiyear renewal would have been preferable. But the group, which is a staunch ally of the Senate Republicans, blamed the mayor rather than the Senate for the short extension.

“A longer renewal would be better for everyone, and we’re hopeful that Mayor de Blasio will show new urgency this year to improve schools so he can restore the legislature’s confidence in his management,” the group’s executive director, Jenny Sedlis, said in an email.


