


The filmmaker Whit Stillman’s 1990 debut, “Metropolitan,” about a group of young upper-class New Yorkers, immediately established a tonal kinship between the writer-director and Jane Austen. In The Times, Vincent Canby called the movie “a comedy of manners of a very high order,” and wrote: “Like Jane Austen, Mr. Stillman severely restricts his characters’ field of action, which is sometimes combat.”

Stillman has now forged the connection to Austen on a more explicit level, with a film and a novel — both called “Love and Friendship” — based on Austen’s “Lady Susan,” an early epistolary novella published years after the author’s death.

Curtis Sittenfeld’s “Eligible,” a retelling of “Pride and Prejudice” set in modern-day Cincinnati, is reviewed by Sarah Lyall this week. “Eligible” is part of a series in which contemporary authors reimagine Austen’s books. But Stillman hasn’t reimagined her work; he has tried to embody it. His novel, set in the 19th century, is full of sentences like this one: “To commit one sin or indiscretion is not to commit every sin or indiscretion — yet many speak as if it were.” And characters say things to each other like: “Please, Reginald, don’t be severe — I can’t support reproaches. . . .”

Earlier this year, Stillman told Vanity Fair that his first exposure to Austen was reading “Northanger Abbey” during his sophomore year of college. “I didn’t like it at all,” he said. “I didn’t get it. And I would loudly tell people that she was overrated and bad for a long time. Until, after college, my sister said, ‘You better read “Pride and Prejudice.” ’ I did, and it changed me.”

Quotable

“It’s like if you were building custom yurts and then somebody commissioned a mansion, I’d say, I can’t do that. Well actually you could, if you can conceptualize a mansion as a series of interconnected yurts.” — George Saunders, on the process of writing his first novel (due out in 2017), in an interview with Vulture

A Visit From Bernie

Kate Daloz’s new book, “We Are as Gods,” is about back-to-the-land radicalism in 1970s America, focusing most closely on a commune in Vermont, close to where Daloz spent part of her childhood. The book recently received a flurry of attention from an unlikely source: right-wing blogs. The paragraphs that grabbed the attention of The Washington Free Beacon and other outlets involve Bernie Sanders, who visited the commune as a newspaper reporter. A man named Craig, one of the group’s leaders, was sympathetic to Sanders’s views, but was bothered by “his penchant for sitting around and talking about ideas when there was so much work to be done. . . . Even though he agreed with almost everything Bernie had to say, he resented feeling like he had to pull others out of Bernie’s orbit if any work was going to get accomplished that day.”


