


The de Blasio administration will give the owners of 17 enormous office towers in Lower Manhattan a chance to fill in the public arcades along their buildings’ ground floors and turn a shadowy, windswept realm into moneymaking retail space.

The arcades were constructed from the 1960s through the 1980s under an abandoned and discredited zoning theory that imagined Water Street, near the southern tip of Manhattan Island, benefiting from covered pedestrian walkways like those on the Rue de Rivoli in Paris.

In exchange for providing open-air arcades around their buildings, developers were permitted to construct more office area than zoning rules would have ordinarily allowed. That added to their revenue in perpetuity. The public was supposed to benefit in perpetuity, too. But it did not.

A few arcades create inviting vistas or make it easier to navigate downtown’s erratic street grid. Some have cafes. They are handy for escaping a downpour or blazing summer sun. But many are used as outdoor smoking lounges. Pedestrians prefer sidewalks to the gloomy, moribund spaces.

“The idea of the arcades here turned out to be a failure, frankly,” said Carl Weisbrod, the chairman of the City Planning Commission, which approved the proposal on Monday, with the support of the Alliance for Downtown New York and the city’s Economic Development Corporation. (Mr. Weisbrod was president of the alliance from 1994 to 2005.)

“This effort is to reclaim and make this into an active, lively corridor,” Mr. Weisbrod said about Water Street. “That may attract more residential uses. But for me, the importance is in retaining it as a lower-cost office district that will keep businesses in the city and in Lower Manhattan.”

The proposal, known as a text amendment, was modified by the commission to allow the local community board 45 days to review retail conversion plans as they come forward. The proposal will next be considered by the New York City Council.

Along Water Street, public arcades and public plazas together yielded more than 2.5 million square feet of bonus floor area. Under the proposal, an owner seeking to convert an arcade must also improve any plaza on the same lot; for instance, by adding trees or seating.

“It’s important that those improvements be made at the same time, and delivered,” said Catherine McVay Hughes, the chairwoman of Community Board 1, which approved the text amendment by a 19-to-11 vote. “The open space we have needs to be top-notch. It’s very precious.”

It appears to some that Water Street landlords are being invited to double dip, since they will receive a benefit from new retail space — conceivably worth hundreds of dollars a square foot annually — on top of the revenue they already get from the bonus office space.

Alice Blank, a downtown architect who is a critic of the proposal, said, “The text amendment violates the deal made with the citizens of New York, when developers got prime additional real estate in exchange for their unqualified promise to preserve this public space.”

But Mr. Weisbrod said the developers had abided by the rules that existed at the time. And current owners along Water Street, he said, had borne enormous costs in recovering from Hurricane Sandy and Hurricane Irene.

“This is designed to benefit the public,” he said about the zoning proposal, “not to provide a windfall to developers.”

Jerold S. Kayden, the founder and president of the Advocates for Privately Owned Public Space, acknowledged that “many of the Water Street arcades are of marginal quality.”

“The big issue,” he added, “is how we can improve the remaining 515 or so privately owned public spaces in the city so that they can truly invite public use.”


