


Kesha — the pop singer whose career has stalled amid a drawn-out contract dispute with her longtime producer Dr. Luke that has rattled the industry with its claims of rape and abuse — will release her first song in years on Friday. And it’s Dr. Luke-approved.

In the midst of an ugly, continuing legal battle between the singer and the producer, Kesha will be featured on “True Colors,” a rerecorded version of the title track from the D.J. and electronic producer Zedd’s 2015 album. A representative for Dr. Luke’s label, Kemosabe, said the song would be a joint release between Zedd’s label, Interscope, along with RCA and Kemosabe, both subsidiaries of Sony Music to which Kesha remains signed.

In February, a New York judge denied Kesha’s request for a preliminary injunction against Dr. Luke and her record labels, in which she argued her career would effectively end if she could not release new music, without Dr. Luke, during the case. Sony said at the time that it was “ready, willing and able to approve a producer with whom Kesha can work other than” Dr. Luke, though he would retain rights to her recordings through the existing contracts.

Kesha claimed in a 2014 lawsuit that Dr. Luke, whose real name is Lukasz Sebastian Gottwald, subjected her to years of emotional and sexual abuse, including rape, and unfair business arrangements. Dr. Luke has denied the accusations and is suing Kesha for defamation and breach of contract.

In legal filings, Kesha’s lawyers have likened her recording contract to “slavery,” and a #FreeKesha campaign has thrived online.

Before announcing the new collaboration, Zedd tweeted, “Music can be freedom!” He added later, “Just to clarify: We didn’t use any loopholes. Kemosabe/RCA gave us permission to release this song!”

Dr. Luke responded on Twitter: “Thanks for the clarification @Zedd …”

Kesha had teased her return to the studio on social media, writing of Zedd, “It’s a miracle when someone gives you a chance at finding your voice again!!” On April 16, she appeared unannounced with Zedd at the Coachella music festival and performed “True Colors” live. Her last official release was a guest spot on the 2013 song “Timber” by Pitbull, which was produced by Dr. Luke.

The release of “True Colors” comes as litigation between Kesha and Dr. Luke continues in three states. Kesha’s initial lawsuit in California has been stayed in favor of Dr. Luke’s New York suit; a New York judge rejected Kesha’s counterclaims of infliction of emotional distress, gender-based hate crimes and employment discrimination earlier this month.

In Tennessee, Dr. Luke is suing Kesha’s mother, Pebe Sebert, on claims of defamation and tortious interference. On Tuesday, Ms. Sebert voluntarily dismissed her counterclaims of intentional and negligent infliction of emotional distress.

Alex Little, a lawyer for Ms. Sebert, said in a statement: “The litigation with Dr. Luke has been a nightmare for Mrs. Sebert and her family. She has decided to move on and find peace and forgiveness in her heart rather than dwelling in the cancerous past of an ongoing lawsuit with no end in sight.”

Christine Lepera, a lawyer for Dr. Luke, said his suit against Ms. Sebert would continue, calling Ms. Sebert’s withdrawal “her acknowledgment that her claims are meritless.”

Kesha’s legal team, which has been led by Mark Geragos, is also undergoing changes. Mr. Little of Tennessee has filed to represent Kesha in New York, along with Daniel Petrocelli, a high-profile lawyer known for his work on the civil suit against O. J. Simpson and his current representation of Donald Trump in the California cases against the now-defunct Trump University.


