


MEXICO CITY — An explosion killed at least 13 people and injured dozens at a petrochemical plant on Mexico’s southern gulf coast, forcing evacuations and sending a toxin-filled cloud into the air, officials said on Thursday. Eighteen workers were reported missing.

The head of Mexico’s civil defense agency, Luis Felipe Puente, wrote on his Twitter account that emergency personnel had been able to enter the burned-out plant and found 10 bodies. Three other workers had been reported dead immediately after the blast Wednesday afternoon.

José Antonio González Anaya, the director of the state oil company Petroleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, said family members had reported that 18 workers at the plant were still missing. One area of the plant was still too hot to enter, and Mr. González Anaya said the death toll could rise.

Pemex said 136 workers were injured in the blast in the industrial port city of Coatzacoalcos. Twenty-four of the injured remained hospitalized.

Mr. González Anaya told Radio Fórmula that 13 of the injured were in serious condition.

He said the blast “was caused by a leak.” He added, “We don’t know how that leak occurred.”

The governor of Veracruz, Javier Duarte, earlier had told Radio Fórmula that the blast was felt as far as six miles away. He said more than 2,000 people were evacuated from the area as a precaution, and classes were canceled on Thursday at area schools.

Pemex reported that the fire was under control late Wednesday, but initially urged people to stay away as a precaution.

It said the explosion hit the Clorados 3 plant of Petroquímica Mexicana de Vinilo, which produces vinyl chloride, a hazardous industrial chemical that is used to make PVC pipes and for other purposes.

Pemex said it operated the plant in partnership with another company, Mexichem.

There have been a number of accidents in recent years at facilities owned by Pemex or where it operates. In early February, a fire killed a worker at the same plant. Also in February, two people were killed and eight injured in a fire on an offshore Pemex platform in the Gulf of Mexico.


