


“We’re all whores,” Chloë Sevigny said Monday night, standing in Balthazar at a dinner Monday night for the Tribeca Film Festival, as she discussed her outfit.

It wasn’t that Ms. Sevigny’s heavily embellished black leather dress made her look like a streetwalker. Rather, it was because her outfit was provided by Chanel, the dinner’s sponsor.

“Borrowed,” she said.

Fashion long ago infiltrated the movie business. And now we’re at the point where the biggest parties for the 15-year-old festival are no longer about the movies per se, but about dressing up and being photographed.

At this dinner, there were no speeches by organizers, no actors or directors being celebrated, and little talk of the movies themselves. In fact, many of the guests conceded that they hadn’t even seen a film this week.

“I’m embarrassed to say I haven’t made it out of Red Hook,” the artist Dustin Yellin said.

“I’ve been busy,” the art world maven Yvonne Force Villareal said, shaking her head.

Their loss. The offerings of the festival have improved steadily in recent years, particularly in the documentary and world cinema categories.

“Junction 48,” a film about a would-be Palestinian rapper, is being shown, after winning the audience award at the Berlin International Film Festival. So is “Life, Animated,” a documentary about an autistic child’s route out of isolation through the discovery of Disney movies. That one is already emerging as a major award-season favorite.

Still, it was a pretty good party, with enough glamour to rival some of the year’s biggest social events.

Near the front was Tory Burch, who arrived with her fiancé, Pierre-Yves Roussel, the chief executive of LVMH Fashion Group. To their right was the model Jamie Bochert and the artist/filmmaker Julian Schnabel. In the back, Robert De Niro huddled with Harvey Keitel.

Around 8:30, guests sat down at their tables, where instead of a goody bag there was a famous artist’s coffee-table book. (After all, the dinner was ostensibly in honor of “artists.”) Waiters approached, offering a choice of roast chicken or steak frites.

And many discussed the next day’s presidential primary.

“I’m deciding in the polling booth whether to vote for Hillary or Bernie,” said the actor Alessandro Nivola, who was next to his wife, Emily Mortimer.

“I’m voting for Bernie,” Ms. Mortimer said.

Around 10:30, profiteroles and apple tarts were passed out for dessert.

Derek Blasberg was in front with Ms. Sevigny, and the producer Jane Rosenthal was in a banquette in the back with the actress Katie Holmes, who made her directorial debut at the festival with the film “All We Had.” Naturally, she was dressed in black Chanel.

As guests began to make their way out of the restaurant and into the night, Tavi Gevinson (also in Chanel) walked around the room, scavenging the seats for free books, many of which had been left unclaimed.

“So far I have three,” she said.


