


As Jahmal Lightfoot tells it, Rikers Island correction officers pummeled him without any words — or any mercy — as he curled up into a fetal position inside a cell to shield himself from their repeated blows.

“Basically it was open season for them to do what they wanted,” Mr. Lightfoot testified on Monday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx.

Mr. Lightfoot, 31, returned to the witness stand for the second day and continued a harrowing, first-person account of the savage beating that he received in July 2012, when, Bronx prosecutors contend, the officers decided to teach him a lesson. He recalled that when he tried to cover his face with his hands, he was kicked in the groin and then officers pinned down his arms and legs.

Nine current and former correction officers are on trial in the beating of Mr. Lightfoot and an attempted cover-up. The most serious charge is attempted gang assault in the first degree, which carries a sentence of up to 15 years in prison. Other charges include attempted assault, tampering with physical evidence, falsifying business records and official misconduct.

Bronx prosecutors have said that Mr. Lightfoot was unarmed, and in a line of inmates being marched to a search area for weapons when he caught the eye of Eliseo Perez Jr., a former assistant chief for security. Prosecutors have said that the officers wanted to set a tone after another inmate was slashed in a separate fight that day.

Mr. Perez and Gerald Vaughn, a former correction captain, ordered five members of an elite squad to beat Mr. Lightfoot in a cell that was covered by a drapery, away from video cameras, while three other officers stood outside, according to prosecutors.

Defense lawyers have countered that Mr. Lightfoot had a weapon, ignored warnings to drop it and instead came at the officers. They argue that Mr. Lightfoot was injured while he was being restrained by the officers, who were simply doing their job.

In testimony on Monday, Mr. Lightfoot showed no hesitation in picking out Mr. Perez in video footage of the moments leading up to the beating, in contrast to last week when Mr. Lightfoot was unable to pick out Mr. Perez in the courtroom.

Mr. Lightfoot spoke matter-of-factly about being punched and then kicked and stomped on, including on his head, by boots that felt “like a brick.” Under questioning from a prosecutor, Lawrence Piergrossi, Mr. Lightfoot repeatedly denied that he had a weapon, or that he had failed to comply with any orders from the officers.

He said that after the beating, he could barely move and had to be helped to the prison clinic by correction officers. Mr. Lightfoot, who had fractures on both his eye sockets, said that for months afterward, his eyes would hurt and his vision would blur when he tried to read, and that he would get headaches and spit up blood.

The high-profile trial has cast Rikers Island, New York City’s main jail complex, as a violent place where weapons are regularly recovered from inmates despite frequent searches. It comes amid calls by critics to close Rikers.

Mr. Lightfoot was released from state prison in 2014 after being convicted of robbery.

Mr. Perez retired in 2013, and Mr. Vaughn in 2014. The seven others on trial — Officers Tobias Parker, Jose Parra, Alfred Rivera, David Rodriguez, Jeffrey Richard, Harmon Frierson and Dwayne Maynard — were suspended in June 2013, but were recently allowed to return to work on modified duty with no contact with inmates.


