


BERLIN — The German comic who prompted an international incident with a satirical poem about President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey will fight the ruling of a Hamburg court that banned repeating most of the text, his lawyer said on Wednesday.

In a ruling made public late Tuesday, the superior state court in Hamburg said that the comic, Jan Böhmermann, could repeat a few selected lines but not the bulk of the poem, “which, because of its insulting content injuring his honor, Mr. Erdogan does not have to accept.”

Christian Schertz, a lawyer who is representing Mr. Böhmermann, said the comic rejected the partial injunction imposed by the court because it tried to dissect the poem into permitted and forbidden parts and, in that way, suggested that artistic freedom was somehow divisible.

Mr. Böhmermann will fight the ruling all the way to the federal constitutional court if need be, Mr. Schertz said in a statement and in a phone interview.

Mr. Schertz said that the Hamburg court’s ruling failed to take into account the way in which Mr. Böhmermann had framed his poem as deliberate satire, interspersing his reading of it with several remarks noting that the verse was an example of what would be impermissible.

Mr. Böhmermann read the poem, which contained extremely crude language, on his television show on March 31. By the next day, it had become a litmus test of artistic freedom in Germany, after the public broadcaster ZDF first pulled the show from its digital archive then restored it minus the reading of the poem.

In what she has since conceded was a mistake, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said through her spokesman on April 4 that she found the poem offensive. Mr. Erdogan went on to sue Mr. Böhmermann for insulting him under an obscure German law that requires the government to give consent in cases of insulting a head of state.

Ms. Merkel’s coalition government split over how to proceed, with the chancellor eventually giving the go-ahead to Mr. Erdogan but also announcing that the relevant law, which dates from 1871, would be repealed.

The city-state of Hamburg said this month that it would try to push the repeal through the upper house of Parliament, with the intention of getting the law off the books and thus rendering action against Mr. Böhmermann moot.

The Turkish leader has also filed a private suit against Mr. Böhmermann that would proceed through the courts under a different law governing such individual action. That suit is currently under scrutiny by state prosecutors in Mainz, which is where ZDF has its headquarters and thus where Mr. Erdogan is pursuing the private suit.

The Mainz prosecutors said in a brief statement on Wednesday that they did not yet know whether or when their case would proceed.


