


The pioneering label Stax Records is best known for gritty, down-and-dirty soul classics by such giants as Otis Redding, Rufus Thomas, and Sam and Dave. But one of the singles that first put the Memphis company on the map was the stately, elegant ballad “You Don’t Miss Your Water,” written and recorded in 1961 by a rising local singer named William Bell. Though the song only grazed the charts, it was a defining cornerstone of the Southern soul sound.

The next year, though, Mr. Bell was drafted into the military, and by the time he was discharged in 1965, Stax had an established lineup of stars. He remained a part of the label until it shuttered in 1975 — most notably, as a writer of “Born Under a Bad Sign” for Albert King in 1967 — but never quite regained his position as one of the Memphis elite.

This week, Mr. Bell is releasing “This Is Where I Live,” his first album in more than a decade. It also represents his return to Stax, which was revived as an imprint by Concord Records in 2004. (He will be performing at the Cutting Room on Tuesday and at MetroTech Commons next Thursday as part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Rhythm and Blues Festival series.)

Over lunch in Midtown Manhattan, Mr. Bell, 76, looked fit and dapper, dressed in shades of brown and tan. Remarkably, he was staying in the same Times Square hotel where he wrote “You Don’t Miss Your Water” while feeling homesick on tour more than 50 years ago. (He sang it at the White House in 2013 in a tribute to Memphis soul.) Mr. Bell claimed that even if the new Stax involved a different team in a different location, he felt a certain accountability about putting out music under the legendary logo.

“We created a new genre, and it’s a responsibility to uphold that and also try to bring it forward a little bit,” he said. “As kids, we never thought that Stax would stop going, and then when it folded, it was devastating to us. So to have it come back, I don’t take it lightly.”

John Leventhal, who produced the album, said in a phone interview that he immediately sensed what he did and didn’t want to do with Mr. Bell. “I knew it shouldn’t be overtly nostalgic, or just a pastiche of clichés,” said Mr. Leventhal, best known for his work with his wife, Rosanne Cash, and such singer-songwriters as Shawn Colvin and Michelle Branch. “We weren’t trying to drag William back to the glory days, but to appropriate older styles and make them more vibrant for today.”

Mr. Bell was truly a team player during Stax’s glory days, writing songs and contributing to sessions by other artists while continuing to cut sophisticated, emotional tracks that are still treasured by soul aficionados, including “Everybody Loves a Winner,” “I Forgot to Be Your Lover” and “Private Number.” His compositions had a melancholy feel and narrative structure that veered close to country music and proved influential in Memphis and Nashville.

“Because he could write, William became a henchman at the label, one of the hubs in the wheel — a go-to guy,” said Booker T. Jones of Booker T. & the MG’s, the Stax house band, and a frequent co-writer, in a telephone interview. “He was an innovator as a singer. He set the standard for Percy Sledge and all the people who sang with heart and soul and feeling.”

After the demise of Stax, Mr. Bell moved to Atlanta. He never left music — he started a production company and a label, and had his biggest hit in 1977 with “Tryin’ to Love Two.” His songs have been covered by Billy Idol and sampled by Kanye West and Ludacris; he also took acting lessons and even played Stanley Kowalski in a production of “A Streetcar Named Desire.”

All of his experiences inform the songs on “This Is Where I Live.” He and Mr. Leventhal pointed to the album’s opener, “The Three of Me,” as being indicative of the mature direction they wanted to pursue.

“It’s more introspective,” Mr. Bell said. “It’s still about love, but not the passion of a younger guy. It’s an older guy reflecting.” Mr. Leventhal added that they developed material that would be “compelling for a 75-year-old man — it’s not becoming of a great singer to sing something they would have done 50 years earlier.”

Though his songwriting was always characterized by a graceful simplicity, Mr. Bell continues to refine his work. “There’s a calmness now with my demeanor,” he said. “I’m able to express myself better now than I did as a teenager. I’ve traveled the world; I have a better perspective on life, on people, on my career. I’m very fortunate — a lot of my peers are gone, and it’s very gratifying to have lasted this long, still intact.”

Inevitably, though, he continues to look back on his days as part of one of America’s most mythic musical communities. He admits to some disappointment with his initial run at Stax but lights up talking about visiting Redding’s Georgia ranch or recording with Booker T. & the MG’s, two members of whom he knew from church.

“It really was like an extended family,” he said. “Long before integration, we got behind those walls at Stax, and the only thing that mattered was what you brought to the table in terms of talent and creativity. We didn’t care about race, gender, whatever.

“Being so young, it was like going to university,” he continued. “We honed our craft in that building and learned about the intricacies of music and songwriting and how to express an idea. So for me to come full circle and sign with Stax again, it feels like home.”


