


Lincoln Center’s organizations spent $785.4 million last season, in large part on the salaries of their 4,547 employees. Their offerings attracted 4.5 million people, a third of whom attended free events. And those ticket buyers from outside the city who said in surveys that visiting Lincoln Center was a “very important reason” for their trips spent an estimated $669 million elsewhere in New York.

Those were among the findings of a report that Lincoln Center released on Monday outlining its economic contributions to New York City as a cultural complex, major employer and tourist attraction. The report was shared with city officials as Lincoln Center prepared to seek some city funding for its coming renovation of David Geffen Hall, home of the New York Philharmonic, which is expected to cost about a half-billion dollars.

Some findings, based on extensive surveys, may interest anyone who has ever stood at the fountain trying to figure out where everyone else was from: City residents bought 51 percent of tickets; people from the metropolitan area bought 24 percent; visitors from elsewhere in the United States purchased 16 percent; and tourists from abroad, 9 percent.

The report also has policy ramifications. The de Blasio administration’s support for smaller cultural institutions in all five boroughs, and its emphasis on making art accessible to all, have been eyed warily by some larger Manhattan institutions, including those, like Lincoln Center, that receive some city support. So the new report noted that 1.48 million people came to free events there last year and that 1,500 school and other groups attended offerings.

The report got a warm reception from city officials, some of whom will be part of the discussion of the extent to which taxpayers should help revamp Geffen Hall. Alicia Glen, the city’s deputy mayor for housing and economic development, said in a statement that Lincoln Center “boosts tourism, helps define the city’s cultural life and inspires our young people.”

Many cities have been exploring new or revamped concert halls. London, for example, is debating the price and location of a new hall sought by Simon Rattle, the conductor who will be the next music director of the London Symphony Orchestra.

It is unclear how much city support Lincoln Center will seek. The renovation of Geffen Hall, expected to begin in 2019, was started with a $100 million donation by Mr. Geffen. Officials have noted that they want the new hall to have more spaces for educational presentations and community events. The city contributed $240 million toward the $1.2 billion redevelopment of the other parts of Lincoln Center, a project completed in 2012.

Lincoln Center and the Philharmonic are working to keep the renovation moving forward now that the center is without a president: Jed Bernstein stepped down this spring after having failed to disclose a personal relationship with an employee in violation of center policy.

The report estimated that Lincoln Center generated roughly $113.5 million in taxes for New York City last year. Other estimates were more difficult to assess independently. For instance, it projected that with indirect spending factored in — say, what its employees spend in the city — Lincoln Center and its tourists contributed $2.4 billion to the city’s economy last year and generated 15,802 jobs in the city. That jobs projection was much higher than the one in a 2004 economic impact report, which used a different methodology and estimated that Lincoln Center had generated a total of 10,200 jobs in the city.

City Councilman Jimmy Van Bramer, a Queens Democrat who is chairman of the council’s committee on cultural affairs, said in an interview that he was impressed by the report’s findings. “I am a firm believer that we have to invest in all of our cultural institutions and organizations, large and small, in all five boroughs, in every neighborhood,” he said.

“If an organization is driving so much in terms of what is good about the City of New York, is actively engaged in the work of making this city all that it can be, and is equally committed to making sure that every child in every neighborhood has access to world-class performances and facilities, then that organization is worthy of consideration for support from the City of New York,” he continued. “Absolutely.”


