


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. There’ll be no trip to the bodega tomorrow morning for a watery iced coffee, no toasted bagel slippery with industrial butter product. No crowded subway, either, no lemming-like walk down a Midtown side street to the air-conditioned chill of the newsroom lobby, no sad desk lunch, no exhausted trek south after the train to the long wait for the bus that never comes, no abandonment of the plan to make Mark Bittman’s recipe for stir-fried chicken and ketchup in favor of a quicker bowl of granola and yogurt and the start of the new season of “Peaky Blinders.”

No, it’s a day off for me, and perhaps for you too, and if you can set up this dead-simple recipe for cold-brewed iced coffee tonight on the kitchen counter, next to a good-size vat of this recipe for sourdough waffle batter, by morning both will be ready to help you greet the weekend in style.

I am hoping it will be a good one for cooking — and Cooking. It’d be nice on Saturday night to make Melissa Clark’s new recipe for grilled fish with lemongrass, chiles and coconut (above). That is branzino in the picture there, but you could use any whole fish with clear eyes and firm flesh. (If you’re in the New York area, a fat fresh porgy would be the business.)

Or you could eschew the grill. David Tanis’s recipe for mezzelune pasta with peas and shiitakes is a project for sure, but it’s an enjoyable one that rewards the maker with a delicious meal.

Maybe make a poundcake? Melissa’s version of a toasted-almond poundcake with strawberry-rhubarb compote is terrific this time of year. Or you could try your hand at Nora Ephron’s recipe for Key lime pie, which Jennifer Steinhauer brought to our pages back in 2013.

Then for Sunday night supper, how about this recipe for a warm kale and tomato salad with coconut, which I learned from the British cookbook writer Anna Jones? You could make Kim Severson’s recipe for Cuban rice and beans. Or this recipe for grilled leeks with romesco sauce, which may pair nicely with a platter of barbecued chicken.

Thousands of other recipes to cook this weekend are available on Cooking. I hope you’ll scroll through them for further inspiration. Please save the recipes you like to your recipe box. Then rate them when you’re done cooking and, if you have an ingredient substitution or cooking tip to suggest, leave a note on them for yourself or others. (For help with technical issues, you can reach out to us at cookingcare@nytimes.com. For philosophical ones, I’m at foodeditor@nytimes.com.)

Life isn’t just cooking, though. Need some reading suggestions? You’ll want to spend some time with The New York Issue of The Times Magazine, which documents this city from 800 feet above its sidewalks. Take a gander at this terrifying special report in Outside magazine on the deaths of seven canyoneering adventurers killed in a flash flood in Zion National Park in Utah. And for an accounting of the intricacies behind the regional hot-dog delight known as the Sonoran hot dog, don’t miss Chris Ying’s recipe at Lucky Peach. You could make that this weekend as well.

Finally, in Wednesday’s newsletter I managed to botch the spelling of the Spanish verb “enchilar.” My apologies. Have a great weekend.


