


PAREDE, Portugal — Obscured behind a stone wall and two sprawling ficus trees sits a “palacete,” or small palace, that helped change the architecture in this coastal town, once a summer retreat for urbanites. The fanciful stone-covered house was built in 1899 for a family from Lisbon, 14 miles east. With its blend of the elegant and the rustic, the design established a new look for summer chalets. Nowadays, Parede, along the highway to the better-known cities of Estoril and Cascais, is a bedroom community of Lisbon.

The 5,037-square-foot, or 468-square-meter, house has five bedrooms, three bathrooms, several small curved alcoves in fairy-tale fashion and a wraparound terrace. The property, which sits on a 14,811-square-foot parcel, is listed with the Estoril office of Engel &Volkers, with an asking price of 2 million euros, or about $2.3 million.

Though the house is a five-minute walk from the Atlantic Ocean, the sea is visible from only the attic rooms and tower. Historically, the water of Praia da Parede was regarded as having healing properties because of its iodine content. While the health benefits of the water and mud are debatable, some visitors to Parede Beach still cover themselves in its muddy clay for therapeutic value.

The current owner of the house, João Ramalho Fernandes, said he wasn’t looking to move when he happened upon the property about 25 years ago and was struck by its features, which included a wide stone staircase, a tower and a wrought-iron-lined terrace.

“I told my wife, ‘I just came by a house that I want to buy,’ and she said, ‘You’re crazy.’ Then when she went inside, she agreed, we need to save this house and turn it into what it once was. We also felt it was a lovely place to raise kids,” said Mr. Fernandes, who has twin daughters and a son, now grown.

“It was a mission of love to make a full recovery of the house,” he said. “My wife and I tried to restore everything, including recreating the molding and the original paint colors.”

Outside, the curved and gradually narrowing stairway leads to a thick front door 11 and a half feet tall. The entrance hall shines with Canadian pine flooring, which showcases an ornate enamel Godin wood-burning stove. The 13-foot ceiling gives a first taste of the banquet of moldings throughout the house — a different design for every room, from simple lines to elaborate swirls. “Most of the molding is original, and where it’s not, we had an expert come to create new molds from the old ones,” Mr. Fernandes said.

A side reception area includes bright stained-glass windows that can be covered by retractable folding wooden doors. Mr. Fernandes had to replace some of the panes but commissioned them made to match.

Another downstairs area is used as a media room. The home, which has updated wiring, is equipped with fire and intrusion sensors and a video surveillance system that can be viewed online.

The eat-in kitchen features walls partly covered with original blue tiles, a traditional Portuguese decorative element. Mr. Fernandes had them removed, cleaned and reinstalled. In the adjacent formal dining room, a simple, elegant ceiling molding complements the panel molding along the sides. Windows and large glass-paned doors allow light to enter from three sides.

From the entrance hall, the main staircase (there are also service stairs) commands attention for its curves and white-painted iron balusters. Upstairs, the main rooms — a large living space and a master bedroom — both have archways in the center, and are decorated with outstanding filigree molding. The living room’s parquet floor contains seven types of wood, Mr. Fernandes said. A showstopper is the upstairs bathroom, whose walls are plastered with original patterned turquoise green tile. The finished attic is divided into several rooms and two bathrooms.

From the attic, a suspended spiral staircase with iron filigree railing and carved angels leads to the tower, which offers a panoramic view of Parede and a large swath of the Atlantic and, on a clear day, a vista all the way out to the Sintra Mountains.


