


On Thursday night, head to Times Square for a nature takeover from 11:30 p.m. to midnight. The electronic billboards will display “Jungle-ized,” a multisensory art installation directed by Stephan Crasneanscki of Soundwalk Collective and co-produced by the eco-adventurer David de Rothschild that promises to transform the concrete jungle into the heart of the Amazon. Mr. de Rothschild also has some nifty limited-edition items on The Lost Explorer website, including a palm-print market bag ($145) made from a World War II Royal Air force tool bag reworked with end-of-line vintage fabrics. At thelostexplorer.co.

On Saturday, Shen Beauty is hosting an “all day play” day featuring an Immunocologie mask party: Come in barefaced and receive a free clay mask. Then try out new colors and scents from the handmade lip-care line Kosas and the natural-fragrance line Lurk. At 315 Court Street, Brooklyn.

3.1 Phillip Lim teamed up with the artist and environmentalist Maya Lin (who designed the earth-mound set for his spring 2016 10-year anniversary show) on a collection of T-shirts featuring life-size footprints of the African elephant, Siberian crane, tiger and rhinoceros ($125). One hundred percent of profits will benefit Ms. Lin’s foundation, What is Missing?, which aims to raise awareness of endangered species and habitat loss. At 48 Great Jones Street.

Amour Vert and Amanda Hearts’s ethical fashion site, Maison-de-mode.com, have teamed up on a capsule collection that includes a classic navy T-shirt dress ($128) and a long-sleeve top in Amour Vert’s signature stripes ($88) made of dead stock from the sustainable fashion brand’s archives. At maison-de-mode.com.

And Melissa Joy Manning is offering a 20 percent discount on her sustainably made gold tanzanite hug earrings ($200, originally $250) through Sunday, with 20 percent of profits going to the Clean Water Fund. At melissajoymanning.com.

Giorgio Armani Beauty will open a spa at Bergdorf Goodman on Thursday with a full menu of services including classic European facials and V.I.P. red-carpet prep featuring Crema Nera products. Spa rituals are free with any purchase of $350 or more — like, say, Crema Nera Extrema cream ($390 for 1.6 ounces).

Sleepy Jones is having its first-ever sample sale through Sunday with discounts up to 70 percent on cozy bits like Liberty print pajamas ($75, originally $168, for the top; $69, originally $118, for the bottom). At 108 Wooster Street.


