


In the summer of 2013, the choreographer Jane Comfort poked hundreds of pin-size holes into a 60-foot garden hose, in preparation for her trip to American Dance Institute, a residency center in Rockville, Md. For the work she would be creating there, she wanted rain — nothing too dramatic, just a light shower onstage.

“I knew I couldn’t have rain like Pina Bausch has rain,” Ms. Comfort said in a recent phone interview. (Bausch, the German tanztheater pioneer, orchestrated a relentless downpour for her 2006 production “Vollmond.”) “But I thought, if I could have rain upstage in the last scene of the show, that would be fantastic.”

Ms. Comfort, who has been making dance-theater works in New York since 1978 — without elaborate sets or simulated weather — was allowing herself to think bigger for this project. That seems to be common among artists supported by American Dance Institute, which in recent years has developed one of the country’s most robust residency programs for contemporary dance, ADI Incubator.

After breaking ground this month on a new home in Catskill, N.Y., the institute is also expanding its role as a presenter of dance, showing in finished form the same works (and occasionally others) that it “incubates” through residencies. Its first New York City season — a five-week series at the Kitchen with premieres by Yvonne Rainer, Brian Brooks, Susan Marshall, Jack Ferver and Ms. Comfort, an eclectic group of artists — opens Thursday, June 2.

All of those choreographers will have taken part in the incubator program, or a version of it. An incubator resident receives time and space — a dance artist’s most vital resources, aside from dancers — as well as housing, food, a technical crew and a creative fee to hammer out the design components of a new work, like indoor precipitation. (For the Kitchen series, those who couldn’t travel to Maryland got rehearsal space in Manhattan.) Since its inception in 2011, the program has grown from two residencies a year to 13 for the 2016-17 season.

“The need for it seemed to be greater than what we were offering,” Adrienne Willis, the institute’s executive director, said during a recent visit to Manhattan. A 2011 study by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation showed that, in Ms. Willis’s words, “American contemporary choreography was premiering before it was ready, and it was having a negative impact — on artists, audiences, across the board.”

Ms. Willis spoke at her new office in the Flatiron district after a weekend at American Dance’s future home, a former lumberyard on the Hudson River, scheduled to open in 2018. Founded as a ballet school in 1999, the institute has changed a lot since 2010, when Ms. Willis was hired to steer it toward stronger financial footing. At its strip-mall location in a Washington suburb, the rent has been a burden, she said. With its own real estate in the friendlier arts ecosystem of the Hudson Valley, programs like the incubator will have room to grow.

The residency, which lasts one or two weeks, is designed to offset the tight schedules of many New York theaters, where companies frequently have just one or two days to work with lighting and sets before presenting a brand-new piece.

“Often when you go into the theater in New York, you don’t have the luxury of time,” said the choreographer Jodi Melnick, who developed her 2014 “Moment Marigold,” including its lighting design by Joe Levasseur, through the incubator residency. (She also serves on the institute’s artistic advisory board.) “ADI has always made me feel that time is not a luxury, it’s a necessity. If you spend the entire day trying something that probably won’t work, they will still support you in trying it. Their first answer is always, ‘Let’s see what we can do.’”

Even theaters with residency programs, like New York Live Arts, which has presented several works incubated at American Dance, can’t always supply sufficient tech time. “We find ourselves constrained in various ways, in terms of schedule, rentals, different things that come up that sustain the organization,” said Thomas O. Kriegsmann, director of programs at Live Arts, “and we’re unable to go as far as we want to. That’s precisely where someone like ADI comes in.”

He added: “The fact that they’re moving to Catskill, devoting even more completely to this environment where a company can live, work, eat and share an entire theater, 24/7, dedicated to their creativity — it’s a massive thing for the field.”

With an annual operating budget of $5 million, American Dance is funded largely by the legacy of its founding benefactor, Solange MacArthur, who died in 2012. According to Ms. Willis, Ms. MacArthur was open-minded in her vision for the institute, saying only that she wanted it to “have an impact,” ideally a national one.

When Ms. MacArthur died, Ms. Willis brought the organization to a “full stop,” she said. “We wanted to make sure that the money was addressing a need, not just replicating existing support structures. If in 10 or five years there are tons of technical residencies around the country, then we’ll do something else.” Ms. Willis has also overseen initiatives to educate audiences, the closing of the original ballet school (“Washington has so many ballet schools,” she said) and the creation, in its place, of a new national scholarship program meant to increase racial diversity in ballet.

The renovated lumberyard, or ADI/Lumberyard — which will include a black-box theater, studios and housing — will join a growing list of upstate satellites to the New York City dance world. A Capital Region initiative with the Joyce Theater, Pathways to Dance, recently began supporting dance residencies, workshops and exhibitions at nine upstate arts organizations. And Bard College, Mount Tremper Arts and Jacob’s Pillow (not quite upstate but close, in the Berkshires) all offer dance residencies. But there’s room for more. American Dance has received a warm welcome from the state — a $500,000 Empire State Development Grant — and from the Catskill community.

“Four or five locals sent us donations without even meeting us, which was something we’d never experienced before,” Ms. Willis said. “Local banks have called and asked us to apply for grants. It’s just a totally different world.”


