


WASHINGTON — The head of the Transportation Security Administration, facing fierce criticism over long lines at airport security checkpoints, said Wednesday that passengers would probably continue to experience longer than normal wait times because of an expected increase in summer travel.

In an effort to ameliorate delays, Peter V. Neffenger, the T.S.A. administrator, told members of the House Homeland Security Committee that the agency was promoting screeners from part time to full time, reassigning hundreds of behavioral detection officers to help on security lines and shifting bomb-detection dog teams to larger airports. Mr. Neffenger’s testimony comes just days before millions of Americans are expected to travel over the Memorial Day weekend. The agency has come under fire recently, with some passengers reporting hourslong waits to get through checkpoints.

Many airlines say the delays have caused passengers to miss flights.

“This is not a new rodeo,” said Representative Michael McCaul, Republican of Texas and chairman of the committee. “Why didn’t we see this coming?”

Mr. Neffenger said the long lines were a product of higher-than-forecast passenger numbers, staffing shortages and changes in a program that allowed people who had not signed up for background checks to use expedited security lines. The agency tightened security procedures after federal auditors managed to get fake bombs and weapons past screeners, which has also contributed to the long lines.

“We are at a lower staffing level than we need to be to address peak demand,” Mr. Neffenger told lawmakers.

Congress has authorized the agency to hire 768 additional screeners to handle the expected increase in passengers, which is estimated at 740 million this year, up from 643 million in 2013. Lawmakers shifted $34 million in the T.S.A.’s budget to help the agency pay for the additional screeners, which the agency said would be in place next month.

The number of T.S.A. screeners has declined to 44,942 this year from 47,147 in 2013, according to the agency.

Some members of Congress and the T.S.A. attribute the decline in screeners over the years to budget cuts, though some Republicans blame the agency for cutting the number of screeners in recent years. And some members of the committee said the problems went beyond staffing and training.

Representative Martha E. McSally, Republican of Arizona, said the agency was distracted from its focus on airport security by operating screening at political conventions and sporting events.

“Where is the authority for supporting things that have nothing to do with the core mission?” she asked.

“It’s a pretty important mission, and we’re the screening experts,” said Mr. Neffenger, who added the screening was typically done in response to requests from the Secret Service.

Mr. Neffenger shook up his leadership team on Monday, replacing the agency’s top security official and adding a new group of administrators at Chicago O’Hare International, one of the many airports plagued by long passenger delays.

Mr. Neffenger replaced Kelly Hoggan, who had come under criticism for receiving $90,000 in bonuses over a 13-month period. The bonuses were awarded even though a leaked report from the Department of Homeland Security showed that auditors were able to get fake weapons and explosives past security screeners 95 percent of the time in 70 covert tests.

In addition, several employees who say they were punished with reassignments to other airports after filing whistle-blower complaints have charged that Mr. Hoggan played a role in their forced transfers.

Mr. Hoggan’s bonus was paid out in $10,000 increments, an arrangement that members of Congress have said was intended to disguise the payments.

Lawmakers grilled Mr. Neffenger about the bonuses, which were awarded before he joined the agency in July; he said he had stopped the practice. He said Mr. Hoggan was on paid administrative leave.

Mr. Neffenger continued to urge travelers to sign up for T.S.A. Precheck, an expedited screening process that allows passengers to keep their shoes on and keep their computers in their bags. Enrollment in the program has fallen short of expectations, exacerbating the longer lines.

Mr. Neffenger said about 15,000 people a month were signing up for the program.

Despite the changes at the agency, some airports are still considering switching to private companies to provide screeners.

Under the T.S.A.’s Screening Partnership Program, 22 of the approximately 450 commercial airports in the country, including San Francisco International Airport, now use private screeners.

Some airport executives and Republicans in Congress have proposed hiring private screeners to replace T.S.A. workers.

But some transportation experts point out that airports with private screeners, which must follow T.S.A. procedures, are also experiencing longer waiting times as passenger volume increases.

Representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the ranking Democrat on the committee, cautioned against what he said would be a return to the pre-Sept. 11 privatization model, in which failure to screen hijackers led to the creation of the T.S.A.

“Congress and T.S.A. must resist Band-Aid fixes to complicated and well-understood aviation security challenges,” Mr. Thompson said. “Patching and plugging holes are not answers.”


