


The red brick facade of the Stonewall Inn has served as the backdrop to countless passages in the history of the gay rights movement.

It was there that a clash between gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender patrons and the New York City police in June 1969 led to a wave of demonstrations demanding equal rights. People gathered there somberly in October 1998, after Matthew Shepard, a 21-year-old gay student, was beaten, tortured and left to die in Laramie, Wyo. And people danced and celebrated there last year when the Supreme Court declared marriage a right for all.

But even the most battle-weary Stonewall devotees said they were not prepared for the mass horror in Orlando, Fla. — a shooting at a gay nightclub that left at least 50 dead and 53 injured — that brought them together on Sunday at the storied West Village watering hole to grieve once again.

“We come today because we are a community that will never be silenced again,” Ken Kidd, 58, an organizer with Queer Nation, howled to a crowd outside.

Hundreds of people swarmed Christopher Street around 6 p.m. for a vigil, dazed by the events of the early morning and needing to come to a place that they said gave them strength and solace. They held aloft rainbow banners, draped their arms around one another’s shoulders and offered chant after chant of “No hate!” Watching over them was a team of officers in counterterrorism gear.

“In the good times we’ve come here, in the bad times we’ve come here,” Brandon Cordeiro, 28, said. “What has always been true in all those times is we’ve stood together.”

Long before the vigil began, dozens of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender New Yorkers met inside the tavern to commiserate as a community.

On Sunday, like so many before, Vinny Milack-Carrasco arrived at the Stonewall Inn to spend time with some of his closest friends. Before the building lay bouquets of flowers and a series of handwritten cards dedicated to the victims of the massacre in Orlando.

“Gay bars and clubs are supposed to be our safe haven,” said Mr. Milack-Carrasco, 48, a store manager from Brooklyn. “I’ve never felt threatened here, but now I’m looking over my shoulder.”

Ever since the 1969 rebellion, Stonewall has become the locus not only for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender New Yorkers, but also for people across the country and the world who crave the sense of belonging that is still not easy to find in many places.

Over the last year or so, there were times Stonewall had been filled with joyous revelers celebrating milestones they had long fought to attain — most notably a year ago, after the Supreme Court’s same-sex marriage ruling. More recently, more than 100 people attended a town-hall-style meeting to support an initiative aimed at turning Stonewall and its surrounding area into a national monument to the gay rights movement.

“This shooting opens up a lot of old wounds,” Ron Perry, 66, a retiree from TriBeCa, said as he stood in Stonewall. “It brings back memories of when violence was regular at gay bars.”

Joseph Pierce, 33, a professor of Latin American studies from Prospect-Lefferts Gardens in Brooklyn, said that gay bars had always been “some of the only places queer people can feel like themselves” and that historically, they had been a nexus for political organizing. “This just shows that being queer and proud is a radical act and one that can still put your life at risk,” he said.

Muslim leaders, gay rights advocates and local politicians also gathered at a vigil in Jackson Heights, Queens. City Councilman Daniel Dromm, who represents Jackson Heights and organized the vigil, said the neighborhood had a large Muslim population as well as a thriving gay community.

“The reason I wanted to have this vigil here tonight is because I didn’t want this incident to separate our communities,” Mr. Dromm said.

Ali Najmi, president of the Muslim Democratic Club of New York, said gay and lesbian advocates had been loud and reliable allies against Islamophobia, and he condemned the attacks.

“It was very frustrating to find out that the person who inflicted all of this harm was someone who came from a Muslim family and likely pledged allegiance to ISIS or tries to maybe bring Islam into this,” he said. “That is very troubling because there is no place for that type of violence in this religion.”

At Stonewall, even as throngs of mourners wept in the streets and offered words of prayer, some patrons stayed inside the bar to drink and congregate in peace, determined not to let the massacre wreak havoc on their lives.

“This is my home, and these people are my family,” Mr. Perry said. “I refuse to sacrifice my pride.”


