


In what has become a sadly familiar ritual, many of America’s late-night TV hosts, who generally respond to the news with levity and one-liners, used their shows Monday night to address the attack at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., in which 49 people died in the worst mass shooting in United States history.

In tones that were sincere and sober, sometimes gentle and sometimes strident, these performers tried to make sense of the massacre. They spoke openly about how strange they felt to be talking about it on their shows at all, and they expressed their frustrations that these shooting deaths — and the hosts’ perplexed coverage of them — were becoming routine events. They tried to offer viewers messages of hope and inspiration.

Here is a look at what some of the late-night hosts said:

On TBS’s “Conan,” Conan O’Brien began the evening with an impassioned monologue that asked why sales of military-style semiautomatic assault rifles, like the kind used in the Orlando killings and in other mass shootings, were permitted. “Our goal, obviously, night after night, is to be funny and silly, if you’re in the mood for that, late at night,” he said. “However, sometimes, events are so horrifying and bleak that to come out here and tell jokes, it’s not really possible.”

Mr. O’Brien added: “I am a father of two. I like to believe I have a shred of common sense, and I simply do not understand why anybody in this country is allowed to purchase and own a semiautomatic assault rifle. It makes no sense to me.”

His voice rising, Mr. O’Brien said: “These are weapons of war, and they have no place in civilian life. I have tried to understand this issue from every side, and it all comes down to this: Nobody I know or have ever met in my entire life should have access to a weapon that can kill so many people so quickly.”

At the start of her TBS show, “Full Frontal With Samantha Bee,” a visibly exasperated Ms. Bee asked, “Hey, is it O.K. if, instead of making jokes, I just scream for seven minutes until we go to commercial?”

Anticipating the kinds of remarks that the Orlando shooting was likely to elicit from her and other hosts, she said: “After a massacre, the standard operating procedure is that you stand on stage and deliver some well-meaning words about how we will get through this together, how love wins, how love conquers hate and that is great. That is beautiful. But you know what?”

Ms. Bee added, “I am too angry for that. Love does not win unless we start loving each other enough to fix our problems.” She used an expletive before “problems,” for emphasis.

She mocked elected officials (including Gov. Rick Scott of Florida) whose advice after the massacre was to pray: “We pray after every mass shooting,” Ms. Bee said, “and yet they keep happening. Maybe we’re not praying right. Can we check the instruction manual?”

An image of the Bible appeared on screen, and Ms. Bee read from the Book of James: “Thus also faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead.”

Stephen Colbert, the host of CBS’s “Late Show,” began his program seated at his desk with his stage lit by the rainbow colors of a gay-pride flag.

“We each ask ourselves: What can you possibly say in the face of this horror?” Mr. Colbert said. “But then sadly, you realize you know what to say, because it’s been said too many times before.”

In the aftermath of these shootings, he said, “It’s as if there’s a national script that we have learned, and I think by accepting the script, we tacitly accept that the script will end the same way every time, with nothing changing, except for the loved ones and the families of the victims, for whom nothing will ever be the same.”

Rather than give into despair, which he said would be a victory for hate, Mr. Colbert urged his viewers to find love. “Love does not despair,” he said. “Love makes us strong. Love gives us the courage to act. Love gives us hope that change is possible. Love allows us to change the script. So love your country. Love your family. Love the families and the victims and the people of Orlando, but let’s remember that love is a verb. And to love means to do something.”

Beginning with a clip of President Obama addressing the Orlando attacks, Trevor Noah observed in his “Daily Show” monologue that Mr. Obama was making this speech — his 16th after a mass-shooting event — from a press room named for James S. Brady, the press secretary who was wounded in a 1981 assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan. “That’s how much gun violence is a part of American life,” Mr. Noah said. “Even the room that the president talks about gun violence from is named for a victim of gun violence.”

Mr. Noah, who is from South Africa, a country that suffers from high rates of violent crime, said that Americans did not have to rid the world of terrorism before addressing their own problems with gun violence. “Just because there’s a problem with terrorism doesn’t mean there isn’t also a problem with access to guns,” he said. “And I understand that Americans love guns. But this love comes at a cost.”

Mr. Noah added: “It’s clear here. America needs to ask itself the question: Do you want to be a country that takes reasonable measures to protect its citizens, or should we tell the president to prepare speech No. 17?”

In his opening monologue on “The Tonight Show,” Jimmy Fallon urged his viewers to be tolerant at a time when, he said, “I know everyone is angry right now and not really knowing how to react.”

But, he added, “This is a time where people are looking to us as a country and how we will react.”

Mr. Fallon said that America was “built on the idea that we do not all agree on everything, that we are a tolerant, free nation that encourages debate, free thinking, believing or not in what you choose.”

Noting that he is a father and unsure of what to tell his children, Mr. Fallon said: “We need to get back to being brave enough to accept that we have different opinions and that’s O.K., because that’s what America is built on — this idea that we can stand up and speak our minds and live our lives and not be punished for that. Or mocked on the internet. Or killed by someone you don’t know.”

He concluded his remarks by saying, “Keep loving each other, keep respecting each other and keep on dancing.”


