


Every day as Gil Horowitz, 80, passes by the Stonewall Inn near his home in the West Village, he is transported back to the early morning hours of June 28, 1969. He was in his early 30s then, a bisexual man still living largely in the shadows, when, he said, he was arrested by a police officer as part of a protest outside the bar and taken to the Sixth Precinct station house. Overnight in jail, he said, he witnessed dozens of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people chained to radiators and beaten with nightsticks.

“It was made clear to me that night that it was never safe to be L.G.B.T.,” he recalled. “Stonewall was our turning point, our rallying cry.”

Mr. Horowitz was among the dozens of people who testified at Public School 41 in the West Village on Monday evening in support of a proposal to create the first national monument to the gay rights movement, anchored by the Stonewall Inn and neighboring Christopher Park.

Those spontaneous protests outside the tavern — led in part by Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson — are widely regarded as pivotal in spurring the equal-rights movement for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.

The meeting on Monday, attended by a host of local politicians and led by Representative Jerrold Nadler of Manhattan; Sally Jewell, the United States secretary of the interior; and Jonathan B. Jarvis, the National Park Service director, was the latest step in a growing effort to recognize the area as a national monument. Mr. Nadler and Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, both Democrats of New York, introduced legislation to have Congress designate the area as a unit of the national park system, and President Obama is considering executive action. Although the White House would not confirm its support, several officials last night expressed confidence that the president would follow through, and some even thanked him prematurely for his support.

“We are long overdue for recognition of the struggle for L.G.B.T. civil rights in our national park system, and there is no better way to begin telling those stories than at Stonewall,” Mr. Nadler said, to applause from the audience.

Ms. Jewell said, “The National Park Service is America’s storytelling, and we know there are stories yet to be told.”

The Stonewall Inn has already been declared a New York City landmark and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places and then as a National Historic Landmark in 2000.

There are two avenues for adding locations to the national park system: through an act of Congress or by presidential designation. In Congress, a bill can be introduced requesting that an area be designated as a national park unit. The president can also designate a site as a national monument, based on the Antiquities Act of 1906. Most presidents have used this authority, together establishing nearly 140 national monuments, nearly half of which were later redesignated by Congress as part of the national park system.

Since Republicans control the House and the Senate, backers of the bill are doubtful it would pass, so they are counting on President Obama to achieve their goal.

The plot of land that would serve as the cornerstone of the monument is now a city park. To ease the site’s development as a national park or monument, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo signed legislation permitting the city to transfer ownership of the area to the federal government, a move endorsed by Mayor Bill de Blasio, a fellow Democrat, and other local and state officials.

Two-thirds of America’s national park sites are dedicated to issues of cultural and historic significance, according to the National Parks Conservation Association. Still, there are no sites within the National Park Service dedicated solely to the gay rights movement.

Nance Lomax first went to the Stonewall Inn as a transgender teenager from Philadelphia to find a sense of community that had always eluded her. The first night of the protests, she narrowly avoided arrest but returned many times thereafter.

“Stonewall meant the world to me,” Ms. Lomax, 62, said. “It taught me I could be or do anything.”

For Mr. Horowitz and many others, Stonewall continues to serve as a center of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender life. He gathered there with scores of patrons in times of celebration, as after the Supreme Court ruling that legalized same-sex marriage, and in times of tragedy, as when a gay man named Mark Carson was murdered blocks away in 2013.

“The place is a beacon of hope,” he said, “and we should never forget it.”


