


WHEN Weird Al Yankovic, the enduring musical satirist, appears in the season premiere of IFC’s “Comedy Bang! Bang!” to introduce himself as the new bandleader of this ersatz talk show and settle in for his first steady television gig in nearly 20 years, this is the heartfelt welcome he receives from its host, Scott Aukerman.

Mr. Aukerman gives a sideways glance to the camera and says: “Eh. Fine.”

As Mr. Yankovic, 56, explained later in an interview, he has become accustomed to this mix of recognition and indifference in a career of almost four decades as a composer and pop-song parodist.

“It’s usually, ‘Oh, him,’” he said with a giggling laugh. “There’s not a lot of, ‘Who’s this guy?’”

That modest approach to his work makes Mr. Yankovic — who achieved his first No. 1 album only two years ago, with the release of “Mandatory Fun” — an ideal fit for “Comedy Bang! Bang!,” a quietly successful show that begins its fifth season on Friday.

Mr. Yankovic, a Grammy Award winner who still seems startled that a mass audience enjoys his music, said that the show suited him particularly because “it’s not an extremely popular mainstream show.”

“If they want to do some really obscure references or inside jokes,” he said, “there’s not some network head going, ‘Nobody in Nebraska is going to get this.’ It almost feels like a little secret club.”

“Comedy Bang! Bang!,” which Mr. Aukerman described in an interview as “a narrative sketch show wearing the Halloween costume of a talk show,” draws fewer than 100,000 viewers for first-run broadcasts of episodes yet but has produced 90 installments over its first four seasons. (The fifth-season premiere also features a visit from Kevin Bacon and Mr. Aukerman’s pursuit of a mischievous, leprechaun-like creature.)

In that time, it has featured two previous bandleaders who also acted as second bananas and foils to Mr. Aukerman: first, Reggie Watts, the comedian and musician who joined James Corden on CBS’s “The Late Late Show.” He was followed by Kid Cudi, the rapper and actor, who appeared in about 20 episodes but left the series just before production began on the new season.

Mr. Aukerman explained: “We actually shifted the shooting schedule to accommodate him coming back. And then, at the last minute, right before we were supposed to start, he decided to shift his touring schedule even further, and so it coincided with the shooting and it didn’t end up happening.”

(A representative for Kid Cudi said in an email that the musician was working on an album and had left the show because of his “recording and touring schedule.”)

Mr. Yankovic, who has been a guest on the “Comedy Bang! Bang!” TV series and on Mr. Aukerman’s podcast of the same name, said that Mr. Aukerman’s invitation to join the show had come as “a Hail Mary pass” just as he had returned home from a live tour.

Although Mr. Yankovic was eager to accept the offer, he said there were “some people” he works with who “weren’t sure if it was the right career move, to be somebody’s sidekick on a low-rated cable show.”

He added, “What’s nice is, I’m at a point in my life that I don’t have to be so focused on what’s good for my career.”

Mr. Yankovic described himself as enjoying a “soft renaissance,” perhaps his fourth or fifth resurgence since 1984, when his popular sendup of a certain Michael Jackson hit went into heavy rotation on MTV.

“The day before, I could walk the streets and nobody would be staring or pointing at me,” Mr. Yankovic recalled. “The day after, I was the ‘Eat It’ guy.”

As a film and TV actor, Mr. Yankovic has usually limited himself to one-off roles with quick comedic impact: a series of cameo appearances in the “Naked Gun” movies, for example, or animated characters like the manic Banana Man on Cartoon Network’s “Adventure Time.”

The rare exception was Mr. Yankovic’s CBS Saturday morning series, “The Weird Al Show,” which ran for just one season in 1997.

But he said that he made the commitment to “Comedy Bang! Bang!,” which was filmed this year, because he was a fan, it fit his schedule and he felt at home in its loose and somewhat improvised environment.

“I can be saying stupid stuff, trying to add my own two cents, and I never have to worry about, ‘Oh, is that going to look dumb or play flat?’” he explained. “If it is, they don’t use it. The joy of editing.”

Mr. Yankovic said that he had also contributed about 100 pieces of new music to the show, including short musical cues and walk-on fanfares for its celebrity visitors. “To call them songs may be overstating it,” he said. “They’re basically hooks that are like 20 seconds long, to play in and out of commercials.”

Even so, Mr. Yankovic said that he was protective of his miniature creations. “Sometimes they’ll cut them down to two seconds,” he said. “I’m like: ‘What! How could you do that to my 20-second song?’”

Mr. Yankovic, who resumes touring in June, said he would gladly return for further seasons of “Comedy Bang! Bang!”

“I have told Scott, in no uncertain terms, that I will do this show until I’m dead,” he said. “And then he’s free to ‘Weekend at Bernie’s’ me a few more seasons after that.”

Mr. Aukerman said that he would also like to have Mr. Yankovic return. But then, he added, “Cudi said he wanted to come back, too.”

In the meantime, Mr. Yankovic is continuing to ruminate on a follow-up to “Mandatory Fun,” which he said is “probably not going to be an album, per se,” and on whether he could poke fun at hits like Beyoncé’s “Lemonade,” which has been interpreted as a many-layered response to grievances from her marriage to Jay Z.

“People are like, ‘What are you going to do with ‘Lemonade’?” Mr. Yankovic said. “I don’t know. By the time I get around to it, it’s probably going to be old news.”

He joked that he could record a response album from Jay Z to Beyoncé, then thought better of it. The most sensible response that Jay Z could give her, he said, was: “O.K., honey! Message received.”


