


UNITED NATIONS — Conflicts last longer. Soldiers and rebels break the laws of war without so much as a shrug. Millions of people are driven from their homes by wars and natural disasters. And aid workers complain that they are overstretched, underfunded and in greater danger as they try to deliver relief to the people who need it most.

The machinery of humanitarian aid is not only broke — but, according to many critics, also broken.

To address these problems, the United Nations is sponsoring the first World Humanitarian Summit, starting on Monday in Istanbul. But most of the world’s most powerful leaders — those whose soldiers and diplomats can end wars and hold accountable those who violate international humanitarian law — are not going.

President Obama is not planning to attend, nor is his top diplomat, Secretary of State John F. Kerry. Neither is President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who has rebuffed the five “core commitments” that the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, wants countries to embrace at Istanbul. Those commitments include respecting existing humanitarian law, preventing conflicts and donating more money for aid. In any event, they are not legally binding.

China, which operates a parallel aid system that channels money mostly to friendly governments, is sending officials from the ministry that handles foreign aid. The host nation, Turkey, is itself under scrutiny by rights groups for turning back refugees to war zones.

Even some humanitarian groups have signaled their doubts about the meeting. Doctors Without Borders made a splash this month by pulling out of the conference, calling it “a fig leaf of good intentions.”

The gathering is being held at a time when the entire architecture of humanitarian relief, set in place after World War II, is at a crossroads or worse — staring at its own irrelevance, according to many aid experts.

“The humanitarian system is suffering from a crisis of legitimacy,” said Christina Bennett, an analyst with a London research group, Overseas Development Institute, and the lead author of a report that calls for an overhaul of the aid system.

That crisis was on stark display this month at an entrance to Daraya, a suburb of Damascus, Syria. A convoy of trucks, carrying infant formula and medicine, waited to enter for six hours before being forced to leave. Jan Egeland, the humanitarian adviser to the United Nations envoy to Syria, said in a post on Twitter that the convoy had been blocked by government forces he described as “well-fed Syrian soldiers.”

For the World Humanitarian Summit to matter, Mr. Egeland wrote in an essay on Irin News, a news agency that focuses on humanitarian issues, “it must make us better able to respond where we now fail the most.”

The way wars are fought has changed radically since the era after World War II, when the aid architecture was set up. The aid business has not.

For instance, in 2013, conflicts around the world had been going on for an average of 37 years, according to Ms. Bennett’s report, up from 19 years in 1990. The United Nations reports that currently displaced people have been displaced, on average, for a generation, or 17 years worldwide.

Yet, at the same time, the basic protections enshrined by the refugee convention of 1951 are flouted, including by countries in Europe, which are now offering financial incentives to Turkey to keep asylum-seekers at bay.

Most egregious, the laws of war are repeatedly broken, whether intentionally or not. Hospitals have been bombed in Yemen, Syria and Afghanistan. Women have been raped in South Sudan by rival armies. Israeli forces attacked a school where families sought shelter during the war in Gaza.

The crisis in the humanitarian system is not something aid workers can solve themselves, even with a lot more money.

“There is an appalling lack of engagement and political courage at the moment either to resolve or address the root causes of an unbroken chain of simultaneous, complex, protracted crises,” said William Lacy Swing, the director general of the International Organization for Migration. “International humanitarian law continues to be violated on all sides, it seems, accompanied by serious erosion of international authority.”

As for money, the world spends about $25 billion each year on humanitarian relief, according to the United Nations, which says at least $15 billion more is needed.

The United Nations is eager to secure more financial pledges — the organization’s funding appeal for Yemen, for instance, is only 16 percent fulfilled — and it is seeking to appease donors by promising to make spending more transparent. At present, though, there is little transparency on how funds are spent, making it impossible to ferret out how much of every aid dollar that comes into the world body goes to beneficiaries.

United Nations agencies commonly dole out money to big Western nongovernmental organizations, or NGOs, which subcontract to local NGOs. There is a push to give the money directly to local groups, which get less than 1 percent of humanitarian funds, and let them decide how to spend it.

New ideas have been floated on how to raise more money — like a tax on luxury goods to help pay for humanitarian relief — and new ways to get aid to civilians, such as just giving them cash.

John Ging, the director of field operations for the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, wants to refocus the attention of world leaders to “a deficit of humanity.”

That will be a challenge.

Organizers rescheduled the World Humanitarian Summit so it did not conflict with a meeting of the world’s richest countries, the G7, which will begin May 26 in Japan. Still, the only G7 leader confirmed to attend the World Humanitarian Summit is Angela Merkel, the German chancellor.

Mr. Obama will be in Vietnam with Mr. Kerry. The American delegation will be led by Gayle E. Smith, the head of the United States Agency for International Development.

Patricia McIlreavy, a vice-president of InterAction, a coalition of NGOs based in the United States, said that while she was disappointed that Mr. Obama would not appear, she hoped the meeting would yield “concrete measures to minimize civilian harm during armed conflict and restoring respect for international humanitarian law.”

The International Committee of the Red Cross said the highest priorities of the gathering should include protecting civilians, ensuring aid reaches those in need and, as it said in a statement Friday, tackling “abuses of international humanitarian law in conflict.”

All told, 175 countries are scheduled to participate, including 53 heads of state and government. It is unclear whether any major financial pledges will be made, or if there will be any commitment to obey the laws of war.

“As world leaders gather for the first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, I have a question,” Malala Yousafzai, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning education activist from Pakistan, said in a news release. “What will this summit deliver beyond words?”


