


At the Prospect.1 biennial in New Orleans in 2008, three years after Hurricane Katrina, the Berlin artist Katharina Grosse covered a dilapidated house in the Lower Ninth Ward with orange and yellow.

Now, four years after Hurricane Sandy, she is bringing her spray paint to Fort Tilden’s decaying aquatics building in Queens, covering it in the fiery red of a Rockaways sunset.

Beginning on Fourth of July weekend and continuing through Thanksgiving, Ms. Grosse’s outdoor exhibition is part of “Rockaway!,” MoMA PS1’s programming that began in 2013 with Bloomberg Philanthropies. Fort Tilden, a former military base, is part of the Gateway National Recreation Area.

Klaus Biesenbach, the director of MoMA PS1, said that Ms. Grosse is going to “use the landscape and architecture as a canvas.”

The partners on “Rockaway!” include the National Park Service, the Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy and Rockaway Artists Alliance. After the exhibition, the aquatics building will be razed by the park service as part of its Hurricane Sandy recovery program.

“Here’s a very beautiful found object,” said Mr. Biesenbach, who has a house in the Rockaways. “It has history as being a military fortress, as being ecologically changed because of the hurricane. Now it’s being restored to its natural habitat.”

For four years, Chrissie Iles, a curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art, has been exploring how artists use cinematic conventions to create their own versions of the moving image.

“There’s been a complete revolution in the way we see,” Ms. Iles said. “What is this new visual reality and how are artists articulating it?”

The results of this inquiry, “Dreamlands: Immersive Cinema and Art, 1905-2016,” will take up the entire fifth floor of the Whitney beginning Oct. 28.

Highlights include a video projected inside a cardboard geodesic dome; production design paintings for Ridley Scott’s film “Blade Runner”; and the actress Tilda Swinton portraying an artificial intelligence persona who talks to viewers through a mirrored screen; and a microphone in a piece by Lynn Hershman Leeson.

“Artifice and reality,” Ms. Iles said, “have become versions of each other.”

When the Turner Prize-winning artist Simon Starling was preparing the piece he would exhibit at the Hiroshima City Museum of Contemporary Art five years ago, he learned about masked Japanese Noh theater, which inspired W. B. Yeats’s 1916 play, “At the Hawk’s Well.”

Now Mr. Starling is building on that project with “At Twilight,” his first institutional show in New York and a rare solo exhibition at Japan Society that features a non-Japanese artist.

It is also the first exhibition by Yukie Kamiya, Japan Society’s new gallery director, who used to be chief curator at the Hiroshima museum.

The show is organized with the Common Guild of Glasgow, which will present Mr. Starling’s version of the Yeats play in July.

Mr. Starling said that he was intrigued by the idea of masked theater, “where nobody is who they appear to be.”

“Crackers, cheese, peanut butter, ketchup … .”

Since when does a grocery list qualify as a monument? Enter the British artist David Shrigley, who has engraved these sundry items on a 17-foot-tall slab of granite, to be temporarily installed by the Public Art Fund on Sept. 8 at the southeast entrance to Central Park.

The piece, “Memorial,” expands on Mr. Shrigley’s 2008 work “Gravestone,” which featured a grocery list in gold-leaf letters. (The artist also has a show opening at Brandeis University’s Rose Art Museum in September.)

“He’s best known for a unique drawing style that makes satirical comments on everyday interactions,” said Emma Enderby, an associate curator with the Art Fund. “It’s absurd, it’s funny but it’s also sad and poignant.”

The Argentine artist Julio Le Parc has dedicated his 60-year career to participatory kinetic art as a way to encourage personal contact and promote social change. “He wants to clear away all the structures and systems which come between a work of art and the viewer,” said Estrellita B. Brodsky, a collector and curator, “so they result in a direct unmediated connection.”

Ms. Brodsky is the guest curator for a Le Parc show at the Pérez Art Museum Miami opening on Nov. 18, the artist’s first United States museum exhibition.

For the show, which will include more than 100 pieces, Mr. Le Parc has insisted on a minimum of signage and labels.

“He wants people to engage with the artwork — he doesn’t want them to read,” Ms. Brodsky said. “He doesn’t want the institution to dictate how they should interact with a work of art.”

Marianne Boesky’s Chelsea gallery is expanding into the space next door, doubling its size — to allow for concurrent exhibitions and more ambitious shows — and closing its Lower East Side location.

The first show in the combined West 24th Street space, opening on June 23, will feature work by the artists Jay Heikes, Thornton Dial and Lee Mullican. In September, the gallery will present a solo exhibition of new works by Donald Moffett.

Meanwhile, Triple Canopy, the Brooklyn-based art and literary journal, is also gaining twice the space in September with a move to Chinatown. With the architects Leong Leong, the organization has designed a new home that can accommodate activities from “solitary editing and coding,” said the director, Peter J. Russo, “to daylong work sessions with artists to performances and readings.”


