


A member of a volunteer security force in Borough Park, Brooklyn, was charged on Monday with offering bribes to New York Police Department officials to obtain handgun permits — the first arrest directly linked to the widening federal investigation into police corruption and Mayor Bill de Blasio’s fund-raising efforts.

The man, Alex Lichtenstein, 44, was arrested on Sunday at his home in Pomona, N.Y., by agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and detectives from the Police Department’s Internal Affairs Bureau, officials said. A criminal complaint unsealed on Monday in United States District Court in Manhattan charged him with bribery and conspiracy to commit bribery.

Deputy Inspector Michael T. Endall, who heads the Police Department’s License Division, was one of three men transferred from that division on Monday, a statement from the department said. Inspector Endall was reassigned to an administrative position pending further review; Sgt. David Villanueva and Officer Richard Ochetal were placed on modified assignment, and have also been transferred.

Mr. Lichtenstein tried to bribe an officer to help him obtain pistol licenses, offering him $6,000 per license and telling him he had already obtained an estimated 150 permits over the last year through his connections at the License Division, a claim the officer secretly recorded, the complaint said.

The allegations that the handgun licenses, particularly full- and limited-carry permits, which are difficult to obtain in New York City, were being sold as part of a corruption scheme has prompted a top-to-bottom review of the License Division, the police said

In one instance, a man whose license application fee was paid for with Mr. Lichtenstein’s credit card was approved for a full-carry permit in July 2013, despite a forgery arrest, four domestic violence complaints, three car accidents and 10 moving violations. They were all red flags that could have barred him from obtaining a permit. Months later, a complaint was made to the police that Mr. Lichtenstein used his connections to get the man a license despite his history of domestic violence, but it apparently was not investigated, the criminal complaint said.

The broader federal corruption investigation focusing on fund-raising by Mr. de Blasio’s campaign has centered on two businessmen with ties to him, Jona Rechnitz and Jeremy Reichberg. The two men donated and raised money for his election campaign and for a nonprofit connected to his causes, people briefed on the matter have said. The inquiry has led federal agents to interview roughly 20 senior Police Department officials, several people briefed on the matter said.

The case against Mr. Lichtenstein is being prosecuted by the same three assistant United States attorneys assigned to the fund-raising inquiry, Russell Capone, Martin Bell and Kan Nawaday. All are assigned to the Public Corruption Unit in the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.

Mr. Lichtenstein came under scrutiny this month after he approached a police officer he knew and offered him cash to help him obtain gun licenses, the complaint said. The officer contacted the Internal Affairs Bureau and recorded a subsequent meeting with Mr. Lichtenstein, who was so nervous he patted the officer down, looking for a recording device, and telling him he would rather meet him “in your underpants and undershirt.”

After offering the officer $6,000 per permit and estimating he had obtained 150 permits over the course of a year, Mr. Lichtenstein took out his calculator and multiplied $6,000 by 150, showing the officer that he stood to make $900,000 a year, the complaint said.

The complaint said that Mr. Lichtenstein had previously dealt with the sergeant, who was not identified in the complaint, and that he told the officer he needed a new contact because the commander of the License Division got upset after hearing that Mr. Lichtenstein was “being paid so much money.” A person briefed on the matter said the sergeant was Sgt. Villanueva. The commander, Mr. Lichtenstein said, was concerned people would think he “had his hand in the cookie pot.”

Roy Richter, the head of the police union that represents captains, deputy inspectors, inspectors and chiefs, defended Inspector Endall, saying he is “an honest cop who is sickened by what he reads in the federal complaint.”

Mr. Lichtenstein, a member of the Shomrim, a volunteer Orthodox Jewish patrol society in Borough Park, was released on a personal recognizance bond of $500,000. During his arrest, two licensed firearms were taken away from Mr. Lichtenstein; on Monday, a magistrate judge, Henry Pitman of Federal District Court in Manhattan, ordered Mr. Lichtenstein to surrender all firearms, including a shotgun that was still in his possession.

The mayor was asked about the arrest at the end of an unrelated news conference on Monday; Mr. de Blasio did not acknowledge the inquiry. Before that, he said that any person accused of wrongdoing “should suffer the consequences.”

“I believe that anyone who does something wrong should suffer the consequences, as some of our police individual chiefs are at this point,” he said.


