


Last month, the JPMorgan Chase shareholders’ letter went up online, and the bank’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, had some harsh words for start-ups selling services that try to improve upon his bank’s offerings.

To the Mints and the Acorns and the Pennys and the scores of other services and their partners that use Chase checking and credit card data in their work — and, more important, to their customers — he declared the following:

■ These start-ups take more of your data than they need to.

■ Many of them sell the data to outsiders in a way that benefits them but not you.

■ They often take your data every day, for years, even if your account is inactive.

■ If your money disappears because of fraud, it’s on you, not the bank.

His broadsides make for great theater, even if the statements are debatable. But because it’s Jamie Dimon talking, you have to take the letter seriously. After all, an ever-growing number of consumers don’t mind letting third parties see their financial information, like their debit card transactions or investment choices, if it means getting new investment or budgeting advice or services that the banks haven’t thought of themselves.

We’ll examine his points one by one in a moment, but first, a question: Why is the company making all of this noise now?

None of these new services could exist without third parties called aggregators. They run software in the background that connects the apps with banks and other financial services companies to collect customer data. Back in the 1990s, when aggregators like Yodlee first came on the scene, the banks engaged in much public hand-wringing about the security implications of “screen-scraping,” which is essentially what happens when an app needs to fetch your data from a bank’s computers.

But by early 2002, the trade publication American Banker was declaring these concerns “almost passé.” Early on, big banks themselves used aggregators because high-net-worth customers wanted to see all their account balances on a single Web dashboard.

Phase 2 was more troubling to the banks. That’s when Mint came along, collecting your credit card transactions from one company and then showing ads for other cards that offered better deals. Along the way, it got bounties from that competitive card.

Now comes Phase 3, in which the aggregators are helping start-ups automate the transfer of money from big banks, using the banks’ own data to do it. Consider Acorns, which rounds up your purchases to the nearest dollar, grabs that extra change from your bank and drops it in an Acorns investment account. Nifty, right?

But if you’re Jamie Dimon, this has to be utterly galling. A bunch of West Coast whippersnappers go into your site, figure out when your customers are spending money, tell a robot to take additional amounts out regularly and then invest the money someplace else. Your in-house financial advisers are left out of the picture. You’d stomp your feet and hurl insults, too.

So should we believe his accusations? Here they are, in his own words:

Far more information is taken than the third party needs in order to do its job.

Taken by whom? A spokeswoman for Chase declined to name names.

Does Acorns take more than it needs? “Absolutely not,” said an Acorns co-founder, Jeff Cruttenden. What about Penny, an app that tracks income and spending? “We pull three months’ worth of information, and we did that only when consumers started demanding we give them more than two,” said a co-founder, Mitchell Lee. Plaid, a newer aggregator that helps many start-ups, said it does not take more than it needs either.

Yodlee would not discuss Mr. Dimon’s accusations. But its silence may be connected to Mr. Dimon’s next statement.

Many third parties sell or trade information in a way customers may not understand, and the third parties, quite often, are doing it for their own economic benefit — not for the customer’s benefit.

This is almost certainly directed at Yodlee, which was the subject of a Wall Street Journal article last year about how it sells big batches of data on the activity of large numbers of customers (say, about the credit card transactions at specific merchants) to hedge funds looking for a trading edge. Yodlee again declined to comment, other than to send me a statement saying that customers should have control of their data. Plaid, which Yodlee is suing for patent infringement, says it will not sell data to hedge funds.

Still, protesters did not storm Yodlee’s gates. Even if hedge funds had reason to pick out individual spending patterns (they don’t, and they might not be able to anyway), would consumers mind that those investors found out that, say, they’re going to McDonald’s more often because of the new all-day availability of Egg McMuffins?

After all, this is a world where over 1,000 people handed over their user names and passwords to a start-up called Blooom in exchange for a Chipotle burrito and an analysis of their 401(k) investments.

Often this is being done on a daily basis for years after the customer signed up for the services, which they may no longer be using.

Not us, says Penny. In fact, to do so would be uneconomical, because the company has to pay fees to an aggregator every month for every account that its customers want it to track.

This, too, may be a shot at Yodlee. Perhaps its economic interest in selling McMuffin data to hedge funds makes it worth the effort.

When customers give out their bank passcode, they may not realize that if a rogue employee at an aggregator uses this passcode to steal money from the customer’s account, the customer, not the bank, is responsible for any loss.

The aggregators have never had a breach that we know of. Plaid, in a position paper on these issues, points out that JPMorgan Chase had a breach in 2014 in which thieves stole the contact information of tens of millions of customers.

Not everyone agrees with Mr. Dimon’s reading of the relevant law here, which is Regulation E. If an unauthorized transfer of money takes place because a thief has stolen your bank password from an aggregator, Nessa Feddis, deputy chief counsel for consumer protection and payments with the American Bankers Association, agrees with Mr. Dimon, given that the consumer has handed over the password to a third party. But an article in The Fordham Journal of Corporate & Financial Law from 2003 came to the opposite conclusion.

Here’s what would have to happen for a consumer not to get reimbursed: A breach would have to occur as a result of an aggregator’s error. It would also have to be apparent that it was the aggregator’s error, even though fault is often difficult to discern. The bank would have to risk bad press and lawsuits by refusing to reimburse the account holder. And the aggregator and the app that used it would also have to turn the customer away, even though the breach was their fault. A judge might get involved, too. The odds of all of this coming to pass are close to zero.

So if all of his statements don’t amount to much, why is Mr. Dimon so exercised? One hint comes from job listings that the company has posted, including a posting for a vice president in a new unit that aims to “leverage JPM proprietary data assets into opportunities” for the bank. It hopes to “enable end users to make better decisions.” That sounds a lot like what many of the apps that scrape the banks’ data already do. Maybe someday the bank will invent services that are good enough to keep every customer inside its firewalls.

Or might JPMorgan just charge outside apps for access to the data, or cut off access if they won’t pay? The bank is not offering specifics for now, though Patricia Wexler, a spokeswoman, tried to make nice to account holders who want to liberate their data. “We understand our customers want to use these services,” she said in an emailed statement. “And we want to make sure that it’s done in a safe and secure way and that our customers understand that handing out their banking password to a third party has risk. We’re happy to be working with the aggregator community to create a solution here.”

Let’s hope so. “Your financial information, which is so often used against you or to judge you, belongs to you, just like your health data,” said Mr. Lee of Penny. “And you should have access to it outside of the bank.”


