


BALTIMORE — As the Yankees’ first-base coach, Tony Pena, stood in the dugout Sunday morning, he was asked to consider a hypothetical situation. What if his son, Francisco, came to the plate for the Baltimore Orioles with two outs, the bases loaded and the Yankees clinging to a one-run lead?

“I want him to strike out,” Pena said with a smile. “I want to win. Honestly. I want to win.”

It was not quite the ninth inning and Francisco Pena did not deliver the winning hit, but he was there in the middle of the winning rally for the Orioles, who scored three times in the bottom of the eighth inning after a long rain delay to beat the Yankees, 3-1, at Camden Yards.

After the rain had delayed the game for 1 hour 37 minutes, Yankees closer Aroldis Chapman came on with runners at first and second and quickly struck out Jonathan Schoop for the second out. But Pena rifled a single to right field hit so hard that it prevented the lead runner, Mark Trumbo, from trying to score — even after right fielder Aaron Hicks bobbled the ball.

But pinch-hitter Matt Wieters followed by lining an 0-2 fastball up the middle to drive in Trumbo and Chris Davis, and Pena then scored when center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury’s throw sailed past catcher Brian McCann. Chapman was not backing up home.

The loss was a crushing way to end a 10-game trip for the Yankees, who wasted a plethora of scoring opportunities and another fine effort by starter C. C. Sabathia before falling victim to Chapman’s first blown save in 10 chances.

“We can’t feel sorry for ourselves,” said reliever Dellin Betances, who lost for the second time in this series and has given up runs in four consecutive appearances, a career high. “Things aren’t going our way. We just have to continue to work.”

As dispiriting as the loss was for the Yankees, it was uplifting for the Orioles, who moved into a tie for first place with Boston in the American League East, six and a half games ahead of the Yankees.

Nobody was more ebullient than the younger Pena, who hit his first career home run on Thursday and played in front of his father for the first time on Sunday. They shared laughs and meals and celebrated the older Pena’s 59th birthday on Saturday.

“It was a real, real special moment,” Pena said of playing in front of his father. “It’s the same game — I still had a smile on my face. I just had fun, trying just to make my whole family proud back home in the Dominican Republic watching and my wife and my mom.”

Tony Pena was standing in the corner of the Yankees’ dugout, his arms folded, when the ball went screaming off the bat of his son into right field. After the loss, the elder Pena was disappointed, but he also surely had some paternal pride.

Francisco, a catcher like his father, said he caught his father’s eye once during the game. After chasing down a ball that had skittered away, he glanced toward the first-base coaching box. He also stepped into the batter’s box once and asked McCann, one of many Yankees he knows, if he might do him a favor and call for a fastball.

“When I was in A-ball, AA, used to go to Yankee Stadium on my day off, so I know all those guys,” said Pena, 26, who signed with the Mets as a 17-year-old and made his major league debut last year for Kansas City. “I was messing around with McCann.”

Sabathia walked six and hit a batter in five solid innings, but he managed to keep the Orioles scoreless amid muggy, 80-degree conditions. He lowered his E.R.A. to 0.87 over his last five starts, but he has only two wins over that stretch.

The Yankees took a 1-0 lead on an Alex Rodriguez single that scored Brett Gardner with two outs in the third, but that was the Yankees’ sole run despite 10 hits, two walks and a runner who reached on an error.

All the base runners made for a busy day for Pena’s father at first base.

As unshakable as the bond is between father and son, there is also a link between catchers — an often unspoken understanding of the demands of the position.

So when the Yankees’ two catchers recently sustained freakish injuries — McCann hyperextending his left elbow when he reached down to block a pitch and Austin Romine hurting his thumb when his glove fell off as he tried to catch a warm-up pitch — Manager Joe Girardi cringed along with them. Girardi caught for 15 seasons in the major leagues.

“That’s why I retired,” Girardi said Sunday morning in the third-base dugout. “I don’t miss all the bumps and bruises you get as a catcher and how you physically feel every day. It’s a brutal position, and there has to be a good amount of toughness in an individual to play that position.”

When Romine was hurt before the start of the ninth inning on Saturday, Pena jogged out with his glove and mask to warm up Chapman. He was quickly called back because Girardi wanted to preserve Chapman’s warm-up tosses for McCann, who was replacing Romine.

“I was not scared for Tony,” Girardi said.

Pena, a four-time Gold Glove catcher, was in the vanguard of Latino catchers in the late 1970s and early 1980s who brought a flamboyance to the position, sitting on the ground with one leg splayed out and throwing from a crouch. Pena was eager to show off his arm, one of the best in the game.

“With Tony, everybody knew he was in the park,” Orioles Manager Buck Showalter said. “This kid fits in a little more,” he said, referring to Francisco Pena, who goes by Frankie.

The younger Pena is indeed more circumspect. He is bigger than his father, at 6 feet 2 inches and 230 pounds, and he displayed a rare sign of exuberance on Sunday when he applauded pitcher Kevin Gausman for a high fastball he threw Ellsbury with the bases loaded in the fourth. Gausman eventually struck Ellsbury out.

Tony Pena, who averaged just over six walks for every 100 plate appearances in his 18-year career, said his son had a similar approach at the plate: “His strike zone is from the head to the toe. If he throws the rosin bag, he might swing.”

Pena’s remark was a spot-on scouting report when the younger Pena fouled off five two-strike pitches and coaxed an 11-pitch walk in his first at-bat. He reached in the fifth on an infield single and took a called third strike in the sixth, at the end of an eight-pitch at-bat against Kirby Yates.

The best, though, was yet to come.


