


The St. Louis Blues have hired Mike Yeo as the successor in waiting to their head coach. Ken Hitchcock, the team’s current coach, has declared that next season will be his last behind the bench before retiring.

The Blues’ general manager, Doug Armstrong, announced Monday that Yeo would be an associate coach for one year under Hitchcock and take over the team for the 2017-18 season. Hitchcock, 64, who led the Blues to the Western Conference finals this season, will enter his sixth year with St. Louis and his 20th as an N.H.L. head coach.

“I feel really confident that the team and the franchise is going to be in great shape with Mike at the helm,” Hitchcock said.

Yeo was fired Feb. 13 by the Central Division rival Minnesota Wild after compiling a 173-132-44 record over five seasons. Under Yeo, the Wild made three trips to the playoffs, including a first-round victory over the Blues last year.

The Wild, who rallied to return to the postseason under the interim coach John Torchetti, were mired in a 3-12-4 slide when the 42-year-old Yeo was let go.

Rick Wilson, a former Blues defenseman who was on Hitchcock’s staff in Dallas in 1999 when the Stars won the Stanley Cup and on Yeo’s staff in Minnesota, was also hired as an assistant coach. Yeo and Wilson were picked as replacements for the assistant coaches Brad Shaw and Kirk Muller, who decided not return to St. Louis.

The Blues had 107 points last season before eliminating the defending champion Chicago Blackhawks and the Central Division champion Stars in the playoffs. They lost to San Jose in six games in the conference finals.

The Detroit Red Wings and the family of the hockey legend Gordie Howe are encouraging fans to attend a public visitation at Joe Louis Arena.

Mark Howe said in a release Monday that his father “always had a special connection with the fans, so it was important to us to allow the public into the funeral service because it’s the way he would have done it.”

Gordie Howe died Friday at 88. He led the Red Wings to four Stanley Cups during his 25 years with the team.

The public visitation is scheduled from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Tuesday. Gordie Howe’s body will lie in repose inside the arena bowl.

Max Scherzer retired the first 16 batters he faced and threw seven innings of two-hit ball, striking out 11 in a pitching masterpiece that carried the Washington Nationals past the visiting Chicago Cubs, 4-1.

Scherzer’s bid for his third career no-hitter ended with one out in the sixth when Addison Russell hit a 3-2 pitch into the left-field seats. The only other batter to reach against Scherzer (8-4) was Anthony Rizzo, who doubled in the seventh.

He has won three straight starts.

AROUND THE MAJORS Ryan Howard and Odubel Herrera homered, Jerad Eickhoff pitched six spotless innings to win consecutive starts for the first time this season, and the Philadelphia Phillies ended a four-game losing streak by beating the Blue Jays, 7-0, in Toronto. Tyler Holt’s bases-loaded walk off closer Arodys Vizcaino forced in the tiebreaking run in the ninth inning, and the Cincinnati Reds beat the Braves, 9-8, in Atlanta. Five Braves pitchers combined for eight walks, including three by Vizcaino (1-2) in the ninth.

Fletcher Cox, the standout defensive tackle for the Philadelphia Eagles, agreed to a six-year contract with the team that could earn him nine figures.

Cox, a first-round draft pick in 2012, has been a starter since midway through his rookie season. One of the N.F.L.’s most versatile defensive linemen, Cox has 308 tackles and 22 sacks in his four pro seasons.

He is coming off his best N.F.L. season, with 104 tackles (80 solo) and nine and a half sacks.

AROUND THE LEAGUE The Buffalo Bills shuffled their roster before opening a mandatory spring minicamp by signing defensive end Leger Douzable and offensive tackle Chris Martin. Douzable has seven seasons of N.F.L. experience, including three with the Jets. He is reuniting with Rex Ryan, who took over as the Bills’ coach last year after spending six seasons coaching the Jets. Martin rejoins the Bills after spending part of last season on Buffalo’s practice squad. Buffalo freed up room by releasing defensive end Claudell Louis and offensive tackle Keith Lumpkin. The Seattle Seahawks have given Nate Robinson, a former N.B.A. standout and a former college football player, a tryout. The Seahawks confirmed that Robinson went through a tryout on Monday, which was first reported by The Washington Post.

Yale’s rowing coach said a committee would determine whether the Bulldogs won the 151st regatta with its archrival Harvard, or if the decision would go down in the books as no contest.

Yale was leading the heavyweight race in poor conditions on the Thames River on Sunday when Harvard’s shell began taking on water and the Crimson crew had to be evacuated into launch boats. Yale went on to finish the race but was informed two hours later that because a judge had put up a red flag when the incident occurred, no winner would be declared.

Yale Coach Steve Gladstone said the regatta committee, which includes officials from both universities, could take a few weeks to decide.


