


LOUISVILLE, Ky. — Inside a big arena, the likes of Bill Clinton, Billy Crystal and Bryant Gumbel and a diverse range of family members and religious leaders spoke weighty and witty words about Muhammad Ali not long after he was laid to rest Friday in a cemetery here.

But it was from humble roots here that he became one of the world’s most recognizable figures, and an ad hoc outpouring of tens of thousands of people turned out on the streets for a final salute more celebratory than somber.

For an hourslong procession that wove 20 miles through the city to Cave Hill Cemetery, where Ali was buried, his hometown did not hold back, with people at some points standing eight to 10 deep along the street for a moment’s glimpse, a fleeting last encounter with their favorite son.

There were no barriers to keep people off the street, and they swarmed forward when the motorcade passed, tossing flowers onto the hearse. Riding with the windows down, people in the limousines accompanying it — including members of the Ali family and Will Smith, the actor who portrayed Ali in a movie — slapped hands with the spectators as they passed.

Unlike the formal ceremonies indoors, the procession was more of a street party. On a downtown street, people were startled to see Larry Holmes, a former heavyweight boxing champion who had beaten Ali, being led along the sidewalk outside the Brown Hotel by a young man at his elbow. Neither spoke.

Chants of “Ali, Ali, Ali” rose as the hearse rolled past the bystanders. That included the fans in the West End, where Ali spent his formative years. Nearly everyone seemed to have a story about meeting or being inspired by Ali.

At a parking lot on the corner of Broadway and Louis Coleman Jr. Drive, hundreds of people from the neighborhood gathered to await the champion, who died June 3 at age 74.

“He was a dignitary from the sports world who traveled the globe, but he never forgot where he came from,” said Wayne Simon, 72, who remembered Ali visiting their alma mater, Central High School, after he had won a gold medal at the 1960 Olympic Games in Rome.

Earlier Friday, Robert Mitchem was setting up a shirt stand with two friends. The funeral procession carrying Ali’s coffin was still nearly five hours away from driving past the corner in the heart of the West End, about a mile from where Ali grew up.

But Mitchem, known as Froot Loop because people mistakenly think he likes that cereal, wanted to be ready for the once-in-a-lifetime chance to commemorate the city’s most famous son and to make a few bucks selling T-shirts with Ali’s picture and his most famous catchphrases, like “Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee.”

“I hope to sell all of them, and when I die, I hope someone is going to have my name on a shirt, too,” he said with a chuckle.

The shirts were hot sellers with the hundreds of people from the neighborhood who gathered to await the champion, who died after a long fight with Parkinson’s disease.

Despite the searing sun and the rising temperatures, the several hundred people who assembled in and around the parking lot were there to celebrate Ali anew. Donald Burress, 63, remembered as a child his family crowding around a black-and-white television to watch Ali knock out Sonny Liston.

“What he did for Louisville, he was our spokesman,” Burress said, his daughter and two grandchildren sitting by his side. “He was bigger than Churchill Downs,” the famed horse racing track that hosts the Kentucky Derby.

As he spoke, his buddy Mitchem was selling shirts to people who stopped their cars on the road, which was by then patrolled by a police cruiser. Thalisa Price, who wore a leather vest with her nickname, Ms. Lovely, stitched on the back, wanted to buy an Ali shirt before leaving for Memphis on Saturday with her motorcycle club, the Naptown Riders.

“I’m going to wear this shirt to let people know we’re from Louisville,” she said.

After the limousines had passed, heading toward Ali’s childhood home on Grand Avenue, people trickled away. Mitchem, though, still had work to do. Having sold more than 10 dozen shirts, he was going to rush home and print some more.

In the afternoon, more fans gathered downtown on a grass plaza a few blocks from KFC Yum Center, where the memorial service was held. Huddled in the shade, they watched the dignitaries giving their speeches on a large screen. While impressed with the remarks, the fans were more impressed by the chance to see Ali and his family pass earlier in the day.

“They were in awe seeing us, and we were in awe seeing them,” said Brenda Ringo, who had driven from St. Louis with her daughter and two grandchildren to see the procession. “I think that helped lift their spirits, and I don’t regret getting up at 3 a.m. to drive to Louisville.”


