


These are grim times for cheap thrills. I knew this way before I sat down for a third helping of Brian De Palma’s “Dressed to Kill.” But there was something freshly moving about listening to the poor, sexually exasperated Kate Miller (Angie Dickinson) talk to her shrink (Michael Caine) about faking another marital orgasm. She’s tired of “wham-bang” specials from her husband. She wants passion. The longer she goes on, the more I thought, Hear! Hear!

The capes, remakes and movies engineered for late-year acclaim? Stop playing footsie and make love to me.

More, please, of the bloody film ecstasies of Mr. De Palma, the relentless American director to whom the Metrograph, on Manhattan’s Lower East Side, has devoted the month to cinematic French-kissing — courtesy of a retrospective. Living elsewhere should deter no one from drumming up private De Palma marathons (or finding “De Palma,” the new career documentary that Noah Baumbach and Jake Paltrow have made).

If you miss homicidal mania, gonzo sexual desire, cruelty lugubriously avenged, camerawork and editing that never sleep, or arriving at the closing credits and exclaiming, “Again!”, “What the hell was that?” or sometimes both, then you can certainly salute Mr. De Palma at home.

His body of work is large and varied. He’s given us carnal disturbances (“Phantom of the Paradise”); adolescent-hormone horror (“Carrie” and “The Fury”), personal dramedy, assorted paranoia thrillers; a couple of moralist combat dramas; and more crime-world escapades than you’d think (starting with “Scarface” and peaking with “The Untouchables”).

We’re talking about an auteur but a completely heterogeneous one, whose thematic promiscuity ranges from counterculture-era black comedies (“Greetings” and “Hi, Mom!”) to rotten eggs like “Mission to Mars” (2000) and the notorious, picked-over 1990 turkey “The Bonfire of the Vanities.” This is also the director who, in 1996, launched the “Mission: Impossible” series. Mr. De Palma promises nothing (well, he never seems to run out of music; his movies do promise too much of that). He can’t even guarantee quality. After almost 26 years, I thought going back to “Bonfire” would help recast it as a timely (or timeless) race farce. Nope. Its badness is forever.

And yet here’s the thing about Mr. De Palma. He never stops — never stops trying to pull the rug out from under us, never stops trying to twist our arm, never stops believing that nonsense can be an aphrodisiac, too.

I mean, who has better understood the elastic power of slow motion? It’s the sort of only-in-the-movies effect that no one’s actually experienced but that everybody’s felt. It’s the speed of dreams and nightmares — REM sleep at minimal m.p.h. With Mr. De Palma, though, the dreams favor the dewy, and the nightmares run red. Death, ecstasy and humiliation can all happen at well under 24 frames per second, all the better for the movies to show us what we see when our eyes are shut.

That’s what’s wrong with that adaptation of Tom Wolfe’s “The Bonfire of the Vanities.” By Mr. De Palma’s standards, it’s bloodless in every way. Even real time feels too slow.

In his prime, which was the paranoid Nixon ’70s, the excessive Reagan ’80s and just a touch beyond, Mr. De Palma made thrillers that thrilled. And cheap was fine. We’re cheap. Just don’t treat us that way. De Palma didn’t. He winked and ribbed and elbowed, but he also knew how to freak you out and turn you on. There’s a spot for perversity and transgression that certain moviegoers have, and Mr. De Palma knew how to hit it. You could count on him to put a frame around desire and fear.

In “Dressed to Kill” (1980), toward the end of her session with Mr. Caine’s Dr. Elliott, Kate comes on to him. He declines. And a scene later, she is sitting alone at the Met, too distracted to engage with the art. She scribbles in her datebook stuff like “nuts,” “eggnog” and “pick up turkey!” Then a man in sunglasses sits beside her and starts sucking on a golden pen. The next shot shows her with one leg wrapped around the other.

He gets up, and she chases after him from gallery to gallery. An Alex Katz, a Frank Stella, Rauschenberg and Johns: all afterthoughts. As they go, the score rises and falls — panting, basically. Then he stops and cruises her, and she walks past, exhilarated but ultimately too embarrassed to respond when he comes up behind her and places a gloved hand on her shoulder. She runs off and looks at a museum map (for sexual orientation, more than anything else).

Then she realizes that the glove was hers, and she starts scanning these rooms full of art for the work of trashy masculinity who’s getting away. But when she exits, there he is in a cab wagging that glove. She goes to thank him. He pulls her in and starts going to town on her right there in the back seat. The turkey’s picked her up!

It is such obvious surface, but the surface goes on for miles. As a formalist, Mr. De Palma repeatedly cast his lot with the films of Alfred Hitchcock — in “Blow Out,” “Body Double” and “Raising Cain,” too. The museum sequence is like an exhibitionist “Vertigo” whipping open its trench coat and flashing its great big Judith Krantz.

Mr. De Palma’s baldness can still be brow-furrowing. The wonderful Ms. Dickinson’s function here is the same as Janet Leigh’s in “Psycho”: cautionary. Indeed, Hitchcock’s female trouble is also Mr. De Palma’s — judgment, sexual confinement. He’s just not as icy. Indeed, “Dressed to Kill” features the sort of queer killer who slays out of sexual confusion (or jealousy) that cropped up that year (also in 1980, N.Y.P.D. detective Al Pacino went gay, in “Cruising,” to stop murders in S-and-M communities) and reached a mass-media boiling point 12 years later with “Basic Instinct.” If you’re not straight, these movies end punitively for you.

But there’s a kind of touching ignorance at work in “Dressed to Kill.” When the movie wants us to understand transgenderism, it splits the screen and, on both sides, plays an actual talk show featuring Nancy Hunt, who explains her life to a live studio audience. Dr. Elliott isn’t on the show; he’s watching at home, studying it. That’s this movie: Phil Donahue is its Freud.

(Mr. De Palma is stranger with black people in his movies. There’s the fascinating experimental-theater sequence in “Hi, Mom!” in which a bunch of black actors in whiteface put white audience members in blackface so they can sample the black experience. And “Sisters” is built around an interracial relationship. But, until “Bonfire,” those scenes appear to have obviated a reason for black people in his films to do much more than deliver exposition and jive.)

But with sex, no one in America is doing this kind of cheap-thrill stuff anymore. The accusations of misogyny against Mr. De Palma were always complicated. Sexuality constitutes a survival skill and power play for some of these characters. The women in a block of his films are more than victims; and carnality is both weapon and currency. In “Body Double” (1984), Melanie Griffith plays a porn actress named Holly Body. Some of the appeal in casting her had to have been that her mother was Tippi Hedren, the Popsicle at the center of Hitchcock’s “The Birds” and “Marnie.”

Mr. De Palma, who wrote the movie with Robert J. Avrech, gives Ms. Griffith a monologue about her rules for kink that is pretty much unprintable. But I typed it out just to feel the tingle of Ms. Griffith’s confident obscenity.

Mr. De Palma used to conjure that vicarious kick of attraction — but also the viciousness and risk in it, that the danger for women came at the hands of men. If anything, his true thematic pursuits were privacy and invasions of it. The opening scene of “Sisters” (1973) is from a television show he cooked up called “Peeping Tom.” But ways of seeing are also crucial to “Casualties of War” (1989) and “Redacted” (2007).

The erotics of looking gave his sex movies both some of their sensation and their paradoxical moral tinge: that which feels right but is wrong. There you have the engine for an entire generation of delicious De Palma cousins and knockoffs: the erotic thriller, movies where plot and sensation went at it until some kind of soft-porno-orgasmic ridiculousness was achieved. These films thrived for two decades (“Jagged Edge,” “Body of Evidence,” “Color of Night”) incongruously amid the fear of AIDS and newer sexual freedoms.

They treated lust as sin but also as inevitable. In “Dressed to Kill,” Kate succumbs to both. And paying attention to Mr. De Palma’s mastery of them doesn’t constitute nostalgia so much as a call to arms. There hasn’t been his kind of casual sex in movies for almost a decade. Kate’s moaning in the back of that cab leads only to bad news. But who cares? Things are so chaste now that I’ll even have what she’s having.


