


Times Insider shares historic insights from The New York Times.

Journalists pretty much never agree with one another on anything — especially what constitutes prizeworthy news. But few would have denied The New York Times a Pulitzer Prize for printing the Pentagon Papers.

Except the trustees of Columbia University. And they had the power to do so.

In 1971, The Times started to publish a series about a secret history of United States involvement in Indochina, prepared by the Pentagon. It laid bare the steps by which America’s presence had escalated under four presidents into the Vietnam War. The Times’s presentation, written by a team of reporters led by Neil Sheehan, included substantial excerpts from the documents.

The history ended in 1968, before Richard M. Nixon had become president. Still, it was a profound embarrassment to the government. In the name of national security, the Nixon administration tried to stop The Times and The Washington Post, which had begun to publish its own copy of the study, from printing further installments. The Justice Department was granted a temporary restraining order in federal court.

The case came quickly before the Supreme Court, which ruled 6-to-3 that the government had failed to justify its attempt, through prior restraint, to suppress constitutionally protected expression. Both newspapers resumed their series.

Next spring, the Pulitzer’s public service jury unanimously recommended a gold medal for The Times and Mr. Sheehan, for “the remarkable journalistic feat which has come to be known as the Pentagon Papers.” At the next step in the process, an advisory board agreed unanimously. However, because gold medals are given to newspapers, not individuals, Mr. Sheehan was effectively eliminated from consideration.

The recommendations went next to the trustees of Columbia University, who administer the prizes. By this time, questions were being raised as to whether Columbia ought to grant awards to The Times and another nominee, the investigative columnist Jack Anderson, for reporting based on secret government documents.

This was such a charged question that the trustees convened a special Sunday meeting just to take it up. Two board members recused themselves: Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the publisher of The Times, and Judge Frederick van Pelt Bryan of federal court.

“From 8 to 11:15 p.m., they argued the case for and against the two major recommended awards and twice voted them down,” John Hohenberg wrote in “The Pulitzer Prizes: A History of the Awards in Books, Drama, Music and Journalism, Based on the Private Files Over Six Decades.”

William J. McGill, the president of Columbia, was put in an excruciating spot.

Two months earlier, he had assured Pulitzer jurors that “he would support the decisions upon which they and the advisory board agreed and see that they were enacted by the trustees,” Mr. Hohenberg wrote.

And now the trustees were balking at giving a Pulitzer for one of the most important newspaper stories of the latter 20th century.

Persuaded by Dr. McGill to reconsider, the trustees agreed to permit the awarding of Pulitzer Prizes to The Times and Mr. Anderson with this distancing language:

No one had to ask who those certain recipients were.

Three years later, the Columbia trustees got out of the prize-judging business.

Today, our 1972 award enjoys pride of place in the Pulitzer Prize gallery on the 15th floor of The Times’s headquarters.

We take it for granted that a story whose publication was halted by the White House and upheld by the Supreme Court would naturally have won.

Few of us know it was such a close call.


