


Sheldon Silver, the former State Assembly speaker, offered an emotional apology to the judge who will sentence him next month, saying in a letter filed on Wednesday that he had “failed the people of New York.”

“What I have done,” he wrote, “has hurt the Assembly, and New York, and my constituents terribly, and I regret that more than I can possibly express.”

Mr. Silver’s expression of contrition came the same day that federal prosecutors filed court papers suggesting that he be sentenced to more than 14 years in prison for his conviction on corruption charges.

The government did not propose a specific sentence, but asked for a prison term “substantially in excess” of the 10 years that the court’s probation office had recommended for Mr. Silver. Prosecutors also said the sentence should be “greater than any sentence imposed on other New York State legislators convicted of public corruption offenses.”

The longest such sentence in recent years appears to be the one imposed on William F. Boyland Jr., a former assemblyman, who was convicted in a bribery case in Federal District Court in Brooklyn and was sentenced last year to 14 years in prison.

Mr. Silver is scheduled to be sentenced on May 3 in Federal District Court in Manhattan. In a short letter to the judge, Valerie E. Caproni, he said he had been advised by his lawyers not to comment on the facts of the case or on the verdict, given a possible appeal, but that he wanted to apologize. “I failed the people of New York,” he wrote. “There is no question about it. Other than my family, serving my constituents was the most important thing to me.”

Mr. Silver, in what appeared to be his first substantive public comment on the case since his conviction, said that because of his actions, New York’s “ethics rules were and continue to be analyzed, evaluated and criticized everywhere.”

He said he had worked for years to make sure the Assembly and its members were respected as a legislative body. “Because of me, the government has been ridiculed,” he wrote. “I let my peers down, I let the people of the state down, and I let down my constituents — the people of Lower Manhattan that I live among and fought for. They deserve better.”

In Mr. Silver’s case, the federal sentencing guidelines, which are only advisory, suggest a sentence between roughly 22 and 27 years, prosecutors said in a memorandum filed with the judge. While the government said a sentence in that range “would not be unreasonable or unjust,” it did not specifically request one.

Any sentence surpassing Mr. Boyland’s 14 years would mean that Mr. Silver, 72, might well spend the rest of his life in prison. The government also asked that he forfeit more than $5 million in proceeds from his crimes and be fined at least $1 million more.

“The sentence imposed on Silver should reflect the unprecedented magnitude, duration and scope of his abuse of power,” prosecutors in the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, wrote to the judge.

While Mr. Silver’s lawyers, in their own sentencing memo, did not specify a term in years, they suggested that a long one was unnecessary, and that Mr. Silver should be allowed to “continue to employ his unique talents to benefit others.”

“A sentence that incorporates extensive community service and little — if any — incarceration could do that,” they said.

Mr. Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, was one of the most powerful politicians in state government until he was forced to step down as speaker after his arrest last year. He was convicted after a five-week trial of all seven counts against him, including honest services fraud, extortion and money laundering; six of the seven counts carry maximum prison terms of 20 years apiece.

The government showed that Mr. Silver had obtained nearly $4 million in illegal payments in return for taking official actions that benefited a cancer expert at Columbia University and two real estate developers in New York.

Mr. Bharara’s office also cited evidence beyond the crimes for which Mr. Silver had been convicted, like allegations that he misused his office “for personal benefit,” as prosecutors put it, to help two women with whom he had extramarital relationships. That evidence was cited in documents unsealed by the judge last week.

Mr. Silver forfeited his seat upon his conviction. In a special election on Tuesday for the seat he formerly held, Alice Cancel, a Democrat, defeated Yuh-Line Niou, a Working Families Party candidate. The seat will be up for election again in November.


