


At one time, military-style assault rifles like the ones used at a nightclub in Orlando, Fla., and in other mass shootings represented a relatively small segment of sales for gun manufacturers.

But in recent decades, such guns serve as one of the two financial pillars of the firearms industry, along with smaller handguns that are designed to be concealed, which have been the biggest driver of sales.

Together, the popularity of the assault rifles and small handguns highlight how the industry has changed in recent decades, as people have increasingly turned to guns for self-defense and less for hunting.

“The younger generations have fewer hunters,” said Thomas W. Smith, the director of the General Social Survey, an annual survey conducted by researchers at the University of Chicago. “Hunting is a traditional activity, and one that is declining in popularity.”

Gun makers do not break out weapon sales other than in broad categories in which firearms like traditional hunting rifles are lumped in with assault rifles. When contacted, Smith & Wesson would not provide additional information, while Sturm Ruger did not respond to messages seeking comment. And an industry trade group, the National Shooting Sports Foundation, did not respond to emails or phone calls.

Nonetheless, manufacturers, in presentations to analysts and investors, have acknowledged the central role that assault rifles and concealed handguns play in their financial health. They also often point out that sales frequently rise after mass shootings like the attacks over the last year in Paris, San Bernardino, Calif., and Orlando.

“This spike in demand was strongly correlated to the tragic, terrorist events in Paris and San Bernardino,” Michael O. Fifer, the chief executive of Sturm Ruger, a major firearms maker, wrote in a letter to investors in May. “Demand for firearms for self-defense and concealed carry increased dramatically.”

The popularity of handguns and assault weapons, experts say, reflects a fundamental shift over recent decades in who in America is buying guns and their reason for doing so.

Although about 50 percent of homes in the United States reported owning a firearm in the 1970s, that number by 2014 had fallen to 31 percent, according to the General Social Survey.

Significantly for gun makers, the number of Americans who identified themselves as hunters fell sharply during that same period. While some 32 percent of survey respondents said in the late 1970s that they or their spouse hunted, that number had plummeted to 15.5 percent by 2014.

The number of people who cite self-protection as the reason for owning a firearm has grown, said Mr. Smith, the social survey’s director.

There was a significant market for assault-style rifles before Congress passed legislation in 1994 that sought to ban their sales, said David Kopel, the research director of the Independence Institute, a group in Denver that supports gun owners’ rights. But because the law tried to ban guns based on certain characteristics, firearms makers simply reconfigured their weapons so that they did not run afoul of the law.

Trying to make the guns illegal may also have stoked consumer interest in them, Mr. Kopel added. “You tell someone they can’t own something and they are going to buy it,” he said.

In more recent years, sales of both categories of weapons have benefited from legislative changes. The federal assault rifle ban expired in 2004, and many states have passed laws allowing residents to carry concealed guns.

Some companies jumped into the assault rifle business only after the ban expired. Smith & Wesson, for example — a company known for decades for revolvers — started selling the weapons two years later, in 2006.

Now, Smith & Wesson says it is a market leader in AR-15-type rifles, offering 44 models. Along with Sturm Ruger, its principal competitors include, among others, Remington’s Bushmaster and Sig Sauer, the manufacturer of the MCX, the military-style weapon used in the Orlando shooting.

Smith & Wesson does not break down how many AR-type weapons it sells, said Elizabeth Sharp, the company’s vice president for investor relations. Instead, when it reported results last Thursday for its most recent fiscal year ending April 30, it said only that rifles of all types represented 17.7 percent of its $722.9 million in total sales.

Overall rifle sales, the company said, represented a 31 percent increase from its previous fiscal year. In the annual report last week, Smith & Wesson said the results reflected “increased demand” for guns since late last year.

Christopher Krueger, a gun industry analyst at Lake Street Capital Markets in Minneapolis, said that an even bigger area of sales for gun makers like Smith & Wesson was small, semiautomatic handguns that can be carried concealed — weapons that appeal to consumers concerned about self-protection.

Josh Sugarmann, executive director of the Violence Policy Center, a group in Washington that advocates tougher gun control laws, agreed. “Assault weapons and high-capacity concealed carry handguns are the bread and butter of today’s gun industry,” he said.

Firearms producers, meanwhile, have tried in recent decades to widen the appeal of guns to another group of buyers: women. The National Shooting Sports Foundation features a graphic on its website titled “Girl Power,” which says that the number of women who own guns, hunt and target shoot has increased significantly in recent years.

But Mr. Smith, the General Social Survey director, said that while the firearms industry, as far back as the 1980s, began promoting the idea of increased gun ownership by women, the data gathered by his group have yet to support such claims. Instead, the percentage of American woman who say they own a gun has remained relatively stable at about 10 percent.

“You see a lot of anecdotes that more women are buying guns,” Mr. Smith said, “but it does not translate into statistics.”


