


REMEMBER the late 1990s, when hulking sport utility vehicles began appearing in large numbers on our roads? Many buyers have now abandoned low-slung Accords, Camrys and Malibus to ride high in S.U.V.s, which have become the best-selling auto segment in the United States.

But not everyone wants a monster truck. Compact unibody S.U.V.s, known as crossovers, certainly have advantages, especially in tight urban spaces. Take BMW’s second-generation X1, which comes to this party well dressed. It’s just one model in a crowded field that includes the Audi Q3, Infiniti QX50, Lexus NX, Lincoln MKC and Mercedes GLA.

The new X1 looks less like a hatchback and more like an off-roader now. It even tackles moderately tough terrain (I’ve done it). But the big news is not its Ranger Rick design. BMW, revered for its rear-wheel-drive dynamics, has built the X1 on front-wheel-drive architecture. Sorry, I should have asked the children to leave the room.

This is not the big deal some would make it out to be. Remember, Mini (largely front-drive) is a BMW company. The smallest X Series rides on the same architecture as the Mini Clubman, but BMW brings only all-wheel-drive X1s to our terrain.

As expected for a BMW, the diminutive X drives well. This is a fun machine that is nicely buttoned down, but remember, it’s a crossover. Although it’s sporty in the curves, don’t expect a sports car. The nimble size makes it a good urban attack vehicle, far better than a Chevrolet Suburban.

Powered by a 2-liter, 4-cylinder engine with a twin-scroll turbocharger providing 228 horsepower and 258 pound-feet of torque early in the rev range, there’s a touch of lag off the line. It goes from 0 to 60 miles an hour in 6.3 seconds, according to BMW. Drive modes range from environmental Eco to pavement-loving Sport. The 8-speed automatic does its job seamlessly. “Fast and Furious” enthusiasts should know there is no other powertrain available.

The government-rated average of 26 miles per gallon makes the X1 the fuel-efficiency champ in its segment. Like most in the class, the BMW prefers premium gas.

Serious material and lighting upgrades in the cabin give it the BMW look. And it has options to match. The X1’s base price is $35,795. A backup camera package goes for $1,150. Keyless ignition is part of a $3,200 grouping that provides a big glass roof and adaptive LED headlights. At $45,370 as tested, it’s the way many people will want the car equipped. Personally, I would add supportive sport seats (a $2,450 package) and adaptive cruise control ($1,000). Perhaps a second job is in order.

Back-seat accommodations will make two adults feel welcome; three, not so much. The cushions are a tad flat, and heaters are not available. For a small rig, the X1’s cargo hold is large and the seat backs split 40-20-40. Sliding rear seats and remote seat-back releases are optional.

Our fascination with crossovers is curious considering that Americans largely eschew station wagons and hatchbacks (I’ll argue that S.U.V.s are pumped-up variations of those.) The X1’s flexible packaging, nimbleness, refinement and compact form shine brightly in congested cities. If only the price were more in line with the size.


