


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Dan Levin, a Times reporter, describes a recent road trip along the Highway of Tears.

The skies over northern British Columbia were gray and ominous as I began a two-day road trip to report on the scores of indigenous women who have gone missing or been murdered along a desolate stretch of highway. The atmosphere seemed fitting for a story that felt ripped from a gritty murder mystery novel, except this was true crime and real grief.

I’ve witnessed tough scenes before in my career. A few years ago, for example, I watched a young Burmese jade miner inject heroin into his arm, the fix he needed before he could tell me about his addiction.

But writing articles about serial killers and interviewing relatives of women who suffered violent deaths leaves a darker, more chilling mark on the psyche, despite the emotional armor you develop as a reporter.

In March, I traveled to northern Canada to write about the “Highway of Tears,” the name locals have given a 450-mile stretch of Highway 16 that has been stalked by tragedy. I knew it would be intense, but the experience became more personal than I expected. Along with Ruth Fremson, a Times photographer, I was joined on the journey by Brenda Wilson, whose sister Ramona was one of the victims, and who now works as a community activist. One Saturday night in June 1994, Ramona left her home in the town of Smithers to attend a dance several miles away in a community further up on Highway 16. She was last seen walking toward Main Street. Her remains were found in April 1995, buried in a shallow grave.

Nobody knows who killed Ramona. Well, that’s not entirely true. The killer knows. And maybe others, too. A few months after she went missing, an anonymous caller called Ramona’s mother on her home phone to say that the 16-year-old girl’s body was by the Smithers airport. The police dismissed the call as a prank, the mother, Matilda, told me.

Over 20 years later, her family is still reeling from the anguish and anger that has fermented over their lost loved one. I could hear it in Brenda’s voice as she rode in our rented Jeep past the thick forests, which may hide other bodies. Matilda was visibly shaken as she recounted the desperate days, weeks and months after her daughter’s disappearance.

But there was also fear. Despite the breathtaking vistas of snow-capped mountains and tranquil lakes, people who live in the region, especially the indigenous residents, are often wary and suspicious of outsiders, an emotion I felt as I scanned passing cars and trucks carrying heavy mining equipment.

There was this question too: Can vast open spaces be haunted? Because as much as this was an account of crime, it was also a ghost story.

Murder, at least in this part of the world, is an equal opportunist. White women, and both white and indigenous men, for that matter, have also gone missing or turned up dead in the remote, wild expanses of northern British Columbia. Just about everywhere we went along the highway, full-color missing posters were affixed to posts and glued to the sides of buildings, each with the smiling portrait of Madison Scott, a strawberry-blonde woman of 20 who vanished from a campsite near the highway in 2011 and has never been found.

Her face adorns a weatherworn flier stapled next to the front door of a highway trading post in the village of Burns Lake. Beside it, another flier warned hitchhikers: “don’t end up another face in the newspaper cuz there are serial killer(s) on this road.”

As a reporter, I hope that my articles will have a positive impact on the wider world. But the Highway of Tears thrums with a sense of powerlessness. So many women and girls just gone, plucked out of existence, their lives reduced to family photos and names on cold cases, stained with sorrow.

Canada can sometimes feel like a more enlightened, polite version of the United States. Traveling to some of the country’s indigenous communities swiftly disabused me of that notion. As we were driving along Highway 16 through Vanderhoof, a mill town where Madison Scott grew up, we came upon a hitchhiker named Mark William. He was standing beside an abandoned gas station, thumb out in the familiar, desperate pose of someone with places to be but no way to get there. Mr. William, an unemployed 52-year-old, gladly accepted a ride, and as he settled into the back seat, the acrid stench of alcohol filled the car. He had been drinking with a relative in town, and had to get home to the Saik’uz First Nation reserve, nine miles away. The drive took about 30 minutes, past vast fields, thick woods and another poster seeking tips on Madison Scott. Walking, it would have taken three hours.

Though British Columbia is a lucrative source of lumber, gold and diamonds, few of the profits have trickled down to aboriginal residents. The Saik’uz reserve, like many aboriginal settlements off Highway 16, was a dispiriting portrait of official neglect. As we drove through it, Mr. William pointed out numerous empty buildings and homes, made uninhabitable by toxic black mold. Dogs scampered along dirt roads, past dilapidated houses and junked cars rusting on wild, unkempt lawns. Many residents are unemployed. The only form of public transportation is a shuttle bus that had shut down, before the snows had even melted, until next winter.

We dropped Mr. William off at his house, a ramshackle gray structure adorned with satellite dishes and a pile of firewood. The plywood front steps sagged with rot. As we drove away, back to the highway to continue our journey, the car was silent. I looked out the window at the wilderness, suddenly eerie, sinister even, and worried that Mr. William’s next ride could well be his last.


