


PARIS — The French government will seek a two-month extension of the state of emergency it declared after the attacks in and around Paris that left 130 people dead in November, Prime Minister Manuel Valls said on Wednesday.

The move, which is expected to get the required parliamentary approval, comes as France prepares for the European Championship soccer tournament and the Tour de France this summer.

The two high-profile, well-attended events will pose a serious security challenge as the government tries to guarantee safety amid the increasing threat posed by Islamist extremists.

The attacks in November included three suicide bombers who struck outside a soccer match at the Stade de France, a stadium in the northern Paris suburb of St.-Denis that will be the site of the final game of the soccer tournament.

Seven million people are expected to attend events related to the soccer tournament, either by attending the 51 matches that will be played in 10 stadiums or by watching the games at fan zones that can accommodate 10,000 to 100,000.

Mr. Valls, speaking on the radio network France Info, said the government had to “ensure full security” at stadiums and fan zones in cities across the country for the European Championship, which will run from June 10 to July 10.

UEFA, the governing body for European soccer, is expected to hire 10,000 private agents to help with security inside and outside the stadiums. They will be deployed in addition to a sizable police presence.

The fan zones have prompted concerns about security, which were heightened after the attacks in Brussels last month in which 32 people were killed.

A joint steering committee that includes representatives from UEFA, the French soccer federation, the government and host cities approved security measures on March 5 for the fan zones that include searches for explosives, pat downs for people attending the events, metal detectors at entrances and the use of video surveillance.

The state of emergency, which has already been extended twice, was scheduled to end on May 26. It expands the powers of the French authorities, allowing them to carry out police raids and put people under house arrest without the prior authorization of a judge.

The office of President François Hollande said in a statement after a weekly cabinet meeting on Wednesday that the police had conducted 3,549 raids since the November attacks, and that 69 people were still under house arrest.

The security forces have been on red alert since the attacks in and around Paris, with large-scale exercises to test their response to terrorist attacks.

A drill held on March 17 simulated a chemical attack among a crowd of 1,200 soccer fans in an open-air area. On Tuesday, three elite police units were involved in a simulated attack inside one of Paris’s railway stations.

In Brussels, a 23-year-old Swede accused of involvement in the bombing at the Maelbeek subway station, has also been charged in connection with the Paris attacks, Belgian media reported on Tuesday, citing prosecutors.

A Flemish television station, VRT, said that the fingerprints of the man — Osama Krayem, also known as Naim al-Ahmed — were found at several hide-outs used in preparation for the attacks. Claude Moniquet, a former French intelligence officer who lives in Belgium, was quoted as saying that Mr. Krayem had been identified in security-camera footage talking to the second subway bomber, Khalid el-Bakraoui, moments before the bomb went off.

A lawyer for Mr. Krayem, Vincent Lurquin, said last week that his client “turned back” and gave up his suicide mission.


