


MINNEAPOLIS — Joe Mauer’s engaging manner has not changed since ESPN the Magazine named him the most fan-friendly athlete in the United States in 2010.

Before batting practice on Saturday, Mauer, the Minnesota Twins’ first baseman, had trouble putting in his contact lenses. As he returned to his locker to grab another bottle of solution, he smiled and joked wryly about it.

“I’m already 0 for 2,” he said.

Things did not go much better for Mauer, a three-time American League batting champion, once the game began. Donning sunglasses to counter the afternoon glare, Mauer went 0 for 4 with a season-high three strikeouts as his second 28-game streak of reaching base this season ended. After going 0 for 3 against the Yankees on Sunday, his average fell to .276, an improvement from last year but still below his .311 career mark.

The Twins are in the midst of their worst season in decades, and the frustration weighs on Mauer, the hometown guy from nearby St. Paul and the club’s highest-paid player. More than two years after a concussion forced him to give up catching, where he had been a six-time All-Star and the 2009 American League most valuable player, his recovery from lingering vision issues continues. Slowly.

Last winter, Mauer told The St. Paul Pioneer Press that since sustaining the concussion — brought on by two jarring foul tips to the mask against the Mets in August 2013 — he occasionally had blurred vision that made it difficult to track pitches. Last season, Mauer hit a career-low .265, his second consecutive season below .300, with a career-high 112 strikeouts.

Mauer, 33, said this weekend that he felt healthier and was seeing the ball better than he had in years. The dizziness he sometimes experienced in off-season workouts subsided last winter. His strikeouts are down, his walks are up, and according to the website FanGraphs, he is hitting more line drives than any season in his career.

He started strong with a .321 batting average in April, but then fell off. Mauer, a left-handed batter, has not figured out how to beat shifts that position the shortstop toward the middle and outfielders around to left, taking away his favorite places to hit the ball. On Sunday, Yankees shortstop Didi Gregorius played him almost directly behind second base.

Still, Mauer’s .379 on-base percentage is on pace to be his best since he stopped catching, and his eight intentional walks lead the A.L. He has seven home runs and 26 R.B.I.

“He’s more like himself, for sure,” Twins General Manager Terry Ryan said. “He’s got all those streaks of being on base. He’s taking good at-bats. He’s certainly getting on at a frequent rate. He’s got seven home runs. And he’s playing a Gold Glove first base. I swear to God, that goes underrated with him. He can really play first.”

Twins second baseman Brian Dozier said: “What impresses me with what Joe’s doing this year is the juice. It’s coming off his bat really well to left field. Even his outs are battled at-bats and hard-hit outs. That’s when you know he’s locked in.”

But Ryan, Manager Paul Molitor and others in the organization question whether Mauer will ever match his old production, which put him on a track for the Hall of Fame. When Molitor, a Hall of Famer with more than 3,000 hits who graduated from the same high school as Mauer, was asked if Mauer might crack the A.L. top 10 in batting again, he hedged.

“That’s hard to say,” Molitor said. “That’s pretty speculative. I think Joe just kind of grinds it out every day. Same guy. Doesn’t change. He can get hot, like you saw the first month when he hit .350. I’m sure that’s still in there.”

No American League catcher had won multiple batting titles until Mauer led the league three times in four seasons from 2006 to 2009. His M.V.P. season of 2009 ranks among the best ever by a catcher. He missed spring training and the first month of the season with back problems, homered on his first swing in his first game, then went on to finish with 28 homers, 96 R.B.I. and a .365 average and led the Twins to the postseason.

The eight-year, $184 million contract extension Mauer signed the next spring, the richest ever for a catcher, has made Mauer an easy target for fans looking for someone to blame for the club’s collapse since its last division title in 2010.

It is more complicated than that, though. Mauer and Justin Morneau, his former roommate, were expected to anchor the middle of the Twins’ lineup for years. But Morneau, the 2006 American League M.V.P., struggled for years after sustaining a concussion in July 2010 in a basepath collision. The Twins traded Morneau in 2013; he recently signed a minor-league deal with the Chicago White Sox.

Other injuries, bad pitching, ill-advised trades and the slow development of prospects have contributed to one big mess. The 20-48 Twins began play Sunday with the worst record in baseball. On Saturday, they blew a 4-0 seventh-inning lead to the Yankees in a 7-6 loss.

“It’s been a very frustrating year,” Mauer said.

Mauer and Morneau have remained close. When the duo was in its prime, a local columnist called the two the M&M Boys, borrowing the combined nickname of Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris with the 1960s Yankees. With a little better luck, Mauer and Morneau might still be together, and the Twins might not be so bad.

“We can play the what-if games all the time,” Mauer said. “I try not to do that. We’ve both been through a lot. Obviously you can’t control what happened to us. All you can control is how you recover from it.”

Morneau won a National League batting title with Colorado in 2014. That gives Mauer hope that perhaps another remains for him, but he said that was not his main focus.

“I’ve never been too concerned about those individual things,” he said. “I’m trying to get us back to winning and where we should be. But I don’t see why I can’t be successful.”


