


New York City is crisscrossed with rivers and bounded by the sea, facts easily forgotten when fighting the swift human currents of the city streets. But the owners of a marina that opened on Sunday off the banks of Brooklyn Heights in Brooklyn Bridge Park are aiming to remind New Yorkers of the water that plies this place, and how to enjoy it.

“You’re on an island, and nobody thinks about the water except as something you need to get across, or over, or avoid somehow,” said Estelle Lau, the deputy chief executive officer of the marina at Pier 5, where Joralemon Street dead ends at the East River.

The marina, called ONE°15 Brooklyn — a reference to the coordinates of a marina over 9,500 miles away, in Singapore, where the majority partner of the $27 million project is based — will be a private dock with 100 slips for skiffs, yachts and the occasional hulking lightship. It will also devote a portion of its proceeds to community groups that will use the marina for education programs.

While there are marinas elsewhere in the city, including in Brooklyn and Queens and along the West Side of Manhattan, the marina’s owners felt this one would be a new asset.

The idea for the marina did not come to Tim O’Brien, the general manager and a partner in the project, as much as it never left him. Mr. O’Brien, 37, grew up summering in Cape Cod in Massachusetts, teaching sailing at a marina where dues were little more than $10. When he moved to New York over a decade ago, he managed a marina in Lower Manhattan, until he took a “grown-up” job, he said, in private wealth management. But he spent his free time trying to figure out how to replicate the marina of his youth in New York.

“You go on a boat, and immediately step into a different universe,” he said. “You still have that same feeling of being transported.”

In 2013, when Brooklyn Bridge Park Development Corporation was seeking proposals for what to do with the site at Pier 5, Mr. O’Brien saw an opportunity to realize his dream. Soon afterward he quit his job to work on the marina full time. Last week, as the first ship, a yacht named Topaz, docked in Brooklyn Bridge Park, he began to cry, he said. “This is the project of a lifetime,” he said.

On Sunday, shiny white sailboats belonging to the marina’s sail club were nestled in slips. The site includes a high-tech buffer system manufactured in Finland that was designed to withstand brutal waves from hurricanes and wakes from ferries that chop up the East River.

A community dock, where kayak lessons and other services will be offered to the public, is yet to be completed. The programs will be funded by the marina, which will tithe 2 percent of its berthing revenue — boat-parking, in landlubber speak — to a nonprofit created in conjunction with the marina.

“I want to make sure that people know that this is not just another thing that’s an amenity for the rich,” Mr. O’Brien said.

But slip rentals are far from the low-priced marina of Mr. O’Brien’s youth. Boat slips start at about $325 per foot and go up to $972 a foot for vessels over 150 feet. Sail club memberships range from $1,000 a season to about $3,000.

During its first weekend the marina was largely empty, but ships were already calling. The cherry red Nantucket Lightship bobbed in the East River. The decommissioned floating lighthouse, owned by Kristen and William B. Golden, usually makes berth in Newport, R.I., but they sailed it to New York and took it Brooklyn to show it off.

“This marina is a game changer for New York City,” Mr. Golden, 67, a former lobsterman and Massachusetts state senator, said.


