


LONDON — Atmosphere is where it’s at on the London stage these days, which is another way of saying that it’s difficult to imagine Lorraine Hansberry’s play “Les Blancs” divorced from the spine-tingling production now at the Olivier auditorium at the National Theater.

Unfinished at the time of its author’s death from cancer in 1965 at age 34, “Les Blancs” remains mightily ambitious in its attempt to refract colonialism, revolution and misrule through life in and around a fragile-looking mission hospital in an unnamed African country.

But well before a single word has been spoken, the South African director Yael Farber conjures up a sequence that transports the audience directly into the otherness of the piece. To one side of the stage, a trio of singers set a compellingly eerie mood, while a sinuous figure billed only as The Woman (Sheila Atim) threads her way through the action — a shape-shifting emblem, perhaps, of Africa itself.

As the white inhabitants of this outpost enter through the auditorium to get into position for the opening scene, the tableau speaks volumes about the tenuous rapport between cultures, or between the outsiders and the indigenous people of a community that, we eventually realize, is imploding from within. The countdown to conflagration has begun.

Ms. Farber made her London name two summers ago with a (very long) Old Vic production of “The Crucible,” but “Les Blancs” represents the kind of summary achievement one can only imagine happening at a playhouse like the National.

The building’s entire resources — from the dramaturgical department through to Adam Cork’s ravishing soundscape and a stage crew there to ensure that Soutra Gilmour’s set revolves — work in concert to remind us that Hansberry was not just a one-play wonder immortalized for having written “A Raisin in the Sun.”

The writing itself in “Les Blancs” is compelling, moment by moment, but it becomes clear just how thesis-mongering the play might seem in lesser hands. There is an American photographer on hand (the English actor Elliot Cowan) to act as our guide to this alternately brave and brutal new world.

“I really do care about the place,” he insists rather clunkily midway through, and when others urge him later on to “write the truth,” it sounds a bit like Hansberry’s memo to herself to do justice to a continent worlds apart from her own upbringing in Chicago.

The play is on more fertile ground in its depiction of how the mission dwellers and the Africans coexist — at least up until a cataclysmic ending that places Ms. Atim tellingly at center stage.

Siân Phillips, the veteran British actress who turns 83 next month, has a surpassingly moving moment near the end in which she recalls how her first glimpse of Africa at age 28 prompted her to make this foreign land the place where she would spend her life.

Among the younger generation, the ever-lovely Anna Madeley turns the role of a seemingly saintly expatriate surgeon alive to “the terror” in her midst into something quietly complex.

Notably less humane, though every bit as vivid, is the English major whom Clive Francis presents as a scarily compelling psychopath, his every disclaimer (“I’m not a racist”) followed by an action to suggest the opposite.

And in the play’s defining role of the itinerant Tshembe, who has returned home following his father’s death to greet what he says are “new times,” Danny Sapani deftly navigates this rhetoric-heavy play to evoke the difficulties of straddling competing impulses toward quietude and peace on the one hand and arms-taking and action on the other.

Equal measures Hamlet and Odysseus, Tshembe stands at the anxious heart of a beautiful and haunting production in which a rarely seen slice of the American repertoire crosses the decades to speak to our globe’s ever-expanding tribalism.

Across town at the Royal Court Theater, the director Vicky Featherstone has achieved an unusual double with two simultaneous plays at that address — and why not, since she is the Court’s artistic director?

Her main stage entry, “X,” is a puzzle play from the fast-rising young writer Alistair McDowall set — wait for it — on a space station on Pluto, the not-quite-planet that figures infrequently on stage or screen. (“The Martian” this is not.)

Within the gray confines of Merle Hensel’s angled set, a British crew face the limbo into which they have landed with increasing frustration and internecine sniping, not least from the team leader Gilda, whom Jessica Raine plays with an initially relentless bark that threatens to grate.

Stick with it, and you may be as surprised as the characters surely are by the jagged shifts of a fractured plot that rewrites itself as it goes along, so much so that the second act demands a rethinking of virtually every detail of the first, including the specifics of Gilda’s circumstances.

The title itself acquires multiple meanings, whether as an affectionate shorthand for kisses, a mathematical symbol or simply a signifier of the unknowable.

Ms. Featherstone navigates the play’s alien — make that “Alien,” given the implicit nods in the direction of Ridley Scott’s film — terrain with impressive ease. What is more, in an age when many a new play ties itself into a neat bow at the end, “X” has the opposite and galvanic effect of leaving spectators to debate what on earth (or Pluto) they have just seen.

In many ways the less said the better about Ms. Featherstone’s concurrent entry in the Court’s studio-sized upstairs theater, the blistering “Cyprus Avenue” from the Belfast-born writer David Ireland, a co-production with Dublin’s Abbey Theater, where it premiered in February.

As genuinely shocking a play as I’ve come across in many a year, “Cyprus Avenue” takes its title from a middle-class Belfast street that finds room for the fearsome bigotry of the central character of Eric (Stephen Rea), an ordinary-seeming man whose actions by play’s end are extraordinarily gasp-inducing.

Don’t worry if you’re not up on the language of Fenians and Loyalists that connects this play to the “troubles” in which Mr. Ireland’s take-no-prisoners writing is steeped, though the action takes place in the present.

It is clear within minutes that Eric is seriously mentally adrift, as the playwright folds bitterly dark humor into the gatheringly forbidding mix: an exchange between Eric and a leather-jacketed paramilitary by the name of Slim (the priceless Chris Corrigan) surpasses even the Court alumnus Martin McDonagh in its reckless comic bravura.

There is nothing remotely funny, though, about the concluding passages of a play unafraid — as Mr. McDonagh has done — to posit terrorism itself as a form of psychosis. And though the astonishing Mr. Rea, in one of the defining performances of his career, is required to laugh softly as the lights fade, the abiding chill cast by the play even now is hard to shake.

Les Blancs. Directed by Yael Farber. National Theater-Olivier. Through June 2.

X. Directed by Vicky Featherstone. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Downstairs. Through May 7.

Cyprus Avenue. Directed by Vicky Featherstone. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Upstairs. Through May 7.


