


BEIJING — Fourteen films on subjects ranging from life in Tibet to a drug-fueled romance have been chosen to compete for the main Golden Goblet award at this year’s Shanghai International Film Festival.

Among the films announced on Thursday are Werner Herzog’s “Salt and Fire,” starring Veronica Ferres, Michael Shannon and Gael García Bernal, about a scientist who teams up with a corporation after a volcano disaster in South America, which is a world premiere; and Bruce Beresford’s “Mr. Church,” a coming-of-age drama starring Eddie Murphy.

The 19th edition of the festival, China’s most prominent international film event, will run June 11-19. A screening of “Cold War II,” the sequel to the Hong Kong cop thriller “Cold War” (2012), starring Chow Yun-fat, Tony Leung Ka-fai and Aaron Kwok, will kick off the festivities.

The competition for the Golden Goblet, the festival’s top award, includes three films by Chinese directors: Liu Jie’s “De Lan” and Zhang Yang’s “Soul on a String,” both set in Tibet, as well as Cao Baoping’s “Coke and Bull.” Other films from Asia include the Filipino film “Hamog,” directed by Ralston Jover, about street children in Manila, and the Japanese film “The Projects,” directed by Junji Sakamoto, about an elderly couple living in a danchi, or public housing complex.

“In Embryo,” directorial debut of the Danish Hollywood actor Ulrich Thomsen (“The Celebration, ” from 1998), will have its world premiere at the festival. The film is a gritty love story about a drug dealer, played by Ross McCall.

Other films in the main competition include “Flowers of Evil” by the Finnish director Antti Jokinen, “Forest, 4 a.m.” by the Polish director Jan Jakub Kolski, “Hear the Silence” by the German director Ed Ehrenberg, “Hanna’s Sleeping Dogs” by the Austrian director Andreas Gruber, “See You in Texas” by the Italian director Vito Palmieri, and “Sound and Fury” by the Iranian director Hooman Seyadi.

The jury will be led by the Serbian director Emir Kusturica.

The finalists for the documentary competition include Hogir Hirori’s “The Girl Who Saved My Life,” about the Kurdish director’s return to his homeland after the rise of the Islamic State, and Tomer Heymann’s “Mr. Gaga” which tells the story of Ohad Naharin, the Israeli choreographer and artistic director of the Batsheva Dance Company in Tel Aviv.


