


BOULDER, Colo. — Sitora Yusufiy thought she was done with her ex-husband, Omar Mateen.

After a marriage in which she said he beat her, confiscated her paychecks and isolated her in their Florida home, Ms. Yusufiy said she fled in 2009 with the help of her parents. The last she remembers of Mr. Mateen is that he grabbed her arm to stop her from getting into the car and leaving him forever.

“He tried to reach in his back pocket, I don’t know if he had a gun with him, but my mother felt that and she screamed out,” Ms. Yusufiy said at an interview at the home where she lives with her fiancé, here in the steep green hillsides above Boulder. “That was the last time I saw him.”

Early Sunday morning, his presence ripped back into her life when Ms. Yusufiy’s mother called her to say that the man she had met through Myspace in 2008 and quickly married had committed the deadliest mass shooting in United States history.

“I had let that chapter of my life go a long time ago,” she said. “It’s somebody that hurt me and traumatized me.”

She spent part of Sunday being interviewed by F.B.I. agents, who were inside the home for about an hour. Although officials said they had investigated Mr. Mateen in 2013 and 2014, Ms. Yusufiy said that Sunday was the first time she had been approached by law enforcement officials to talk about him.

She answered phone calls from her mother and watched as her online photographs and social-media profiles were scattered across the internet. As she sat to speak of her memories of Mr. Mateen, she lightly touched a tree-of-life necklace her brother had given her and held a bracelet from her mother that she wears for protection.

Ms. Yusufiy said she had immigrated to the United States from Uzbekistan in 2000, following her father, who had come a year earlier. She grew up in northern New Jersey and met Mr. Mateen around the time her parents started to talk to her about marrying.

“I had already started getting hints from my family — Oh, it’s time for you to get married, we want to set you up with somebody,” she said. She said she figured if she was to marry young, she would do it on her own terms: “I wanted to find somebody that I could relate to, and find him for myself.”

She said Mr. Mateen seemed nice at first. He joked around, had a decent job, aspired to become a police officer and respected his family, she said. He was an American but had roots in their shared culture, she said. After a few dates, she said their parents met to make formal marriage plans.

“I didn’t have any knowledge or feeling of his instability,” she said. “My parents actually did not feel good about it. But I guess I was in a stage of really wanting to make my own decisions and be independent. So I decided to go on with it anyway, and go to Florida and marry him.”

After about six weeks, she said she began to notice erratic behavior and a temper that would flare, sometimes without warning or provocation. She said he became verbally and physically abusive. He forbade her to call her parents, and he allowed her only to go to her job as a day care teacher. He made her hand over her paycheck.

“He was totally two different people sometimes, and would turn and abuse me, out of nowhere, when I was sleeping,” Ms. Yusufiy said.

She said that Mr. Mateen was religious, but that he had never expressed sympathies for terrorist organizations or radical Islamists. But he did make anti-gay comments when he was angry, she said.

“There were definitely moments when he’d express his intolerance toward homosexuals,” she said.

He kept a silver handgun in the house, and he went target shooting with friends. Ms. Yusufiy said that some of his friends were in law enforcement, and that he sometimes went shooting with them. He never threatened her with the gun, but its presence worried her.

In 2009, Ms. Yusufiy said her parents began to sense the depth of the trouble and flew to Florida to intervene. After her parents extricated her from the marriage, they flew back to New Jersey.

“I’m blessed to have the family that I do because they saved me from death,” she said.

Ms. Yusufiy said she had last heard from Mr. Mateen when he sent her a Facebook message about a year ago, casually trying to reconnect. She said she told him never to contact her again and blocked him.


