


HANOI, Vietnam — By the time President Obama arrives here Sunday night, all-day voting in tightly controlled elections for members of the rubber-stamp Parliament will have just finished.

In this Communist-ruled nation, the names that were not allowed to appear on the ballots tell more of a story than the 870 scrupulously vetted candidates permitted to compete for 500 seats.

Nearly two dozen activists registered to run as pro-democracy independent candidates this year. The government first allowed independent candidates to run in 2002, but this was the first year so many activists tried.

After enduring harassment and denunciations orchestrated by the Communist Party, all of them were forced out during a pre-selection process.

Among those who ran unsuccessful campaigns for office were Mai Khoi, 32, a popular singer-songwriter known as the Lady Gaga of Vietnam, and Nguyen Quang A, 69, a former member of the Communist Party, businessman and founder of the Civil Society Forum.

Even a trusted member of the governing elite, the former deputy head of state-controlled Vietnam National Television, Tran Dang Tuan, did not pass the vetting committees run by Communist Party stalwarts.

On paper, Vietnam’s Constitution allows any citizen to run as a candidate. But in reality, the country remains a one-party state, with people allowed to vote only for the candidates handpicked by the party. “We want to change the fake right to participate in the elections into a real right,” Mr. Quang A said.

Mr. Obama’s three-day visit also comes in the midst of mounting public anger over tons of dead fish that washed up on the shores of central Vietnam close to a newly opened steel plant. The police have quashed demonstrations in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City against the Taiwan-owned plant in the last month, and hundreds of protesters have been detained, organizers said.

Last Sunday, leaders of the protests in both cities were blocked from leaving their homes by security guards posted outside, and more than 300 police officers watched 10 protesters hold banners on a street in Hanoi before arresting them.

Vietnam remains one of the most repressive states in Asia, and while the Obama administration has called for the release of political prisoners and criticized the election process as “neither free, nor fair,” Washington is walking a delicate line.

The administration wants to coax Vietnam toward a stronger military relationship with the United States as both countries see a confluence of interests in keeping China at bay. But Vietnam’s new Communist Party hierarchy, in place for just a few months, seems more ideologically conservative and suspicious of American intentions.

Human Rights Watch has urged the United States and other Western countries to use their economic leverage to press for democratic overhauls. “Vietnam’s donors, who regularly call for free and fair elections in countries such as Burma and Cambodia, should publicly call for pluralistic elections in Vietnam and an end to one-party rule,” the group said.

Those activists who tried to participate in the nominating process faced a gantlet of procedures organized by a party group, the Fatherland Front, an independent journalist, Pham Doan Trang, wrote in a report. In all, there were 162 so-called independent candidates but only about two dozen were activists, and none made it onto the ballot, Ms. Trang said.

Almost all the people selected by the Front to participate in the vetting meetings were older, loyal party members, she said.

In Ms. Mai Khoi’s constituency, most of the party members involved in vetting were about 60, the singer wrote on her Facebook page. In the end, she was rejected, she said, because of her youth.

Some candidates also faced intimidation. A month before the party called the meeting in Mr. Quang A’s neighborhood to select the candidates, party propagandists made a video in which his neighbors were asked to denounce him. In the video, shown on a state-run website, he was called a reactionary aligned with foreign forces, he said.

A few days before the selection meeting, in March, he was detained for six hours at a police station, he said.

When he appeared at the meeting, called a “voters’ conference,” all 75 selectors were members of the Communist Party, veterans groups or the Fatherland Front, he said. “I thanked them for gathering, even though I didn’t agree with the process,” Mr. Quang A said.

Intimidation from the security forces frightened some of the independent candidates. When a Western ambassador asked some of the candidates to come to his residence, only Mr. Quang A, the most experienced, dared to turn up, a diplomat who arranged the invitation said.

The next election for the General Assembly is not for another five years. After she was rejected as a candidate, the police closed down a concert planned by Ms. Mai Khoi. She has told supporters she is not sure what she will do next.

But Mr. Quang A says he will continue to press forward in what he calls a “difficult but bright journey.” He is not depending on support from the United States, he said. “They have many interests here,” he said. “Political and human rights is just one.”


