


The brief nudity? “Nah, it’s not a problem.”

Shaving the head? The hair is “already gone.”

Nothing, the actress Elizabeth Lande said, was a barrier when auditioning to play a professor dying of cancer in the Pulitzer Prize-winning “Wit” currently at Playhouse on Park in West Hartford. “When you have the opportunity for a role like this,” she said, “it’s not much of a sacrifice.”

The moving and often funny play, by Margaret Edson, chronicles the thoughts and experiences of the imperial Vivian Bearing, an exacting scholar of John Donne’s poetry who, at 50, has Stage IV ovarian cancer. Before cancer she was a taskmaster, pushing her students into a deeper dissection of the text. Now, undergoing rounds of chemotherapy as part of a research project, she herself is the text, her symptoms dissected in unemotional protocols by doctors. And in the meantime, she’s dying.

The role has a lineage of strong women — Kathleen Chalfant, Emma Thompson — cast as Bearing, “a tough cookie,” as the Yale-trained, New York-based Ms. Lande described her by phone. But that wasn’t the role’s primary appeal, she said. “What you want is to play these amazing human beings, more amazing than you are.”

Sean Harris, an artistic director at Playhouse on Park, said the character, “a cold, stern, disaffected scholar,” had to be played with emotional vulnerability as well. “A lot of people who auditioned had that strength,” Mr. Harris said, “but I didn’t want to go on the journey with them.” Ms. Lande, he said, “broke our heart.”

Now shorn of what Mr. Harris called her “gorgeous red hair,” Ms. Lande is grappling nightly with the play’s emotional challenges.

“This is not someone who’s supersweet and nice to everybody,” Ms. Lande said. “She’s cocky. She’s witty. She’s intelligent. But she’s not a cupcake, as they say in the play.”

Yet the same off-putting character has to accept losing control in the hospital, which she resists with anger and dry humor before, eventually, an emotional breakthrough. “What makes the play so wonderful is that she does have to let go of that power, and she doesn’t want to,” Ms. Lande said.

Facing death is not the time to worry about being right, she said, quoting the play. “‘Now is the time for kindness.’ That, I think, is the most beautiful line.”

Mr. Harris said that a shift like that was a reason Ms. Lande was so right for the role. “She has an incredible balance between frailty and strength,” he said.

Her commitment to the physical experience of cancer and chemotherapy is a particular strength of her performance. She turned to a family connection — Jane Elizabeth Lande, a beloved aunt lost to cancer — for inspiration.

“She was a beautiful, beautiful person,” Ms. Lande said. “She loved art. She was curious; she was adventurous; she always chose to look at the world in a positive light.”

When her aunt faced her death, Ms. Lande said, she “reluctantly accepted it.”

“She said something to me right before she passed away,” the actress recalled. “She said, ‘When I’m gone.’ That just killed me. We don’t think of things that way. ‘When I’m gone.’”

“Death be not proud,” a Donne poem discussed in the play, has a closing line that, Bearing was taught, should have simply a comma, a breath, separating life, death and life everlasting.

“I said that my aunt Jane had said, ‘When I’m gone,’” Ms. Lande said. “That’s the equivalent of saying it’s just a pause. It’s not a big dramatic thing. It’s just a slipping away.”

“Tuesdays With Morrie,” also at the Playhouse on Park this season, has a climactic deathbed scene as well, and “Passing Strange,” another season choice, turns on the death of the narrator’s mother. The choices were coincidental, Mr. Harris said, but “there’s a thread that drew us all to them.” He noted that each has a Brechtian feel, beginning with characters speaking to the audience, and each deals with the emotions of death in surprising ways.

Ms. Lande is encountering her own surprises, some when audience members speak to her after the play about their experiences with cancer or death, some when audiences find the play’s humor. “To get them laughing at certain points is wonderful,” she said.

And she’s had her own epiphanies, of a sort, in playing the role, leading her to consider her life’s work before her own time comes. And what’s left? “Perhaps it’s a gift that we can add something to other people’s lives,” Ms. Lande said. “But who knows?”


