


Just before the March release of “Eat Pray Love Made Me Do It,” an anthology of essays written by people who were inspired by Elizabeth Gilbert’s best-selling 2006 memoir, “Eat Pray Love,” Ms. Gilbert was looking to offload a 7,000-pound Buddha statue.

It was not a matter of spiritual spring cleaning. It was more a matter of cleaning up shop. Her shop.

“The Buddha is about all that’s left,” Ms. Gilbert, 46, said over the phone from Miami, where she was taking a break from promoting “Big Magic: Creative Living Beyond Fear,” her 2015 self-help book.

Nearly everything else at Two Buttons, the store in Frenchtown that she and her husband, José Nunes, opened in 2007 to sell decorative East Asian imports, had been sold. The business was set to close within weeks.

“It was great and a really fun project, but my husband and I share this similar trait where once we’ve made or built something, we no longer have any interest in it,” Ms. Gilbert said.

“So once we got that building renovated and the business was sort of running itself,” she continued, “he very sheepishly came to me and said, ‘I don’t really feel like doing this Two Buttons thing anymore.’ And around the same time, right after we had finished renovating this big house in Frenchtown, I very sheepishly said to him, ‘I don’t really want to live here anymore.’”

Ms. Gilbert and Mr. Nunes have since bought and renovated a smaller house in Frenchtown. “We’re good at creating, but we’re not good at sustaining things,” she said. “And we always let the other person have an out.”

Ms. Gilbert may be willing to give her husband an out, but letting herself off the hook is another matter. Her followers on social media learned as much last year when, in an effort to practice what she preaches in “Big Magic,” she sang a karaoke rendition of the Bonnie Tyler chestnut “Total Eclipse of the Heart” at the Diamond Horseshoe nightclub in Manhattan. The idea was for Ms. Gilbert to face her fear of singing in public.

The experience was “terrifying,” she recalled. “Immediately I started to see these really talented people coming in — this is a Midtown bar where people are coming from jobs on Broadway, a very different scene from hanging out at the National Hotel in Frenchtown.” She decided to take her name off the waiting list for the microphone.

Then her inner scold grabbed hold of her.

“I said to myself, ‘You’re not allowed to do that anymore. You spend your life telling people they have to take creative risks, and you’re about to publish this book that’s essentially a manifesto,’” she said. So she sang.

She wrote about the experience on Facebook, but her followers wanted proof; they wanted to see video of Ms. Gilbert singing. “So I said, ‘O.K., I’ll do it again,’” she recalled. But this time she introduced a caveat: “You guys have to help me raise money.”

The result? A few more nervous nights in Manhattan and a boon to BlinkNow, a nonprofit based in Morristown that helps poor children in Nepal.

“There’s this really strange circular connection between me and my fellow New Jerseyan Maggie,” Ms. Gilbert said of Maggie Doyne, BlinkNow’s founder. “Hers is another ‘Eat Pray Love Made Me Do It’ story.”

Among the essays submitted for inclusion in “Eat Pray Love Made Me Do It” are descriptions of their writers’ experiences abandoning bad marriages, learning to embrace motherhood and overcoming addictions. Ms. Doyne, of Mendham, was not a contributor, but she said she was inspired by the memoir just the same. Her story found its way to Ms. Gilbert through a mutual friend.

“Eat Pray Love” was the only book that Ms. Doyne took with her when she left New Jersey to travel to India as a new high school graduate in 2007. “It was such an empowering book about a woman who was traveling on a solo journey to find herself,” Ms. Doyne wrote in an email from Nepal. "It inspired me and encouraged me.”

During her travels, Ms. Doyne, now 28, saw homeless Nepalese children working at difficult, physical jobs. “Instead of doing what most of us would do, which is turning away from that kind of despicable situation and saying it’s so horrible I can’t even look, she stayed and created a home for them,” Ms. Gilbert said.

The home, called the Kopila Valley Children’s Home, was opened to 50 children in 2008. In 2010, BlinkNow also opened a school that now educates over 350 Nepalese children. Ms. Gilbert, through her karaoke stunt, was able to raise more than $100,000 for the organization, Ms. Doyne said.

Ms. Gilbert said the money she raised proved the value in overcoming fears.

“If we’re being honest about what we’re afraid of, we have to admit that the stakes are usually terribly low,” she said. “When you put it in the context of raising money for orphans in Nepal, my singing in public is not a big deal. No one has died from my singing. Yet.”

That does not mean that a career switch to music is likely. Ms. Gilbert is currently at work on a historical novel about 1940s New York City and “promiscuous showgirls there,” she said.

“Frenchtown is a great place to write, especially in the summer,” she said. “I have this little corner room, with maple leaves advancing on the windows and kids riding their bikes below. It’s not as grand or fancy as the other house, but I love being in this little creative community, this Brigadoon-like place.”


