


When the Olympics begin in Rio during the first week of August, the eyes of the world will be watching Brazil. The eyes of Brazil, meanwhile, will be watching Camila Pitanga.

A veteran of Brazilian soap operas, Ms. Pitanga is typically cast as a willowy damsel who makes terrible choices when it comes to men. Over the decades she has swooned for a gangster, a conniving executive and an assortment of feckless playboys. Currently, she is falling for her father’s sworn enemy on “Velho Chico,” which airs at 9:15 p.m. on Rede Globo, by far the country’s largest free TV channel.

On weeknights, Globo broadcasts five one-hour telenovelas, a marathon of greed, passion and freighted glances, interrupted only by two newscasts and a sitcom. The most coveted time slot is 9:15, when as many as 50 million people tune in, roughly one-fourth of the country’s population. For the sake of comparison, the Oscars this year brought in 34 million viewers, a little more than one-tenth of all Americans. Of course the Oscars are an annual event. Most telenovelas, as soaps here are called, air Monday through Saturday and have a life of about 200 episodes.

The shows and Globo are the national soundtrack, the running din in living rooms and restaurants, as well as countless taxis with dashboard TVs, adding an unscripted element of suspense for everyone on the road. For Grupo Globo, a multimedia goliath described as “Brazil’s most powerful company” by The Economist, Rede Globo is an engine of profit without peer.

But for organizers of the Summer Olympics, telenovelas are a problem. Last year, before the Zika virus made international headlines, and before the wheel of impeachment proceedings against President Dilma Rousseff started turning, the country’s International Olympic Committee representatives would readily profess to one worry: that more Brazilians would watch soaps than the Games.

In fact, this particular Olympic contest will be surprisingly close. And odd as it may sound, telenovelas might win.

While Rede Globo is one of a handful of Brazilian television networks with the rights to air the Games, the rivals have a small fraction of the audience. And though the company will broadcast events throughout the day and parts of the night, Globo will essentially be a sports-free zone during prime time.

Yes, the opening ceremony will be broadcast live. But pre-empt telenovelas between 6:30 and 10:30? No way, said Monica Albuquerque, Globo’s head of artistic development. There will be breaks for highlights and results, but the schedule won’t change just because the greatest athletic spectacle on earth has come to town.

“The country would stop,” she said, if soaps went on hiatus. “It’s cultural. It’s part of life. I can’t imagine Brazil without soaps.”

What if some Brazilian athlete is on a tear?

“You flash,” she said, flicking her fingers, suggesting a blip of time for a quick update.

What if the Brazilian soccer team is going to win gold?

“You flash,” she repeated. Then she paused for a moment, mulling it over. “If it’s one episode, maybe. O.K. One episode.”

Globo is just catering to its audience. Unless the topic is soccer or, to a far lesser extent, beach volleyball, Brazilians aren’t especially passionate about Olympic sports. But they are gaga for telenovelas, and anyone who would like to understand the country, and its current travails, should look at the torrid affair between Brazilians and their singular take on soaps.

“What Brazil did with this format is very special and very particular, different than what you will see in the rest of Latin America,” said Maria Immacolata Vassallo de Lopes, of the Center for the Study of Telenovelas at the University of São Paulo. “It introduced realism. It integrated the daily lives of people in a way that is almost journalistic. It’s still melodrama, but done in a realistic way.”

Among those who take this job seriously is Ms. Pitanga, the actress. Not long ago, she was sitting in a sort of reading room at Globo Studios, a sprawling 17.5-million-square-foot mini-city on Rio de Janeiro’s outskirts, where five or six soaps are filmed each day. This is Brazil’s answer to Hollywood.

Ms. Pitanga was getting ready for a wardrobe fitting and defending her character’s fictional penchant for inappropriate men. “Do I really need to explain love to you?” she said. Asked if she was looking forward to the Games, she frowned a bit and said that it was unlikely she would catch many events. She won’t have the time.

“We shoot about 35 scenes a day, sometimes six days a week,” she said. “I just pray we’ll get Saturdays off.”

Brazil’s telenovelas range from slightly comic and family-oriented (early in the evening) to epic and sexy (later on). Aesthetically, they have more in common with bygone American evening dramas like “Dallas” and “Knots Landing” than daytime perennials like “General Hospital.” The stories sprawl, the casts are huge, and before the country’s currency started declining in value a few years ago, an episode could cost the equivalent of $400,000.

In a typical year, Globo produces about 2,500 hours of entertainment, the equivalent of more than 1,000 feature-length films. The shows are among the country’s most successful exports, viewed in more than 100 countries, including China, Australia and Serbia.

“I was in Russia, visiting the Hermitage Museum in 2009,” said Tony Ramos, a telenovela star for more than 50 years, often called the Robert De Niro of Brazil. “Suddenly we were surrounded by Russians. In my bad English and their bad English, we talked and it was very emotional. They said, ‘Thank you, thank you.’” Eventually, he said, the director of the museum rescued him.

On the surface, the country’s telenovelas look like pure escapism, the kind that might be especially appealing now that Brazil’s fortunes have plunged, along with the gross domestic product and the reputation of dozens of national politicians. A bribery scheme surrounding Petrobras, the state-owned oil giant, has already landed dozens of party leaders and prominent executives in prison.

That fiasco is unrelated to Ms. Rousseff’s troubles, which stem from charges of illegal budgetary maneuvers that were said to help her narrowly win re-election in 2014. The drop in the price of oil, one of the country’s most lucrative commodities, has added to a sense of doom. Once on every economist’s short list of most promising nations, Brazil is now in recession. The optimism that defined the country when it landed the 2016 Olympics seven years ago has vanished.

In short, the country has plenty of worries, but telenovelas are not really a way to forget them. In fact, those worries are often embedded right in the shows.

Corruption and income inequality are common themes, as are racism, domestic violence, H.I.V. and red tape. Most commonly, telenovelas operate as a kind of analogue for current events.

For instance, “Velho Chico” — the title refers to the São Francisco River, where the show is set — may look like a humid saga of lust, tears and unruly beards. But it is also a cautionary tale about the environment as well as a critique of contemporary politics. Much of the action revolves around a mafia-don-like figure named Colonel Saruê who is seizing land and exploiting plantation laborers.

“He’s basically seizing all the assets he can, to accrue as big a fortune as possible,” said Joseph Straubhaar, a professor at the University of Texas and co-author of “Latin American Television Industries.”

“Brazilians will know exactly who this guy is because the country is filled with politicians like him, and some of them are pursuing Dilma now,” he said. “The colonel uses violence, which in the show is kind of a stand-in for corruption.”

There are purely whimsical telenovelas in Brazil, like “O Mapa da Mina” (“The Map of the Mine”), in which the heroine has a treasure map tattooed near her buttocks. But such shows are outnumbered by the heavier fare. There was a crusading senator on “Rei do Gado” (“The Cattle King”), a ratings monster from 1997. It was so beloved that real senators angled for cameos on the show.

More recently, the most popular leader in the country was arguably Moses, the star of a telenovela version of “The Ten Commandments.” It aired on Record, one of Globo’s rivals, and the show actually won its time slot on a few occasions — an achievement so rare that it made news.

Part of the appeal was the special effects required to present the story’s combination of miracles and calamities. But beyond the spectacle, the director, Alexandre Avancini, thinks that the production caught on because it was perfectly timed.

“Unfortunately, we live in an era in Brazil with a lot of corruption,” he said. “Moses is not corruptible. He struggles against great power to change the situation. Brazilians can see a little hope in this story.”

Record is privately held and does not release financial details. But Mr. Avancini said that during the show’s run, the audience grew enough that the company added a third commercial break and started to run six commercials per break, instead of four. By January, all 175 episodes had aired, but Record wasn’t done cashing in on this phenomenon. It was getting ready to release a “Ten Commandments” movie.

For a promo for the film, a group of children was invited one afternoon to romp around on the set, which looked like a gilded patio for a Cleopatra-themed Vogue shoot. To the surprise of the tykes, Guilherme Winter, the amiable hunk who played the grown-up Moses, stopped by. “Can I join you guys?” he said, sauntering up Pharoah’s steps.

There was a moment of baffled silence, and then the children shrieked “Moses!” For the next 15 minutes, they jumped on and off him as if he were a jungle gym.

“I thought I had lost my mind,” one of the boys joyfully announced.

The scrum ended with the entire frolicking bunch gathered on Pharoah’s rug, staring into a Record video camera and shouting “Hashtag Ten Commandments!” in Portuguese.

Like Globo, Record is running soaps in prime time during the Olympics, including a sequel to “The Ten Commandments.” The two networks, and a third called Bandeirantes, reportedly spent a total of $190 million in 2009 to buy broadcasting rights from the International Olympic Committee for both the Sochi and Rio Games. The Olympics, which are privately funded, make deals like this all over the world, providing nearly half of all revenue. Sponsorships provide most of the other half.

Globo’s director of sports, João Pedro Paes Leme, said the company was contractually obligated to broadcast nine hours of the Games a day, and its free channel will broadcast 10 or more hours a day. The company will far exceed that figure, he noted, when its cable sports channels become all-Olympics vehicles. But Globo has only 20 million cable subscribers. It’s a niche product.

You’re a sports guy, Mr. Paes Leme. Couldn’t you negotiate for a bit more prime-time space for the Games on Globo’s mammoth, free broadcast channel?

“More than being a sports guy, I’m a TV guy,” he said. “I understand perfectly the importance of telenovelas.”

The social conscience that defines Brazil’s telenovelas began, paradoxically, with the military dictatorship that ruled the country from 1964 to 1985. The government hounded leftist actors, writers and directors who worked in the theater and film and shut down productions it deemed inimical. With nowhere else to work, these artists turned to Globo, a safe haven because the company had a cozy relationship with the government.

Globo was founded as a newspaper company in 1925 by a journalist, Irineu Marinho, and was headed for decades by his son Roberto, who led its expansion into other media. Today it includes radio stations, book publishers, magazines, music labels, film productions and dozens of TV channels.

Rede Globo started a year after the dictatorship took power, and a marriage of convenience was born. The military needed a pliant broadcasting partner because it wanted to spread its vision of consumer capitalism and squelch the threat of communism. The government went as far as to sell TV sets, on credit, to citizens through its Ministry of Communications.

Rede Globo provided friendly news coverage and shunned pro-democracy movements. In return it enjoyed something close to a monopoly on the medium. Critics would come to call Globo the “unofficial ministry of propaganda,” making it an odd place to find avowed communists, like the celebrated writer Dias Gomes. But he and others were considered the best in the business, so Mr. Marinho hired them.

For the writers, it was either join Globo or cease working. In his autobiography, “Just a Subversive,” Mr. Gomes wrote that after he signed on with Globo, his days of being arrested and interrogated by the police ended — unless you count the time he was hauled in and asked how one of his telenovelas would end. (He refused to say.)

But while Mr. Gomes and others worked for a major ally of the dictatorship, they never stopped trying to sneak social messages into their scripts. It became a game.

When Silvio de Abreu, the Globo dramaturge, wrote telenovelas, he spent a lot of time in the 1970s and ’80s trying to persuade humorless government censors in Brasília, the nation’s capital, that they were missing a joke — which in some cases was not actually a joke at all.

“I wrote a script in which I wanted to show workers striking, which was totally forbidden,” he said in an interview. “So I had a boss at this factory who demands that all of the women come to work in high heels, because high heels are more elegant. Well, none of the workers want to wear high heels, of course — they work at a factory. So they call for a strike. When I went to Brasília they said, ‘You’re telling people it’s O.K. to strike.’ I said: ‘No. The situation is absurd. It’s a joke, obviously.’ And they said, ‘O.K.’ And that’s how I showed a strike on television.”

In 2013 Globo apologized for supporting the military government, calling it “a mistake.” Not everyone has forgiven. That year, during antigovernment protests, a Globo office in Rio was attacked and burned. In the current political crisis, some have sharply criticized Globo for being aligned with the right-wing elite. But fans have long outnumbered detractors, especially in the countryside, where people were given their first glimpse of a prosperous, vibrant Brazil through Globo and its telenovelas.

Millennials are slightly less devoted to the shows, which is one reason that ratings for the network have declined slightly over the years. But broadband and cable have been slow to spread, so potential rivals, like Netflix, have yet to make real inroads. Last year, Carta Capital, a left-leaning magazine based in Rio, estimated that an astounding 60 percent of all advertising expenditures in Brazil were spent on Globo television channels.

Today, the company is run by three of Roberto Marinho’s sons, each of whom is worth more than $5 billion, according to Forbes. (Their father died in 2003.) They sit atop an organization of eight companies with about 19,000 employees. To sustain telenovela ratings — and fend off scares like that provided by “The Ten Commandments” — the brothers are plowing money back into Globo Studios.

After passing through security, visitors to the grounds, located in a forested suburb of Rio de Janeiro called Jacarepaguá, are greeted by a statue of Roberto Marinho. Around him is a sprawling collection of indoor and outdoor sets, along with a medical center, banks, restaurants, 100,000 costumes, 87,000 props and 9,000 employees ferried around by a fleet of microbuses and electric cars.

A daylong trip around the studio is like a tour of Brazil that ranges through time, terrain and every stratum of society. It includes a few acres of a favela — the classic Brazilian urban slum — built for a telenovela called “A Regra do Jogo” (“The Rule of the Game”). The place was so detailed, right down to the cat’s cradle of overhead electrical wires, it seemed weird that nobody lived there.

A 10-minute minicar drive away, a small town from the 18th century was under construction, the setting for “Liberdade, Liberdade” (“Freedom, Freedom”). The story centers on the fictional adventures of the daughter of Tiradentes, a real-life revolutionary and martyr. The director of the show, Vinicius Coimbra, pointed out the town’s architectural highlights.

“We’ve got a church, a tavern, a city hall, a jail,” he said, pointing in different directions. “Over there is a slave market.”

The show sounds pretty dark, but “Liberdade, Liberdade,” which airs five nights a week, at 11 p.m., is what millions of Brazilians watch right before they go to sleep. Its run ends a few days before the Games begin, but Mr. Coimbra would argue that the show is more attuned to the national mood than any of the coming Olympic events.

“People here are very sad,” he said. “I hope with this soap opera people enjoy Brazil again.” When he describes his ambition, and Globo’s, it could scarcely be grander: to “save Brazil, despite its politics.”


