


A Malian man who killed an American diplomat during a carjacking in Niger nearly 16 years ago and twice escaped police custody in West Africa was sentenced on Tuesday to 25 years in a United States prison.

The Malian man, Alhassane Ould Mohamed, pleaded guilty last month in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to murdering William Bultemeier, a Defense Department attaché assigned to the United States Embassy in Mali. Under the terms of his agreement with federal prosecutors, Mr. Mohamed, 46, will be sent to Mali when he completes his prison term.

On Dec. 23, 2000, the day before he was scheduled to leave Niger and return to his home in North Carolina, Mr. Bultemeier, 51, a former Army staff sergeant, and several other members of the embassy staff went out for dinner in Niamey, the capital of Niger. Afterward, Mr. Bultemeier was getting into his Toyota Land Cruiser when he was accosted by Mr. Mohamed, armed with a pistol, and an unnamed accomplice, who was carrying an AK-47.

The gunmen demanded keys to the vehicle and when Mr. Bultemeier did not immediately comply, Mr. Mohamed shot him, court papers say. Another member of the dinner party, a Marine staff sergeant, Christopher McNeely, ran to his friend’s aid and was shot several times by the accomplice. Shortly after, Mr. McNeely was evacuated from Niger and survived; Mr. Bultemeier died.

At the sentencing in Brooklyn on Tuesday, Mr. McNeely, who lost full use of one of his arms in the attack, told the court that he still thinks about that night: how one moment, he was enjoying the company of friends and the next, one of those friends was dying in his arms. Though his own injuries were not “life-threatening,” he added, they were “life-altering.” “The events of that day,” he said, “will be with us for eternity.”

Mr. Bultemeier’s second youngest daughter, Danni Bultemeier, also addressed the court, telling Judge William F. Kuntz II that she had waited more than 15 years for a resolution of her father’s murder. She said that after his death, she remembered picturing the bullets that struck him and thinking about the pain he must have felt. Addressing Mr. Mohamed, who appeared in court in a prison-issue jump suit, she asked, “I wonder how many other families you affected this way?”

It was a long legal journey from the shooting in Niamey to the sentencing hearing in Brooklyn. A few days after the attack, the Malian police arrested Mr. Mohamed after tracking down the stolen Land Cruiser. But nine years later, he escaped Malian custody during a medical appointment. The next year, according to court papers, he was involved in another assault — on a convoy of Saudi officials in Niger, in which four people were killed.

Mr. Mohamed was recaptured in February 2010 and was extradited to Niger, where he was convicted in connection with that second attack and sentenced to 20 years in prison. But in June 2013 he escaped again, court papers say, during an armed assault on his prison spearheaded by Boko Haram, an Islamist terrorist group based in northeast Nigeria.

He remained at large until November 2013, when French forces sent to Mali on an antiterrorism mission apprehended him and turned him over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Prosecutors contend that Mr. Mohamed had ties to several terrorist groups — not only to Boko Haram, but also to Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb and the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad, a separatist movement of mostly Tuareg fighters based in northern Mali.

At the hearing, Mr. Mohamed was largely silent. But at one point, he rose and made a brief statement, telling Mr. McNeely and Mr. Bultemeier’s family through an interpreter, “I would like to say I’m sorry.”

Judge Kuntz ended the hearing by saying that Mr. Mohamed would be too old to have a “meaningful” career as a terrorist at the end of his sentence; he will be 71.


