


In a telling passage toward the end of his latest celebration of antidepressant drugs, Dr. Peter Kramer looks back on the pleasures of his long psychiatric career. He mentions the good company of his patients, his teachers, his colleagues. Then he turns to his favorite medications. He seems to choke up a little.

“To get to meet Prozac and then to work in concert,” he writes without a trace of irony. “I am conscious of the privilege.”

One needs no better evidence that the relationship between prescribers and their pills is quasi human, a partnership that may be utterly rational or wildly emotional, bolstered by wishful thinking, undone by bitter suspicion.

Such has certainly been the case for antidepressants. Their safety and efficacy have been questioned repeatedly over the last decade. Some patients maintain the drugs are poison, while some experts have suggested they are just pricey, overused placebos.

Foremost among the drugs’ champions has been Dr. Kramer, the author of “Listening to Prozac” in 1993 and a professor at Brown Medical School, who now offers a long, point-by-point defense composed of anecdotes and data.

Dr. Kramer’s bottom line is well summarized by the double meaning of “Ordinarily Well: The Case for Antidepressants” — he argues that antidepressants work just about as well as any other pills commonly used for ailing people, and that the drugs keep people who take them reasonably healthy.

Antidepressants are not magic, Dr. Kramer acknowledges; they come with a risk of side effects, and their use in children can be quite problematic. But he has found them immensely helpful in the care of pretty much every variety of depressed adult. Further, he can back up his impressions with statistical proof.

The reader with no particular ax to grind will emerge from the book with two impressions. One is that Dr. Kramer’s data is extremely persuasive. A second is that future rebuttals may well be just as persuasive, thanks to the staggering difficulties of subjecting psychoactive agents to rigorous scientific analysis.

For its articulate, heartfelt demonstration of all those problems, the book is invaluable. (Read an excerpt.)

Most diseases have objective findings that lend themselves to numerical scales: heart, kidney and liver damage, bone marrow function, tumor size. The workings of the brain — not so much. Translating the complicated emotions of depression to a single number is not easy, particularly as a complete assessment also requires a tally of the physical signs that may accompany depression, and the life-altering events that may result.

But drug studies operate off these numbers: one for a patient’s presentation, others for recovery and relapse. Only with numbers can statistical validity be calculated.

In theory, the pattern of the numbers tells the same story as does the multichaptered descriptive narrative a doctor creates over months of conversation with a hurting patient. At least, this assumption, dating from the 1950s, has led to the approval of generations of antidepressants, from the first tricyclic compounds like imipramine (Tofranil) through Prozac and its successors to the newest chemical hope on the block, the recreational drug ketamine.

But accepting that the numbers accurately recreate the narrative is only one faith-based aspect of the enterprise. There are many others.

One is physiological: Depression most likely reflects an array of brain imbalances. Doctors may someday be able to map every patient’s errant neurotransmitters and neural dead ends, then supply the precise chemical needed to restore normal traffic patterns. For now, though, prescribers are stuck with educated guesswork.

Depressed patients who volunteer for prospective drug studies may not be comparable to those who do not. In addition, study subjects may find the structure of these trials (and the kind concern of the staff members who conduct them) comforting in and of themselves, leading to a high rate of placebo responses.

Many studies have been too small to yield meaningful results, and must be combined with larger studies for interpretation, but the choice of studies to combine may, intentionally or not, bias the results. For instance, one large analysis included many patients on Serzone, a weaker drug seldom used these days. The study showed antidepressants did not work very well, but when the Serzone patients were excluded, the drugs all appeared to work far better.

Finally, Dr. Kramer wonders if depression itself is not a shifting target, evolving from the deep melancholia often seen in the last century and seldom seen today into a different beast.

Over and over again, with an emphasis bound to infuriate some scientific purists, Dr. Kramer argues that a doctor’s instincts should be respected when it comes to patient care. He knows the drugs work, he reiterates, because he has seen them work, repeatedly and reliably.

This is exactly the reasoning that the objective study of drugs aims to make obsolete, for the doctor’s ego, and often, the doctor’s income, are deeply bound up in the act and art of prescribing. Patients may get all tangled up in the expectations that result.

And yet the image that insistently comes to my mind is a cartoon: A psychiatrist glowers at a hapless patient on the couch. “Do you really feel better?” the doctor demands. “Or do you just think you feel better?”

That is indeed the question, important and ridiculous all at once. As Dr. Kramer implies, sometimes it makes sense just to let the poor guy off the couch and out into the world.


