


CARACAS, Venezuela — President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela threatened Saturday to seize idle factories in his country using a new emergency decree, moves that followed warnings by United States officials that economic chaos in the country had turned even his allies against him.

“An idle plant is a plant the people will take,” local news outlets quoted Mr. Maduro as saying at a rally. “We will take all the actions necessary to activate production, which is being paralyzed by the bourgeoisie.”

The threats came a day after Mr. Maduro said he would extend a state of emergency for another 60 days, a measure he said was aimed at reviving the country’s collapsing economy. The government said the move would extend presidential powers, though it was vague on specifics.

For months, Venezuela has been convulsed by an economic crisis caused by low oil prices, a lack of savings and a drought. Lines for food have become ubiquitous, as have water shortages and blackouts. The government is working just two days a week in an effort to save electricity.

The United States fears that Venezuela could face a major eruption of street violence in the coming months, according to senior American intelligence officials who spoke on condition of anonymity in discussing the government’s latest intelligence assessment.

While Mr. Maduro has so far held off a recall vote against him, the American officials said that they believed his grip on power was weakening by the day, and that he could be removed from power, either in a palace coup by members of his party or by the Venezuelan military.

While the military’s high command appears unlikely to act against the government right now, these officials said, its midlevel officers are more restive. One American official said intelligence officials were worried about some kind of change, but were not aware of any active plots.

Venezuela is facing a default on its debt in the fourth quarter of this year. The government is trying to keep financing its loans to avoid having creditors seize its foreign assets. But that, as well as the steeply falling price of oil — the country’s largest export — has caused imports to plummet, leading to shortages of food and medicine.

The officials acknowledged that the United States had limited influence in Venezuela, where the government has blamed American meddling for the instability.


