


Two more apartments at the Greenwich Lane, a new luxury condominium complex rising at the site of the former St. Vincent’s Hospital campus in Greenwich Village, have officially closed, each with an unidentified buyer, and were the week’s priciest transactions.

The more expensive of these sponsor apartments, at $16,098,351.56, according to city records, was unit M4, at 150 West 12th Street, a converted 1920s building. The 6,299-square-foot duplex includes a 986-square-foot private garden and a loggia. The monthly carrying costs are $21,913.

Raphael De Niro and Maggie Leigh Marshall of Douglas Elliman Real Estate brought the buyer, identified as the Greenwich Residence Trust, with Jordan Heller listed as a successor trustee.

The floor-through apartment is entered through a spacious formal gallery that leads to the living and dining rooms, which have dark-stained herringbone wood floors and floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking the garden. A chef’s kitchen features paneled wood cabinetry and soapstone counters.

There are five bedrooms and five and a half baths. The master suite, with south-facing windows, has walk-in-closets and a lavish bath with marble mosaic floors, a custom millwork vanity and a separate soaking tub. The apartment also comes with a washer/dryer unit.

The other apartment, No. 4A, at the glass-and-brick 155 West 11th Street, sold for $11,070,918.93, according to property records. Its monthly carrying charges total $12,379.

The loftlike apartment, also with a washer/dryer, has five bedrooms and six and a half baths spread over 3,641 square feet. The south-facing master suite contains two baths and two enormous walk-in closets. The buyer, 155W114A LLC, was represented by Richard Abend.

The Corcoran Sunshine Marketing Group is handling sales for the 200-unit Greenwich Lane development, between Seventh Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, by the Rudin family and Global Holdings. The complex, designed by the architect FXFowle with interiors by Thomas O’Brien, has five apartment buildings and five townhouses. Most of the units have either sold or are in contract.

Big Ticket includes closed sales from the previous week, ending Wednesday.


