


My husband and I have been married for 12 years. It is the second marriage for both of us. We have six grown children between us, but none together. My mother-in-law, an otherwise pleasant woman, has begun inviting my husband on trips for just the two of them, while I am sitting right there. It’s happened several times. My husband doesn’t take her up on these offers; he tells me that his mother is just a little odd. But I want these invitations to stop. Any advice for me?

SUSAN, RIDGEWOOD, N.J.

Advice courses through my veins, though you may not like it. If I am doing the math correctly, you and your husband are probably in your 50s, and his mother is somewhere in her 70s, with an average life expectancy of about 81 years. It doesn’t surprise me that such a woman (or a man) in the autumn of life would reach out to an adult child, especially now that that child’s parenting load has lightened, to renew one of her primary (and primal) relationships. (Remember how we used to long to climb into bed with them as kids?)

Of course, I’m not thrilled with the way these invitations are issued. It’s never kind to exclude people publicly, even if we think they don’t want to be included. (Still, you say she is pleasant; so maybe this is where her oddness comes in?) Your husband can shut down these public overtures in two seconds by speaking with her privately: “Mom, it hurts Susan’s feelings when you invite me on trips without her.” Done.

But this leaves the larger question: the prospect of a brief vacation with an older parent (and without our partners). In my experience, these getaways have been eye-opening and surprisingly tender, forcing us out of the workaday groove of parent and adult child. Handled correctly, they needn’t hurt anyone’s feelings. Now, if your husband is not up for a one-on-one with his mom, that, too, is easily addressed: “Sounds fun! Let’s invite Susan.” But consider encouraging their trip. It’s not about excluding you. (And who knows: A brief absence may make the marital heart beat stronger.)

A new horror on the subway: people clipping their fingernails in public! Is it just me, or is this gross? If it’s the latter, how do we shut this down?

SAMANTHA

Forgive me for being blasé, but I just saw a very good movie, called “Neon Bull,” in which an exotic dancer gives herself a Brazilian wax in the front seat of a truck. (Nearly everything seems refined after that.) But I agree: Personal grooming, like combing hair, applying eyeliner or clipping nails, is better done privately.

Still, who wants to be the grump policing such behavior in public (and possibly getting into scraps with strangers on subways)? That’s the rub. Though a remark along the lines of “I’d rather not lose an eye to one of your projectile fingernail shards” seems reasonable and on (sharp) point.

I recently moved to New York City and took over a room in an apartment with two roommates. My birthday is coming up, and I was thinking of inviting 20 friends over to celebrate. But a roommate told me that the landlord, who lives on the ground floor, only allows two friends at a time. I can understand that big parties may get loud. But sometimes I like to invite four or five friends for brunch. How should I handle this?

ANONYMOUS

Be guided by the spirit of the rule, not its letter. I bet your landlord would rather you invite five considerate brunch guests than the prescribed two, who stomp up the stairs while screeching the lyrics to “I Took a Pill in Ibiza.” Ask your guests, in advance, to be quiet. And once you’ve established a sterling track record with your landlord (in a few months), ask about the great white whale: a dance party produced by Mark Ronson. Exceptions to rules are more common than you’d think.

A dear friend has an annoying quirk in restaurants. If a dish is misprepared — if the bacon is limp or the steak is overcooked — she will not eat the food or send it back to the kitchen. The reason? She is convinced that the kitchen staff will retaliate by spitting in her food. She remains seated while the rest of us finish our meals, but for her, the meal is over. It ruins our experience. This happens often enough that I am not willing to let it slide. Any ideas?

JAN

The problem with irrational fears is that they’re, well, irrational. You will probably not persuade your pal that she is being paranoid until she chooses to address her underlying phobia. My advice: Stop eating out with her, and explain why: “It’s unpleasant to go to restaurants with you. We never know if you’re going to go on one of your strange hunger strikes.” Invite her on walks in the park or shopping instead. Not every social activity has to revolve around food (though all of mine do).


