


Already, it is easy to think of David Wright in the past tense. His lockers at Citi Field, with helmets of the Giants and Virginia Tech hanging from hooks in the corner, remain intact. Packages and notes pile up on his chair. Wright is a presence around the Mets, but a ghostly one. Again.

“This is some years now that he’s been hurt when we play him, and it’s weird not seeing David out there,” said Atlanta’s Jeff Francoeur, his former Mets teammate. “He was kind of a staple, from early when I was on the Braves, to when I was here, to now. The one guy that’s been a constant is David.”

Life is good for Wright, 33. His team is winning, his wife is expecting their first child soon, and his paychecks reflect his status as a seven-time All-Star. But at a time when Wright should be enjoying this to the fullest, he is far away, recovering from surgery in California to repair a herniated disk in his neck.

He might return by the end of the season, but nobody expects it — certainly not Francoeur, who said emphatically that Wright’s season was over. His timing, as the Mets defend their National League title, is awful.

“He’s probably saying, ‘Why couldn’t this be four years ago, when we weren’t good? I’ll skip ’11 and ’12!’ ” Francoeur said. “But now, coming from the World Series, they’ve got a lot of hype, talent, pitching — it’s a tough time for him to get hurt. It’s tough for the team.”

Wright’s injury is said not to be caused by his spinal stenosis, yet it is related, at least, if only because it is all the same spinal cord. Insurance will cover the bulk of Wright’s contract, which runs through 2020 at an average of $17.25 million per season. His $138 million package is the richest in team history.

When Wright signed it in December 2012, the Mets had just finished their fourth of six losing seasons in a row. They had traded a potential Hall of Famer, Carlos Beltran, in 2011. Then they had let their first batting champion, Jose Reyes, leave in free agency. They were working hard to trade R. A. Dickey, who had just won a Cy Young Award.

In time, those decisions would turn out to be very wise. But to sell them to the fans — and to lift morale around Flushing — the Mets needed Wright to buy in, to tie his future to theirs. He was the forever Met, and happy to serve.

“He always believed in the process we were following and the manner in which we were building this team back into a contender, and I will always appreciate that,” General Manager Sandy Alderson said. “Talking about his belief in the organization, there was just immeasurable value in that. He represented a means of continuity for this franchise.”

The Mets needed Wright to be their cornerstone at a low point in the history of the franchise. They paid him very well, but another team, someday, could have done the same. Wright wanted to stay, and the Mets, though badly burned by previous long-term deals, made him the exception in their era of payroll discipline. He was worth the risk.

Wright’s singular value to the Mets, as a symbol of stability who could also produce, still makes him a kind of exception. His debilitating injuries will not make the Mets more hesitant to give out long-term deals, because they already are.

They read the Yoenis Cespedes market perfectly last winter, bringing back a superstar at their price. But Cespedes could opt out after this season, forcing the Mets to extend his contract or lose him. He turns 31 in October and is younger than Yulieski Gourriel, the Cuban third baseman and a newly declared free agent. The Mets have reached out to Gourriel, 32, indicating at least some level of interest. But lucrative contracts for Cuban defectors have uneven success rates, and the Mets will be cautious.

Maybe Wright will recover from his neck injury, as Peyton Manning and Prince Fielder did from theirs, and produce at a high level again. He did have a .350 on-base percentage this season, with seven homers in 37 games. But the spinal stenosis is not going away. His baseball future will always be a struggle, his example a part of his leadership.

“He took pride in what he did and got himself ready every single night,” Manager Terry Collins said. “If you want to be good, do what he does. I think that’s where we’re at in our clubhouse. These veteran players, it’s not like they’ve got to go hit homers, but they’ve got to show these young guys what it’s like to be a big leaguer in tough times.”

The Mets bought that guidance when they re-signed Wright and named him captain. Finding that intangible again will not be easy, but finding a productive replacement at third base should be. Most teams have told the Mets they are not ready to deal, but the market will expand after the All-Star break.

Expect the Oakland Athletics — who have a comfortable relationship with the Mets and Alderson, their former architect — to dangle Danny Valencia and the versatile Jed Lowrie. It stands to reason that the Los Angeles Angels will make Yunel Escobar available, like the Milwaukee Brewers with Aaron Hill and the San Diego Padres with Yangervis Solarte.

Barring a sudden strike for Gourriel, the Mets will give a longer look to Wilmer Flores at third. They also have a capable placeholder in Kelly Johnson. Alderson showed last season that he will be aggressive in maximizing the Mets’ chances of winning before their rotation gets expensive.

As they try, Wright will almost surely be a bystander. His days as a durable, dependable force are over. But Francouer, his old friend, is convinced Wright has more to give. This may not be the end.

“I think he just wants to get back and see what happens,” Francouer said. “He at least deserves that, to see where it goes.”


