


Has the election made you anxious about the future of the United States? Do you feel as if your job is not secure in this lukewarm economy? Are you just generally in the dumps?

If so, take a look at the stock market. After a couple of steep sell-offs since last summer, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has risen to within a whisker of the record high it hit in May 2015.

To get to this latest peak, investors have overcome worries about energy prices, China, Europe, monetary policy and, more recently, some unpleasant-looking job numbers and the increased likelihood that Britain may soon vote to leave the European Union.

The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 18,000 on Wednesday, putting that benchmark up 3 percent for the year.

As I’ve said before, it can be a mistake to cite movements in the stock market as evidence for your view of the economy’s strength. This can mean that economic optimists ignore inconvenient stock market plunges and that pessimists self-servingly dismiss the rallies. What’s more, there are many ground-level economic numbers we can use to gauge the future strength of the economy. Why place so much emphasis on a noisy signal like stock prices?

Still, when stocks have moved higher for several years, notching the second-longest bull run in Standard & Poor’s records, the market’s optimism should be taken seriously.

Indeed, betting against the market’s doubters has been a surefire way to make money. As analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch periodically point out, when stock market strategists’ bearishness increases to certain levels, it has been an astonishingly reliable signal to buy stocks. And right now, the contrarian “sell-side indicator” is still signaling that stocks will go up.

The latest rally, which has lifted the market more than 16 percent from the low point it hit in February, suggests that investors do not believe that the bad jobs numbers are an early signal of a slowdown. They are also probably betting that the Federal Reserve will not be in such a hurry to raise interest rates.

Investors may also be seeing less political risk in the United States. The Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump favors combative trade policies that, if put into place, might disrupt global commerce, unsettle the markets and unnerve investors. A trade war could harm the earnings of American exporters if other countries retaliated. After watching a difficult few days in Mr. Trump’s campaign, investors may have bought more stock this week in the belief that his chances of becoming president have weakened.

But there is good reason to believe that investors have become too optimistic. This turbulent presidential campaign will no doubt disquiet investors in other ways.

All politics aside, the stock market’s rise has made stock prices look expensive when compared with corporate earnings. In aggregate, the companies in the S.&P. 500 were trading at 22 times their earnings for the 12 months through the end of March. That is considerably higher than the average of 16 times earnings for the five years through the end of 2015.

Stocks are also expensive when their prices are compared against expected future earnings. The S.&P. 500 is trading at 18 times projected 2016 operating earnings, above the average of the last five years.

That high level of optimism can also be seen in how much profit growth analysts are expecting. They project 14 percent this year, and a scorching 17 percent in 2017.

Here’s the problem: When investors are this sanguine, they are prone to dash for the exits at small signs of trouble. The impetus might come from a hawkish remark about interest rates from an influential Federal Reserve policy maker or a vote from Britain on June 23 to exit the European Union. Or something else that catches most investors by surprise.

But this is not necessarily a reason to feel gloomy. When an expensive stock market sells off, it’s not a given that the economy will also dive. In the last 10 months, stocks sold off heavily on two occasions. The United States economy kept chugging along.

It’s when the economy stops chugging that it will really be time to avoid the stock market.


