


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. We give thanks today to all those who died in military service to this nation, to their families and to all those who have spent or will spend part of today decorating their graves. It is in its way a terrible day, certainly for a holiday most of us look forward to for weeks. “Sorry, we must say to the mothers whose sons die horribly,” Anthony Swofford wrote in “Jarhead,” his 2003 memoir of the Gulf War. “This will never end. Sorry.”

So we thank them, and pay homage to them as Americans do: with cooking and friendship, feasting and cheer.

Those who have delayed thinking about what to cook today can find a great number of Memorial Day recipes on Cooking.

Those who have not may be looking for lighter fare for this evening, for a post-cookout meal. A simple platter of grilled asparagus with caper salsa may suffice. Or perhaps you could try this easy, light Persian salad from Mark Bittman? I like a radish sandwich with butter and salt after an afternoon of burgers and ribs. Maybe you’d prefer chilled pea-mint soup?

Then when Tuesday and Wednesday come, you can ramp back up toward full-calorie fare. Try David Tanis’s recipe for wild salmon with green sauce. Or my adaptation of the Los Angeles chef Suzanne Goin’s ridiculously good recipe for lamb meatballs with spiced tomato sauce. Check out Melissa Clark’s recipe for a chicken sheet-pan dinner with potatoes, arugula and garlic yogurt. Or Martha Rose Shulman’s recipe for a risotto with asparagus and pesto.

You can find other recipes on Cooking as always. I hope you’ll save the ones you like to your recipe box, and I hope you’ll share them with friends and family as well, since cooking is or ought to be a social activity. (“The Social Network Part II: You Don’t Get to 500 Million Recipes Without Burning a Few Casseroles.”) And if you run into problems doing that, or with anything to do with our site or apps, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

That’s all for later, though. Pretty soon it’ll be time to fire up the grill, or to suggest (gently, please!) that the person firing up the grill spend a little time reading our guide to grilling, and then to heat hot dogs and burgers, lamb chops and cheese, and to consider the bounty afforded this nation by the efforts of people who died fighting its wars.

Speaking of, here is Phil Klay on citizen soldiers and the moral risk of the modern military, an essay he wrote for Brookings that you should read right now, slowly, for the nuances, on Memorial Day. Back to work tomorrow.


