


HOPKINSVILLE, Ky. — Hillary Clinton raced on Monday to fend off Senator Bernie Sanders on the eve of Kentucky’s Democratic primary, hoping to avoid another show of weakness as she heads into an almost certain general-election fight with Donald J. Trump.

Mrs. Clinton snaked through a smoke-filled diner, and then she hopscotched around the state holding a series of rallies, where she urged Kentuckians to turn out to vote.

The fast-paced day, which included a combative exchange with an audience member who objected to her criticism of Kentucky’s Republican governor, might have suggested a candidate fighting for survival.

Instead, Mrs. Clinton is all but certain to claim her party’s nomination. But in the meantime, she would prefer to stop losing primaries, even if they are of little mathematical consequence.

Mrs. Clinton’s husband, former President Bill Clinton, won Kentucky in both 1992 and 1996, and Mrs. Clinton trounced Barack Obama here in the 2008 primary. But this year’s primary here is hard to predict: Polling has been scarce, and both she and Mr. Sanders have lavished attention on the state.

After visiting Kentucky last week, Mrs. Clinton on Monday wrapped up a two-day tour. She started her day in the western part of the state with a visit to the Lone Oak Little Castle restaurant in Paducah, where she was joined by Kentucky’s secretary of state, Alison Lundergan Grimes.

“I’m excited about the primary tomorrow, but we got to turn a lot of people out,” Mrs. Clinton said. “And I’ll tell you this: I’m not going to give up on Kentucky in November.”

Mr. Sanders campaigned in Puerto Rico on Monday, but over the weekend, he made several stops in Kentucky, including visits to Frankfort, Elizabethtown and Bowling Green.

At a rally in Paducah on Sunday, Mr. Sanders argued that he was the stronger candidate to defeat Mr. Trump. He also took aim at Kentucky’s governor, Matt Bevin, a foe of the Affordable Care Act, saying they had stark differences over health care and education.

“If anybody in this room or in this state wants to know what kind of president I will be, take a look at Governor Bevin and what he is doing,” Mr. Sanders said. “And then think about the exact opposite, and that’s Bernie Sanders.”

Mrs. Clinton, too, criticized Mr. Bevin, while showcasing the backing of his Democratic predecessor, Steve Beshear. At a rally here in Hopkinsville on Monday, she said Mr. Bevin was “just bent on destroying so much of what Kentucky has achieved.”

Not long after, when a woman in the crowd objected to her criticism, Mrs. Clinton held her ground. “You are entitled to your opinion, but you’re not entitled to your own facts,” Mrs. Clinton fired back, adding: “It’s time people stop listening to Republican propaganda about the economy, education and health care.”

Kentucky’s primary is one of two Democratic contests on Tuesday. Oregon, which votes by mail, requires ballots to be received by Tuesday night, and the state’s demographics favor Mr. Sanders. Kentucky is more competitive, and it poses another test of how much Mrs. Clinton can attract white working-class voters, who have been receptive to Mr. Sanders’s populist message.

On Monday, Mrs. Clinton appealed to voters who have fond memories of her husband’s administration. “I want to help bring back the kind of economy that worked for everybody in the 1990s,” she said at the diner.

Losses in Kentucky and Oregon would not imperil her grip on the Democratic nomination, but Mrs. Clinton is in the awkward position of running two campaigns at once: urging voters to turn out in the primary while also laying out arguments geared toward a face-off with Mr. Trump in November.

Campaigning in Kentucky, Mrs. Clinton attacked Mr. Sanders by saying he voted against the auto industry bailout, though Mr. Sanders’s record is not as clear-cut as Mrs. Clinton suggested.

At the same time, Mrs. Clinton devoted considerable attention to Mr. Trump, criticizing him over issues like taxes and foreign policy. In Bowling Green on Monday, she told the crowd to imagine she was on a debate stage with Mr. Trump, and provided a sample question: “So what is your plan to create jobs?”

Mrs. Clinton offered an impression of the businessman.

“His answer is, ‘I’m going to create them, they’re going to be great, I know how to do it, but I’m not telling you what it is I’m going to do,’ ” she said.

At the Lone Oak Little Castle, where the menu includes staples like biscuits and gravy, Mrs. Clinton saw signs of loyal support for her and her husband, as well as of the resistance she is likely to face in November from some voters.

Residents peered in the windows of the restaurant to observe the commotion inside as Mrs. Clinton slowly made her way through the crowd, greeting admirers like Debbie Patterson, 60, who wore a shirt saying, “Anything Bill can do Hill can do better.”

“That is so cute!” Mrs. Clinton said.

Mrs. Clinton also encountered DiAnna Dooley, 66, a supporter of Mr. Trump’s who made a miniature Trump sign by scrawling his name on a slip of paper. Before Mrs. Clinton made the rounds, Ms. Dooley described her as “just a carbon-copy Obama.”

Later, Ms. Dooley told Mrs. Clinton that she would never vote for her. Mrs. Clinton was unruffled. “That’s O.K.,” she replied. “You vote for whoever you want.”


