


David Geffen has again reached into his ample coffers to bestow $100 million on a cultural institution — this time the Museum of Modern Art for its $440 million expansion and renovation project — in a gift announced on Thursday.

“These are the kind of gifts you only dream about,” said Glenn D. Lowry, MoMA’s director.

Mr. Geffen’s name will adorn another major New York arts building in perpetuity, as it does the former Avery Fisher Hall, which received his last $100 million gift a year ago.

MoMA will now have a David Geffen Wing: three floors of new galleries in a residential tower designed by Jean Nouvel to the west of the museum on West 53rd Street, currently under construction. And as of this spring, the museum’s existing fourth-floor exhibition space will be called the David Geffen Galleries.

The Avery Fisher gift generated concerns because it covered only a fifth of the projected renovation cost in exchange for perpetual naming rights.

Mr. Geffen, a leading art collector with an estimated worth of $6.8 billion, said in an interview that MoMA has long played an important role in his life. “When I worked in the mailroom at the William Morris agency I used to brown bag it at the sculpture garden of the Museum of Modern Art,” he said. “It’s where I developed my interest in post-World War II art.”

Having made his fortune in pop music, art and movies, Mr. Geffen has been a longtime supporter of the museum, donating substantial artworks over the years (most recently, a Mark Grotjahn sculpture) and lending pieces from his collection for important exhibitions (as he did for a 1996 Jasper Johns retrospective).

“He’s a friend of the institution,” Mr. Lowry said. “He comes here all the time.”

The gift was discussed over the past six months, Mr. Lowry said, and was helped along by Mr. Geffen’s friendship with MoMA’s president, Marie-Josée Kravis.

Mr. Geffen, who established the Geffen Contemporary at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, dismissed the idea that he is choosing one coast over another. “I spend time in both California and New York,” he said, “and I have a great affection for both places.”

At a time that many cultural organizations are struggling to raise funds for their expansions — the Metropolitan Museum of Art announced on Thursday that it was suspending the design of its new Modern and Contemporary wing to cope with a growing deficit — the Geffen gift gets MoMA to the finish line on a building project that has barely broken ground.

MoMA has raised $650 million, including Mr. Geffen’s gift, which is unrestricted, meaning it can be directed at the museum’s discretion. “Through David’s generosity,” Mr. Lowry said, “we’re in incredible shape.”

The museum’s costs include $400 million for new construction and about $40 million for renovations. In addition, MoMA continues to raise funds to increase its endowment and to cover operations during construction, when revenue is expected to decline because some galleries will be closed.

The expansion and renovation, designed by Diller Scofidio & Renfro, will add 50,000 square feet of galleries, giving the museum more space to present its collection and exhibitions and allowing it to improve circulation, particularly in the museum’s congested entrance.

Mr. Geffen has donated to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; the Spelman and Morehouse College arts education programs; the University of California at Los Angeles School of Theater, Film and Television; the University of Southern California School of Cinematic Arts; and the Geffen Playhouse.

In early 2013, he contributed to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the creation of the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures.

His total philanthropic support to U.C.L.A. exceeds $400 million.

Mr. Geffen, who has no dependents, suggested that there may be future substantial donations in store. “I intend to give away as much of my money as possible while I’m alive to things that I think are valuable,” he said. “So far, it’s a considerable amount of money.”

Mr. Geffen will ultimately leave his art collection, valued at more than $2 billion, to his foundation, which will give the pieces to institutions or sell them and donate the proceeds to his main causes: culture, medicine and education.


