


On a recent weekend in Times Square, a crowd at Carolines on Broadway nibbled on chicken salad and hamburgers. There were many empty seats, and the response to the opening acts was lukewarm. The air was thin with anticipation. Then a tornado hit.

Rory Scovel, a comic in his mid-30s with an insincere smile and a scraggly beard, bounded onstage, fist in the air, chin jutting out, jauntily nodding his head and making faces as if he were doing a guitar solo for the Rolling Stones at Madison Square Garden. This triumphant pose seemed incongruous with the preceding mood, but what followed was the funniest set I have seen all year: a whirligig of characters and jokes, leaving the sleepy audience exhausted from laughter. The electric performance actually lived up to his entrance.

Mr. Scovel — whose stand-up set “The Charleston Special” was released this year on video — has long been known as an improvisational experimentalist, the kind of comic who might do a bit in complete darkness or spend minutes in a thick German accent. Two years ago, I saw him do a quirky hour downtown, where he walked to the front of the stage, a stern look on his face. “9/11,” he said, appearing solemn, then suspicious. “When was it? Let’s ask the real questions.”

His latest material highlights that same absurdist delight in transforming the deadly serious into utter nonsense, including another joke about paranoia about Sept. 11. “Where my truth seekers at?” he shouted before shifting into a whisper. “9/11 an inside job? It’s deeper than that. It’s not even a real date.” Mr. Scovel’s more ambitious new hour is tighter, dense with jokes and delivered with the broad showmanship of a Broadway musical. It’s the work of a cult star ready to move to the big rooms.

But what makes him such a magnetic performer is not the content of his jokes.

Mr. Scovel isn’t particularly provocative or incisive about politics or social issues. When he brings up the election, he dismisses the whole thing with a flamboyant display of sarcasm. “Preeeeetty good options,” he says about the candidates, in the glibly knowing way someone might describe Michael Jordan as not that bad of a basketball player.

If a comic says funny things, and a comedian says things funny, as the cliché goes, Mr. Scovel is firmly in the second camp. He also looks funny, a deceptively ingenious physical performer who reveals his collection of goofy poses with the precision of a silent comedian. His deliriously silly comedy is less interested in engaging with the world than in creating its own. And yet — because Mr. Scovel often adopts the persona of a preposterously confident, thin-skinned egotist with a conspiratorial streak — his comedy does seem suited to the age of Trump.

It’s not his only character. In his kinetic act, Mr. Scovel shifts into a variety of Southern figures, including a would-be cool preacher and a rube. What all his buffoons share is a misplaced smugness and blinding lack of self-awareness. They bring to mind the puffed-up idiots played by Will Ferrell and the winking phonies Chris Elliott played in the late 1980s on “Late Night With David Letterman.”

His quintessential impression is of a guy who lied on his résumé about being able to play the piano but still was hired to work in a hotel lobby. He barrels through a song, selling it with gusto, smiling, even though the tune is a cacophonous mess. When he returns to a version of the same guy on the job for a while, he has learned nothing except more salesmanship. The fact that nothing is going right doesn’t stop him from acting as if everything were awesome.

A more traditional stand-up set would be organized around these characters. Mr. Scovel is such an exciting live performer — and he really is one of those comics you need to see in person — because his improvisational instinct appears to be at odds with his own material. He is always looking to transform, even sabotage, his own set, veering off on tangents, interrupting, latching on to a phrase that tickles him, repeating it over and over until it becomes a kind of incantation whose repetition becomes its own bizarre joke.

Comedy relies on surprise, but refining your jokes requires repetition; it follows that most of the best comedians are experts at faking freshness. Mr. Scovel does that nicely, but what really distinguishes him is that his commitment to going off script is greater than most. He searches out distractions the way an intrepid reporter digs up scoops.

When a siren blared in the distance, he did not ignore it. He turned it into a bit and kept it on his special. At Carolines, he started playing with his zipped waist-length jacket, bundling it up by his chest and keeping it there through much of the set. It began as ridiculous, then started to seem normal when Mr. Scovel said that Kanye West was going to make this cool in a year. The biggest laughs in his set are in the transitions, not the prepared jokes.

There’s an almost jazzy rhythm to his comedy, with his tangents integrated so seamlessly that it’s hard to tell what’s planned and what isn’t. The distinction becomes meaningless, because even with his most reliable jokes, he is constantly disrupting his own premises. In his new special, he does a long bit that begins, ‘You guys ever use the bathroom at the grocery store?” He told the same joke on “Conan,” but with a startlingly different pivot from this opening. Instead of treating his question as rhetorical, he darkened his mood in an instant to eyes-blazing rage: “Answer me!” he yelled at the audience, before apologizing for losing his temper.

That this change of pace makes no sense matters less than that it is such a jarring surprise that you can’t help laughing. Unpredictability is one of the most underrated virtues in comedy. Like a well-made suspense film, Mr. Scovel’s jokes have twists you don’t see coming and the thrilling tension of a crackerjack plot where you have no idea what will happen next.


