


Residents of drought-stricken California doubled their water conservation efforts in March compared with the month before, officials said Tuesday. Cities and businesses used 24.3 percent less water than at the same time in 2013. It was twice the saving from the dry month of February, when the savings hit a record low, 12 percent, water regulators announced. March was a cooler and wetter month, and officials also credited Californians with changing their habits, especially when it comes to watering their landscaping, which consumes half of a home’s water use. March was the first month under relaxed conservation requirements since mandatory cutbacks began in June 2015. Californians are expected to use at least 20 percent less water; previously, the order was to conserve by 25 percent. (AP)

Michigan lawmakers on Tuesday advanced a $500 million plan to restructure Detroit public schools by creating a new district. The vote was taken as teachers, fearing they would go unpaid if the district runs out of money, closed the district for a second consecutive day by calling out sick. “Teachers, you’re going to get paid,” said State Representative Al Pscholka, a Republican and the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, before the panel approved the plan over objections that it would not be enough money and hurt the teachers union. Labor agreements would not transfer to the new district, and collective bargaining would be restricted. The proposal, which passed mostly along party lines, would retire the district’s debt by 2023 and start up a new district in July. The Republican-led House could vote on the plan this week. (AP)

The leaders of a proposed museum of narrative art say they are looking at locations outside Chicago after a battle over whether the museum may be constructed along the city’s lakefront. Mellody Hobson, a financial executive, said Tuesday that she and her husband, the filmmaker George Lucas, were looking elsewhere after a legal fight with local activists who have opposed sites along Lake Michigan. “From the beginning, this process has been co-opted and hijacked by a small special interest group,” Ms. Hobson said. MONICA DAVEY

A federal judge on Tuesday dismissed a lawsuit accusing Maine’s governor, Paul R. LePage, of using blackmail to force a charter school operator to rescind a job offer to a political opponent in a flap that led to an impeachment effort. Judge George Z. Singal of United States District Court in Portland agreed with the governor’s lawyers, who said Mr. LePage, a Republican, was entitled to immunity. The speaker of the State House, Mark Eves, a Democrat, accused the governor of overstepping his authority when he used state funding as a threat to force the charter school operator Good Will-Hinckley to rescind a job offer. (AP)


