


Send your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.

Recently, I attended an off-site event connected to my job. Some fellow employees were in attendance, including the person who co-leads my department. (I don’t work directly for this person, but he does oversee some activities that I participate in.) At the conclusion of the event, this manager was describing a work situation to me as we walked out to the parking lot, and said: “You know what will happen — our business partner will Jew the price down.”

I was flabbergasted. I am Jewish, and this is blatant bigotry. Moreover, our company attempts to stand out for embracing diversity in general.

I said nothing at the time because I did not know what to do. I feel sure this man has no idea that I am Jewish. The work he oversees counts toward my productivity and ultimate bonus. So any response on my part (informal or formal) could have financial consequences — as well as create a hostile work situation. Still, I am troubled by knowing his bigoted stance and that he is probably a Jew hater. Is there any win-win action I can take here?

ANONYMOUS

Anybody, Jewish or not, should be offended by such a remark, which unambiguously trades on and perpetuates an ugly stereotype. I understand that in the shock of the moment it’s hard to know what to say. But the fact that the aftermath includes your assumption that this manager is “probably a Jew hater” strongly suggests that you need to say something. The comment is weighing on you, and justifiably so. Pretending it never happened isn’t going to resolve that.

The specifics depend in part on what sort of resolution you want. You might turn to your own direct supervisor for counsel. It doesn’t sound like you are looking to see this manager punished. If so, make that clear — but also make it clear that you were offended and left uncomfortable. The supervisor should take on the role of addressing the issue and making sure there are no repercussions for you. It is a potentially serious problem for your organization to have someone tossing around language offensive to others within the company and among its clients, partners, customers and others.

Or you could try to have a private conversation with the manager who made the remark; it’s possible that the incident is attributable to ignorance rather than hate and that you will receive an immediate apology. But again — I would frame it very carefully, as something more forward-looking than a confrontation: “I need you to know, partly for your own sake, that this was offensive to me and would be offensive to many others.” Either way, the goal is to move decisively from what was said in the past to why it shouldn’t be said in the future.

Yes, it could be that no matter how your response is framed, this person will turn out to be an unrepentant bigot who will seek ways to retaliate. To be safe, take careful notes and document the process in case this evolves into full-blown and overt workplace discrimination.

Admittedly, none of this sounds appealing. Maybe it would be easier to do nothing and let it slide. You could grit your teeth and carry on knowing that you didn’t confront offensive speech, and that you believe that a bigot represents your company and has partial control over your financial future. Wait a minute: That doesn’t sound so easy either, does it?

I recently began volunteering at a midsize nonprofit organization. A senior-level employee brought me into the position, which previously was a paid job; it was understood that I would be volunteering about a third of the hours. But when I started showing up, the employees weren’t quite sure what to do with me. They said they’d get back to me after meeting with the manager who brought me in, but I haven’t heard back. Whom do I follow up with? How much should I push for a volunteer position before I move on?

K.B.

The bigger question here is how to think about the difference between a volunteer position and a paid one. The baseline mind-set should be that most of the same standards apply in both situations. Except: As a volunteer, you have way less to lose.

In this situation, before you follow up with anybody, figure out what (based on your observations so far) you believe represents the best overlap between what you want to get out of the experience and what this workplace needs. Have informal conversations as needed, without regard to official structures, to sort that out. Then take the lead and propose your own future to the person who brought you in, to the person who seems to be the de facto day-to-day soul of the office, or to both.

You may receive countersuggestions, which you should take seriously, but the point is to set a tone. You are not a problem (“Can someone tell me what to do?”), you are a solution (“Here are my thoughts about what I can do to make everybody’s life easier”).

This is largely the advice I would offer to anybody starting a new job: When parameters are unclear, use that as an opportunity to define them yourself. But as a volunteer, you have some advantages over someone who needs a paycheck. So show initiative, but if you conclude that it’s unlikely you’re going to get what you want because you happened to volunteer for a dysfunctional organization, cut your losses. Find a place that appreciates what you have to offer — particularly because you are, after all, offering it free.


