


“We didn’t know each other” was how Ann Wiener, from the 10th floor, described Peter Glebo, from up on 18.

But he had thought of a way to meet neighbors like her in their building, a 27-story Art Deco tower at 310 Riverside Drive on the Upper West Side of Manhattan known as the Master Apartments: He would photograph them and display the images in gallery space in the lobby. Yes, the building has its own gallery space, started a couple of years ago — a long wall opposite the front desk that is carefully lit and maintained by two residents who volunteered as curators. If it wasn’t uptown, it could be a downtown scene.

Mr. Glebo — the president of Tommy Tune Inc., the business operation of the ageless song and dance man, who is also a choreographer and director — is himself a triple threat. A designer, photographer and painter, his works have been seen in gallery shows at the National Arts Club and Art Basel Miami Beach.

Mr. Glebo mulled overtures from his building’s curators and realized how little he knew about his surroundings, about the vertical community that inhabits 310 Riverside Drive.

“I live here, but I really don’t live here — I’m always on the road with Tommy,” he said. “I travel quite a lot. But I’ve always been curious who are my neighbors, so I asked if I could exhibit people who live and work in the building.” Have camera, will travel the hallways.

He said the curators, Jan Fort (who lives down the hall from Mr. Glebo on 18) and Michael Alicia (from 19), liked the idea but told him, “We have to get approved by the board.”

That would be the co-op board. Everyone in New York has heard about co-op boards that proved to be the most persnickety of the many many-headed hydras exerting authority over daily life.

“They wanted a sample,” he said. “I did Carol Channing with the hot pink.” A nonresident.

The hot pink was a strikingly bright color wash that he applied to a black-and-white print. The portrait of Ms. Channing was hung in the mailroom, and a building-wide email was sent out. It brought about 50 replies from residents interested in setting up shoots. After they coordinated schedules, he photographed about 25.

“Peter wasn’t content just to do pictures and put them up,” said Mr. Tune, who stopped by the building on Thursday for a look before the official opening (a little crowd had gathered several days before, when the photographs were being hung). “He said, ‘How can I make it site-specific?’” Using the building as a backdrop was “a genius idea,” Mr. Tune said.

Mr. Tune knows the building — he said he had lived there briefly, years ago — and it is a building with a history. Built in 1929, it was conceived by, and for, Nicholas Roerich, another artist whose name is trailed by a list of accomplishments in different fields. He was a painter, a poet and a peace activist, to name only three, and his fans included Einstein and the Roosevelts (Franklin and Eleanor). He once had a museum in the building.

As Mr. Glebo made his rounds, he photographed more than neighbors: He did portraits of the building’s staff, including the porters and the superintendent, Enes Radoncic.

Some of the residents poured tea when he showed up, and some poured out stories. “They didn’t clean up their apartments for me or clean up their lives for me,” he said.

So he heard about a much-loved cat that was dying. He inspected a prized ficus tree. (He said it has grown so large in its owner’s living room that if it had to evacuate, it could not squeeze through the front door.)

On the ninth floor, he took 75 or so images of Lana Gersman, who, as the makeup artist Lana G., has been called in when the last four presidents were in New York. He photographed her in front of paintings she has done — using makeup, not paint — and during the shoot, she had a revelation about one of them that made her want to redo it.

“He said, ‘Stay there, let me keep on shooting you right there,’” she recalled, adding that the shoot took only 15 minutes. “But it was the most intense 15 minutes of my life.”

Mr. Glebo shot Ms. Fort in even less time. They had penciled in a three-hour block, but first there was a delay, something about a run to a Home Depot for garden supplies. They both have terraces. And then there was the weather.

“It was absolutely pouring rain,” Ms. Fort said. “I thought, I’ve done this a thousand times. I used to do a lot of print modeling. Peter literally stood on a stool and peered over the trees that divide our terrace. He went click, click, click, click, and we were done.”

He did not show her the images before he chose one and printed it. “I had to trust that whatever he chose was going to be fine,” she said. When she finally saw the one he had picked out, her reaction was that it was more than fine: “Wonderful,” she said.

Ms. Wiener, on the 10th floor, said that Mr. Glebo was “intensely interested in my surroundings.” She has a corner apartment, so there were the views, but the Hudson River is nowhere in her portrait.

“When you walk in, the first thing you see is all of these photographs taped to the wall,” Mr. Glebo recalled. “She said, ‘These are my grandchildren and people I love. I don’t even want to frame them.’ She took her finger and opened a pocket door, and there were more.” So many, in fact, that some had to be cropped out.

He also heard about the ficus tree, for it belongs to her.

“I must have had it since ’96,” she said. She brought it with her when she moved into the building after her husband’s death in 2002. When she heard that Mr. Glebo had described it as “gigantic” and “so big it will never be able to leave through the front door,” she said: “Well, I got it in. I’m not sure I want to move.”


