


LONDON — A British judge ruled on Friday in favor of six Lithuanian migrant workers who said they had been lured to Britain with the promise of decent employment but ended up in conditions resembling servitude, catching chickens without adequate pay or access to facilities where they could bathe, rest, eat or drink.

The judge, Justice Michael Supperstone of the High Court of Justice, found that the men were owed compensation because, among other reasons, they had not been paid the minimum wage for agricultural workers, had been charged illegal fees and had had wages improperly withheld.

The case has been closely watched in Britain. Parliament last year adopted the Modern Slavery Act to crack down on the trafficking and exploitation of migrant workers and other laborers. Immigration has been a contentious and central issue in the debate leading up to a referendum, scheduled for June 23, on whether the country should remain in the European Union.

The six men were employed at varying times from 2008 to 2012 by D. J. Houghton Catching Services in Maidstone, Kent, about 30 miles southeast of London. The company acted as a labor agent, sending workers to farms across Britain, where they caught chickens and loaded them onto trucks. The birds were taken to processing plants that slaughtered them for meat or gathered their eggs, which were sold to some of Britain’s largest supermarket and fast-food chains.

The work is dirty and difficult, as the birds flap, peck, claw, vomit and defecate. A catcher can catch up to 1,500 birds per hour. The work usually takes place in the dark, to keep the birds as calm as possible.

“At the heart of modern slavery is exploitation, including labor exploitation,” said Shanta Martin, a lawyer for the men. “Our clients were trafficked to the U. K. and put to work in appalling conditions and without proper pay. They are now in extremely dire economic straits. Today’s judgment is the most important step toward them being able to get their lives back on track.”

The Ethical Trading Initiative, a British organization that promotes workers’ rights, called the decision a “landmark ruling.”

The authorities raided the company in October 2012 and revoked its license. In March 2014, Paul Broadbent, the chief executive of the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, a regulatory body set up to protect food processing workers, called the treatment of the workers “horrific,” saying: “The exploitation of the workers was prolonged and disgraceful by anyone’s standards. Their working conditions were unsanitary, unreasonable and wholly unacceptable. They were vulnerable people who were severely overworked and grossly underpaid.”

In some cases, the men could rest only as they traveled on minibuses for up to seven hours to start their shifts. They were often denied proper equipment or clothing. Some of the men also reported that they had been harassed, threatened and abused by supervisors.

“The fact is that these workers were treated like slaves,” Mr. Broadbent said in 2014, adding that the agency’s scoring system “rated them as the worst U.K. gangmaster ever.” (A gangmaster is someone who oversees the work of casual manual laborers on behalf of another employer.)

Although the agency took action against the company and the local police began a criminal investigation that continues today, the workers had to go to court to seek compensation, which they did in 2014. They ranged in age from 19 to 58.

Justice Supperstone found that the men were paid for the number of chickens caught, rather than for the hours they worked, including travel time. While he found Houghton and its owners liable, the amount of compensation still has to be calculated. Ten other workers are pursuing claims against the company.

David Wynn, a lawyer for D. J. Houghton and its owners, Jacqueline Judge and Darrell Houghton, did not respond to an email requesting comment on Friday.


