


Brett Yormark could not hide his glee as he spoke about the first Stanley Cup game ever played in Brooklyn, last Sunday’s 4-3 overtime win by the Islanders over the Florida Panthers.

Now Yormark, the chief executive of Barclays Center, hopes there will be more opportunities beyond Sunday’s Game 6 to experience hockey hysteria in Brooklyn this spring.

“It was a culmination,” Yormark said of the victory, secured by Thomas Hickey’s goal 12 minutes 31 seconds into overtime, giving the Islanders a 2-1 series lead. “As good of an experience as it was for the fans, organizationally, we needed it. We needed everyone to say, ‘Boy, that felt really good.’ ”

After an inaugural regular season in Brooklyn spent ironing out problems that included players’ occasional complaints of subpar ice conditions, Yormark was buoyed by a frenzied orange-towel-waving celebration swirling throughout the arena. A sellout crowd announced at 15,795 cheered as boisterously as fans did at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders’ former home, which was renowned for its decibel levels.

No matter the outcome of this opening-round series, which the Islanders led by three games to two after Friday’s double-overtime victory in Sunrise, Fla., Yormark believes there is growing momentum for hockey in Brooklyn.

“This gives us a huge lift for next year,” Yormark said last week.

Yormark spends part of every game striding through the arena’s concourses, chatting and shaking hands with fans like a candidate for political office. He invites their comments.

Yormark and his staff started the season facing myriad obstacles. The departure from Long Island after 43 years, they knew, would be an adjustment — even though the buildup to the move had been three years in the making.

Now, more than six months after opening night on Oct. 9 against the Chicago Blackhawks, Yormark said he was relieved that the first year had been mostly smooth, a few hiccups notwithstanding. The Islanders averaged 13,626 tickets sold for 41 regular-season games, playing to 86.2 percent of capacity. With more Saturday night games, a fan favorite on Long Island, scheduled for next season, those numbers should improve.

“In any new relationship, there’s that period of adjustment,” said Yormark, who also oversaw the Nets’ move to Brooklyn from New Jersey in 2012. “We have to give people a reason to come back, and I think we are.”

He acknowledged that at first he might have tried too hard to generate interest in hockey in a borough that had never hosted an N.H.L. game.

“You can’t force it,” he said. “It has to happen organically.”

Yormark said one early-season controversy had been resolved simply by listening to fans and staying attuned to elements that were popular for decades at Nassau Coliseum, where the Islanders won the Stanley Cup four straight times from 1980 to 1983.

“There was an outcry about fans going down to the ice to see warm-ups,” he said. “And I finally said to my security team: ‘What’s the problem? Let’s try it.’ And we tried it, and we didn’t have one issue. I’m glad that the fans pushed, because they were right. It was their tradition. It worked.”

The Islanders went 25-11-5 at Barclays, surpassing by 3 their point total from the previous season on Long Island. Early in the season, they practiced on game-day mornings in Brooklyn, but they later began holding those skates on Long Island so home games would feel less like road games.

Problems with the ice cropped up early and late in the season, a result of warmer weather. But Barclays began using dehumidifiers after a complaint-filled game against Columbus on March 31, and since then, players have reported better ice.

Yormark said a full-time ice engineer would be in place by next season.

“There have been a lot of adjustments and a lot of learning, “ Yormark said. “What happened last Sunday is the bar, not just for the playoffs, but for every game.”

Gary Bettman, the N.H.L.’s commissioner, said the league had worked to help the Islanders and Barclays Center get optimal ice.

“Dan Craig is there,” Bettman said, referring to the league’s senior director for facility operations, who oversees ice-making throughout the N.H.L. “He thinks the conditions are improving, and the building is certainly cooperating to do it. There are few people who have the expertise that he has in making ice, and so he’s lending his assistance to them, in effect, to teach them how to make ice and to make it better.”

Yormark had been closely monitoring two of the other seven first-round playoff series: Tampa Bay’s five-game elimination of Detroit and the Rangers-Pittsburgh series, which the Penguins won, four games to one, on Saturday. If the Islanders advance, they will play the Lightning.

Given the competition between Barclays Center and Madison Square Garden, it is easy to understand what Yormark craves next.

“I’d love to own the city,” he said. “I’d love to be the only hockey team playing, because all eyes will be on the Islanders.”


