


MOSCOW — Three senior editors at the media organization controlled by Mikhail Prokhorov, the Russian billionaire and Brooklyn Nets owner, left their jobs on Friday, apparently victims of the Kremlin’s ire for reporting too many details about the family and friends of President Vladimir V. Putin.

The departure of the three editors from the RBC newspaper and news service was widely viewed as the death knell for one of Russia’s last independent papers — and the latest ambush in the extended campaign by the Putin administration to exert control over all news reporting.

Journalists in Moscow described the paper’s editorial line as virtually suicidal as it published stories related to Mr. Putin and problems at state-run sacred cows like Rosneft, the oil company, that no other media outlet dared touch. But those stories also made its website among the most popular newssites in Russia.

The latest controversy erupted on Wednesday, when the paper published an article reporting that a man linked to the management of a giant Rococo palace believed to have been built for Mr. Putin along the Black Sea had been granted a concession to grow oysters and mussels nearby.

Weeks before that, the RBC paper published an article about Sergei Roldugin, a cellist and close friend of Mr. Putin who had been linked by the Panama Papers leak to an offshore bank account worth about $2 billion.

Previously the newspaper waded into particularly treacherous waters by publishing details about Mr. Putin’s family, including an article saying that his daughter Katerina was married to Kirill Shamalov, the son of a Putin banker friend and a young billionaire who benefited from state business deals.

The report included details about where Katerina, whom Mr. Putin has not publicly identified as his daughter, lived. “That was a mistake — that was personal information,” said Aleksei A. Venediktov, the editor in chief of the Echo of Moscow radio station. “I know that this provoked a burst of wrath.”

Still, he said, such mistakes were no reason to force the paper to change its editorial policy.

Dmitri S. Peskov, Mr. Putin’s spokesman, denied on Friday that the RBC editors’ departure had anything to do with pressure from the Kremlin, a statement he has repeated in recent weeks regarding various moves against the company.

The first overt signs of trouble emerged last month, when government investigators, some in ski masks, searched the offices of Onexim Group, which manages Mr. Prokhorov’s many assets, over tax issues.

At about the same time, Dmitri Kiselyev, the Kremlin’s main propagandist, appeared on state television holding up a copy of the RBC newspaper with the Panama Papers report on its front page.

The paper had published a photograph of Mr. Putin with the article, although he was not named in the leaked documents about offshore accounts. In Russia, the leak joined an endless list of what government supporters regard as American plots to embarrass or weaken Moscow.

“All over the world and of course in Russia, Americans have assistants who are ready to directly link Putin to the offshores — in whatever way they can,” Mr. Kiselyev said, brandishing the paper.

According to two veteran RBC reporters and other accounts published online, matters reached a climax this week over the Putin palace story, with the Kremlin insisting that the editor Maxim Solyus must go. Elizaveta Osetinskaya, the editor in chief of the overall media group, and Roman Badanin, the editor of the RBC news agency, said they would quit in solidarity.

After the pressure started to build last month, Ms. Osetinskaya had already taken an early leave ahead of a journalism fellowship at Stanford University this fall.

RBC issued a statement on Friday saying the resignations were effective immediately. The statement quoted Nikolai Molibog, the director general of RBC, as saying that management and the three editors “have failed to agree on a number of crucial issues.”

“All three had very similar values,” said Max Trudolyubov, a former editorial page editor for Vedomosti, an independent business daily whose foreign partners, The Financial Times and The Wall Street Journal, were recently forced to sell their stakes. “They believed in honest, unbiased journalism and distinguishing between fact and opinion.”

Andrei Belyak, the spokesman for Onexim, said neither the holding company nor Mr. Prokhorov would comment. Journalists said Mr. Prokhorov has avoided interfering in editorial decisions at the paper.

Dmitri Muratov, the editor of Novaya Gazeta, another struggling newspaper often critical of the government, despaired of the fact that more voices were not being raised to defend RBC. “The journalists, Prokhorov and the society should protect RBC,” Mr. Muratov said.

Most analysts expect that Mr. Prokhorov will be pushed to sell the company to some friend of the Kremlin who will turn it into another government mouthpiece. Reporters at the newspaper said that they were asked to stay on until June 30, which they assumed would mark the arrival of new ownership.

One reporter who asked not to be identified amid the turmoil at the newspaper said many in the newsroom were veterans of similar recent government attacks on Lenta.ru and Gazeta.ru, once robust, independent news websites where the Kremlin forced out the top editor and then gutted the content. Numerous reporters followed the three editors to RBC specifically because they were viewed as fearless.

The reporter described the mood in the newsroom as bleak: “Everyone is just filing their stories and drinking.”


