


Pep Guardiola arrived at Bayern Munich in 2013. Bayern, the German league champion, had just won the Champions League under its departing German coach Jupp Heynckes, and Guardiola — a Spaniard who had just directed Barcelona through a four-year period in which trophies seemed to pile up like snowflakes in a blizzard — was expected to produce the same continental glory.

To date, he has not. And if Tuesday’s second leg of this year’s Champions League semifinal does not produce a trip to the final for Guardiola, he will leave for Manchester City this summer having been beaten at the penultimate stage in all three of his seasons, and each time by a former Spanish rival.

An ouster this year would perhaps be the most intriguing. Although Bayern’s losses to Real Madrid (2014) and Barcelona (2015) were against sexier opponents, the man on the opposing bench on Tuesday has quickly become one of Europe’s defining characters. In an era when teams so rarely have a distinctive identity that carries over from season to season, Diego Simeone’s Atlético Madrid, which holds a 1-0 lead against Bayern Munich after the first leg, is European soccer’s pink elephant: big, stout and impossible to miss.

This is by design. While Guardiola made Barcelona world famous for its silky, possession-oriented style, Simeone has transformed his red-and-white-striped Atlético players into rugged, ruthless defenders who guard their penalty area with fury and look to strike on offense through counterattacks or, quite often, on set plays after restarts.

The style has worked particularly well in Europe. Since Simeone took over Atlético in 2011, the Rojiblancos, as the team is known, have conceded Champions League goals at home to only three teams and have lost at Vicente Calderón Stadium just once. This season, Atlético has produced 34 shutouts in 53 games in all competitions, including last week’s first-leg stifling of Guardiola’s star-laden team.

The Atlético wall has several critical pieces. Among the most important, of course, is the goalkeeper, Jan Oblak, who was a backup until an injury to the starter forced him onto the field last spring. Oblak, a Slovene, responded immediately, saving a penalty and recording a shutout in his first match. He has kept hold of the starting job since.

In front of Oblak are a number of hard-nosed players like Filipe Luís, the Spanish national team starter Juanfran and José María Giménez, a talented young center back. The captain is Diego Godín, a gritty veteran player whom Simeone praises constantly and trusts implicitly.

Godín is typically all over the field, pushing his way into scrums and serving as a backbone to Atlético’s unflagging shape. Yet even he did not hesitate, when asked earlier this season, to identify the root of Atlético’s success.

“Simeone is the stone around which this project is constructed,” Godín said. “He has strengthened this group of players. He has made the players and fans believe, not just with words but with acts.”

Many of those acts involve Simeone’s sideline histrionics, which are notably piqued and pugnacious. An Argentine who played in three World Cups for his national team as a midfielder, Simeone cuts a swarthy figure in the bench area, typically wearing outfits that are mostly (or entirely) black and slicking back his flowing hair. With his square jaw and sharp glare, Simeone is imposing when he confronts a referee or stamps his foot or takes off running in celebration after an important goal, particularly in comparison with rival coaches like Barcelona’s Luis Enrique, Manchester City’s professorial Manuel Pellegrini or even Guardiola.

After retiring from a playing career that included two stints at Atlético, Simeone began his managing career by bouncing around clubs in Argentina. In 2011, he helped the Sicilian club Catania avoid relegation, briefly returned to a job in Buenos Aires and then, in December of that year, joined Atlético.

There, Simeone found his place, injecting the club — which has historically played in the significant shadow of Real Madrid — with a needed distinctiveness and a belief that Spanish soccer could be about more than Barcelona and Real. In his first season, Simeone won the second-tier Europa League. The next year, Atlético beat Chelsea to claim the season-opening Super Cup, and in 2013 Simeone won the Copa del Rey, with Atlético beating Real Madrid in the final.

Then, in 2014, he delivered the Spanish league title and was a minute away from beating Real Madrid in the Champions League final before losing in extra time.

Now, Atlético is back on the verge of another trip to the final. A rematch with Real and its new coach, Zinedine Zidane, is possible if Los Blancos are able to overcome Manchester City on Wednesday, though beating Bayern Munich is challenge enough on its own, and Guardiola will have the added incentive of trying to avoid a personal triad of Spanish dismissals.

“It’s not over yet; we still have a chance,” Guardiola told reporters recently. “If we lose it, you can kill me. But we still have a chance.”

Simeone, understandably, was circumspect regarding Atlético’s focus. Playing at Munich’s Allianz Arena is among the most difficult road games in Europe, yet neither the circumstances, nor the opposing players (even if they include weapons like Thomas Müller or Robert Lewandowski), change Simeone’s expectations.

He expects his players to be brutish. To be firm. To be unbowed.

It is what they always are. It is what he has made them.


