


TORONTO — When Red Sox pitcher Pedro Martinez, wearing the wan look of defeat after back-to-back poundings by the Yankees, acknowledged in September 2004 that there was little else he could do except “tip my hat and call the Yankees my daddy,” it was the rare instance of a professional athlete throwing up his hands in public.

Whether it was exasperation or capitulation — or perhaps some cleverly manufactured inspiration — Martinez’s moment of submission was a fleeting one. A month later, he came on in relief on two days’ rest at Yankee Stadium in the clinching game of the Red Sox’ comeback from a three-games-to-none deficit in the American League Championship Series.

Which is a way of suggesting that perhaps the Yankees should acknowledge what is becoming increasingly obvious this season — that the Toronto Blue Jays hold their parenting rights.

Since the start of last season, the Blue Jays have won 19 of 27 meetings between the teams, including their 4-1 victory on Tuesday night.

The Blue Jays essentially won the American League East last year by dominating the Yankees, winning 13 of the 19 meetings — including nine of 13 played during the final eight weeks of the season, when the Blue Jays blew past the Yankees to win by six games.

The Blue Jays may still be searching for their footing — they are five games behind Boston, while the Yankees are seven and a half back — but they have not forgotten how to handle the Yankees. Their win was their sixth in eight games against them this season.

Manager Joe Girardi benched the struggling Alex Rodriguez, who was hitless in 14 career at-bats against Blue Jays starter J. A. Happ, and the slumping left fielder Brett Gardner, but those moves proved fruitless as did a critical in-game decision: to lift C. C. Sabathia after Edwin Encarnacion’s leadoff double in the seventh with the score tied, 1-1.

Dellin Betances struck out Justin Smoak, who had homered earlier, and retired Russell Martin on a deep fly to left. But he walked Devon Travis and gave up consecutive opposite-field singles to Kevin Pillar and Darwin Barney for a 4-1 lead. Pillar and Barney also made stellar defensive plays.

“They’ve had our number a little bit,” third baseman Chase Headley said. “For whatever reason, they’ve been able to get a couple runs and get the big hit when they needed to, and we haven’t.”

The win ensures that the Blue Jays will win a fifth consecutive series against the Yankees — the first time that has happened since 1993 — and have now won eight of their past nine series.

“You never want to disrespect somebody on the other side by making a generalized comment and them taking it the wrong way,” said Blue Jays right fielder Jose Bautista. “And I honestly can’t say it’s because of this or because of that.”

But Bautista did say the Blue Jays’ success — after so many years of struggles against the Yankees, especially in New York, where they once went two and a half seasons without winning a series — might be in the heads of both teams.

“It elevates your awareness on things that you can do to attack a team that have worked,” he said. “It can elevate your confidence, just like if you’re losing, you can become a little shy or wary of certain situations and maybe even panic.”

The formula for the Yankees has been straightforward: They either have to get a shutdown performance or get into the shaky Blue Jays bullpen. In four of their eight wins since the start of last season, Yankees starters have allowed a total of one run. In the other four, they have staged late comebacks to win.

The Yankees tried to steal another win Monday in the ninth inning, when Brian McCann hit a two-run homer, and they had two cracks to get even with the tying run at the plate.

But those late-stage rallies may be harder to come by with the Blue Jays making a deal Tuesday for Atlanta closer Jason Grilli.

“There’s been a lot of games that I feel we’ve had a chance to win if we scored runs,” Girardi said. “We haven’t scored a lot of runs against them.”

The Yankees, since their run of excellence began 20 years ago, have rarely encountered teams that have stymied them for long. The most prominent was the Los Angeles Angels, whose aggressiveness — in the batter’s box and on the basepaths, especially — seemed to stand up well to the Joe Torre-era Yankees.

The Angels eliminated the Yankees from the playoffs in 2002 and 2005; and in 1998, when the Yankees won 114 games, the Angels were the only team that had a winning record against them, beating them in six of their 11 games. From 1998 through 2008, the Angels were the only team in the American League to have a winning record against the Yankees.

Coincidence or not, these Blue Jays have many of the same characteristics as those Angels teams: athleticism, aggressiveness, dangerous bats and pitching that is good enough.

If there was a point when the Blue Jays’ confidence soared, it was last August at Yankee Stadium, when they swept a three-game series. Bautista hit a 10th-inning homer to win the opener, and then David Price and Marco Estrada tossed shutouts.

“That was a really big series for us,” Pillar said. “It showed us not only can we compete with them, but we can beat them at Yankee Stadium. The Yankees always come with that stigma, that reputation, and they’re going to get everyone’s best effort. Even if they’re not quite what they used to be, they’re still the Yankees.”

And who’s their daddy?

“We’re not there yet,” Pillar said with a laugh.


