


BEIRUT, Lebanon — Amid renewed fighting across Syria on Thursday, clashes broke out between Kurdish militias and Syrian government forces, potentially opening a new front in the already complex conflict.

The skirmishes — in Syria’s northeastern tip, where the government controls just a small enclave within a de facto Kurdish autonomous region — disrupted Qamishli, one of Syria’s calmer, safer cities.

Before this, Kurdish and government forces had largely avoided clashes as Kurdish militias largely focused on holding off Islamic State militants, with help from the United States and Russia. But tensions have been brewing since the Kurds formally declared their autonomous zone this year.

The new fighting added to a sense that Syria risked slipping back into all-out war, as a partial truce and an effort at political talks collapsed in tandem. The opposition negotiators walked out of talks in Geneva this week, saying they refused to continue while the government was committing “massacres,” and the warring parties showed signs of preparing for new battles.

Two major humanitarian successes provided the lone bright spots in the darkening landscape. In one of the largest evacuations from besieged areas, 515 sick and wounded people were extricated from four blockaded areas — two opposition-held towns, Madaya and Zabadani and two government-held towns, Fouaa and Kfarya. Those towns have had more luck in negotiations because they have been treated as a group in talks often involving the government’s ally, Iran, and the insurgents’ Turkish backers.

And a United Nations convoy was reported to be on the way to Rastan, in Homs Province, which has not received aid since 2012.

Even so, the United Nations special envoy for the Syrian conflict, Staffan de Mistura, said on Thursday that aid was reaching only about 560,000 people, out of the 4.1 million believed to be in need in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. United Nations officials say the Syrian government is not allowing medicines or medical equipment to be included in the aid deliveries. “This is not only worrisome, but unacceptable according to international law,” Mr. de Mistura said.

American officials expressed concern over reports that Russia was moving artillery into place around the divided city of Aleppo to help its ally, the Syrian government, begin a new attempt to retake rebel-held areas there. There are growing fears about an offensive unleashing a new wave of refugees toward the Turkish border. They would join the tens of thousands already marooned on the Syrian side.

Those refugees set off a debate Thursday in Brussels over Turkey’s request for visa-free travel for its people across most of the region by early summer. Allowing up to 80 million Turks to visit most countries of the European Union is one of the most divisive parts of a deal the bloc signed last month with Ankara. For now, the agreement has stanched the bloc’s worst migration crisis since World War II by keeping the refugees in Turkey.

But critics complain that the deal has forced Europe into far-reaching concessions to Turkey just as it takes an authoritarian turn under President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

Mr. Erdogan has angered some European officials by pushing the issue, while hinting at his power to unleash another flood of migrants toward the Continent.

In the fighting in Qamishli, Kurdish activists and news sites reported, as many as a dozen pro-government militia fighters had been killed, along with at least two Kurdish fighters, members of the autonomous region’s security forces. The reports showed video of a tattered government flag at the Alayia prison in the area, which they said had been taken over by Kurdish fighters.

Pro-government websites said Kurds had started the battle by attacking army positions. Kurdish activists said in accounts posted online that the tensions began when government forces sought to prevent one of them from filming in the government-held security zone in the city.

Syria’s most powerful Kurdish party, the Democratic Union Party, and its militias known as the People’s Protection Units or Y.P.G., have largely maintained an implicit cease-fire with government forces in exchange for local autonomy since the outset of the Syrian uprising, which began with political protests and security crackdowns in 2011.

They have been a powerful player that does not fit neatly into the anti-government camp, in part because of their secular, socialist ideology, and in part because of Arab concerns over Kurdish territorial aspirations in a region that has a significant Arab minority. Nor do they fit well in the government fold, because of historic tensions between Kurds and the Syrian state.

The Kurds have been the most consistently effective local ground force against the Islamic State, drawing competing support from Russia and the United States. Yet they have also sometimes clashed with opposition groups — drawing rebel accusations that they are collaborating with the government.

In an interview with a Saudi newspaper on Monday, the leader of the Democratic Union Party, Saleh Muslim, sought to dispel suspicions of collusion with the government of President Bashar al-Assad. He said that the Kurdish forces were “ready to fight Assad under a secular, democratic and civilian umbrella” and that “Assad is falling no matter how long it takes.”

But he said he did not want to carry out the fight in such a way that Syria would fall into the hands of the Islamic State or other jihadists.


