


OTTAWA — Prime Minister Justin Trudeau condemned the “heinous” killing in the Philippines on Monday of a Canadian who had been held captive by Islamic militants for seven months.

Mr. Trudeau confirmed that John Ridsdel, 68, a mining executive, had been killed by the Abu Sayyaf group after a ransom deadline expired.

“This was an act of coldblooded murder, and responsibility rests squarely with the terrorist group who took him hostage,” Mr. Trudeau told reporters.

On Sept. 21, members of Abu Sayyaf kidnapped Mr. Ridsdel along with Robert Hall, another Canadian, Kjartan Sekkingstad of Norway, and Marites Flor, a woman from the Philippines, from a marina and resort on Samal Island. Several news reports indicated that the group was seeking about $6.4 million in ransom for each of the hostages.

Mr. Ridsdel appeared last month in a video posted on a Facebook page associated with Abu Sayyaf, in which he pleaded with Mr. Trudeau to meet the kidnappers’ demands. He appeared with two other hostages; all were handcuffed and appeared gaunt.

Global Affairs Canada, the country’s foreign ministry, said that the government would not pay ransom.

“Kidnap for ransom is a significant source of terrorist funding, fueling violence and instability,” it said in a statement on Monday.

The ministry declined to comment on what military efforts, if any, had been underway to rescue the hostages when the kidnappers’ deadline approached.

Bob Rae, who was interim leader of the Liberal Party in Canada before Mr. Trudeau took over, told the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation that he had been working with Mr. Ridsdel’s family in efforts to free the hostages.

“It’s hard, it’s just very hard,” Mr. Rae, a friend of Mr. Ridsdel’s since the 1960s, told the broadcaster. “Whether things could have been done differently, it’s too soon for that to be said. Certainly the family did everything they could to try to reach a solution.”

Reuters, quoting a spokesman for the Philippines military, reported that a man on a motorcycle on Monday dropped a plastic bag with a head in it in the center of town on Jolo Island, the remote region where Abu Sayyaf is largely based. The military added that tests were underway to confirm the identity of the victim.

While the United States military has said that Abu Sayyaf has links with Al Qaeda and has received support from it, many analysts characterize the group mainly as a ruthless criminal organization, focused on profiting from kidnappings rather than ideology.

The Philippines armed forces have said the group is holding a number of other hostages. In November, the group decapitated a Malaysian hostage when that country’s prime minister arrived in the Philippines for an international summit meeting.

The Calgary Herald reported that Mr. Ridsdel had worked at the newspaper as a reporter during the 1970s and 1980s before becoming a spokesman and manager for Petro-Canada, a large oil company based in that city. Mr. Ridsdel later managed a mine in the Philippines, and worked part time as a mining consultant in recent years.

The Philippine military and police, in a joint statement on Tuesday, expressed condolences to Mr. Ridsdel’s family, and vowed to press their efforts “to neutralize these lawless elements and thwart further threats to peace and security.”


