


ROME — The adage that real estate is about location, location, location has never been more true than in the case of the Villino Giulia, in Rome. The villino — a diminutive of villa — edges the Spanish Steps, one of the most prized landmarks in one of the world’s most beloved cities. The villino can be entered from the top of the steps, down a little passageway across from the Trinità dei Monti church and the Hotel Hassler. From this vantage point, the villino presents only two of its six floors to the public, and appears to be a tidy little residence.

Six floors and 735 square meters, or 7,910 square feet, down, at the foot of the Spanish Steps, is another entrance, squeezed between shops and near the Keats-Shelley House on the Piazza di Spagna. A 320-square-meter garden climbs through all levels, creating a privacy buffer between the villino and the fenced-off steps and offering a tinkling fountain and several terraces for enjoying a morning espresso or a sunset prosecco.

Inside, an elegantly curved staircase and an elevator connect all floors, save for a rooftop terrace with 360-degree views of the city, a splendid scramble of red-tiled roofs, umbrella pines and the dome of St. Peter’s.

The villino, which is for sale for an asking price of 20 million euros, or $22.4 million, has had a lively past. Built in the 1920s, its most famous resident was Renato Angiolillo, a Roman senator and the founder of the newspaper Il Tempo. After he died in 1973, his widow, Maria, who lived for another 36 years, threw the kinds of parties written about in books and society columns.

A scandal occurred recently when two sides of the family feuded over who had the rights to Mrs. Angiolillo’s pink diamond and sued Christie’s for selling it for $40 million in 2013.

Mrs. Angiolillo was known as the queen of Roman salons. Fellini, Zefferelli, Agnelli, Berlusconi — people for whom one name suffices — mingled with royalty, enjoying their hostess’s insistence on French cuisine and wine. Walking through a low doorway, the housekeeper who was Mrs. Angiolillo’s personal maid and who has lived in and looked after the property since her death in 2009, warned a visitor to duck. “Qadaffi’s son didn’t,” she said, shaking her head.

That low passage leads to the caves for storage and a wine cellar. Other levels have high ceilings and expansive windows that let in the abundant Roman sunshine. There are three bedrooms, four bathrooms and two half-bathrooms, as well as kitchenettes on three floors, installed, perhaps, at the request of Mrs. Angiolillo for her parties; they need complete renovation. The interiors sparkle with marble floors, marble columns and marble surrounds on doorways. One marble mantel still adorns one of the three fireplaces; the other mantelpieces have been sold. Doors are painted with floral designs, and delicate plasterwork decorates the walls and ceilings, where chandeliers once glowed.

“Even though Italy is a country which is very rich in very high-end properties, even amongst them there are particular exceptions, ‘rare pearls,”’ said Dimitri Corti, founder of Lionard Real Estate, which is handling the sale, and an expert on historic Italian properties. “A good example is the Villino Giulia in Piazza di Spagna: an entire palazzo for sale in one of the world’s most famous piazzas, a palazzo which has never been divided into apartments, truly hard to find.”


