


After meeting with a group of gay people who said they had been bullied, Prince William, the Duke of Cambridge, appeared on the cover of Attitude, a gay magazine, and urged young people to report instances of abuse to an adult.

“No one should be bullied for their sexuality or any other reason, and no one should have to put up with the kind of hate that these young people have endured in their lives,” Prince William said in an accompanying statement. “You should be proud of the person you are, and you have nothing to be ashamed of.”

The cover was planned weeks before a shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., killed 49 people, but the magazine said in a statement that the type of hatred exhibited by the gunman, Omar Mateen, begins at an early age.

“Such violence does not exist in a vacuum but snowballs from intolerance and bullying that begins in classrooms, too often comes from politicians, religious leaders and is often not treated with respect by the media,” the statement read.

For Prince William, the decision to meet with members of the lesbian, bisexual, gay and transgender community appears to be a further venture into gay rights issues and an extension of a broader effort to combat bullying. In April, he established a task force to help combat cyberbullying — on Tuesday, Kensington Palace announced that Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the creator of the World Wide Web, had joined the effort.

Prince William is not the first royal to champion a high-profile cause, but Arianne Chernock, an associate professor of history at Boston University who specializes in modern British history, said that Prince William; his wife, Catherine, the Duchess of Cambridge; and his brother, Prince Harry, had gravitated toward more sensitive topics than others had in the past.

L.G.B.T. issues, Ms. Chernock said, might have been seen as “an underdog cause” until relatively recently, and was perhaps the kind of work that would have attracted the duke’s mother, Diana, the princess of Wales.

“I think they’re building on Diana,” Ms. Chernock said, “who really championed the other causes other people didn’t want to touch.”

Ms. Chernock said that Diana understood that the news media could be used to bring awareness to her causes; she also knew that it could help keep the royal family relevant and fashion her image as a royal. When she chose to shake hands with an H.I.V.-positive man in 1987, she was credited with helping to shed light on a cause that had been shunned and ignored.

"That was a really huge turning point for her,” Ms. Chernock said, “and really did change a lot of the public attitude toward H.I.V. AIDS in particular, but as a consequence, the gay community more generally.”

Her sons have largely followed her blueprint. In March, Prince Harry made headlines when he spoke about the need for gender equality while on a visit to Nepal. But Prince William’s decision to allow himself to be photographed for a gay magazine, Ms. Chernock said, shows a royal “pushing the envelope further than we’ve seen before.”


