


Earlier this month, the Istanbul International Arts and Culture Festival, known as IST. Festival, brought together an eclectic mix of international artists and fashion folk for a three-day program of symposia, film screenings and live performances. But for three women of the Fendi family, the festival also presented a rare opportunity to reunite for a family trip.

For Silvia Venturini Fendi — the third-generation designer at the historic Roman house — and her daughters, the jewelry designer Delfina Delettrez Fendi, and Leonetta Luciano Fendi, who is based in London, family get-togethers are limited to their yearly vacation in their holiday home on the Italian island of Ponza. Delfina has attended three out of the five festivals since its inception in 2010 — and suggested that her mother take part in this year’s event. “Every time Delfina returned from the festival she looked so happy, so I thought: ‘Why not?’” says Silvia, adding that the weekend also allowed them to explore their ancestral roots. “This city means something to us as a family: It is said that many generations ago we were Turkish.”

Both generations present felt an immediate affinity with Istanbul. “I love cities with water — I am Roman and Turkish, and water is very important: water gives me energy,” says Silvia, who has been to the city only once before with her own mother, when she was a child. “I do feel there is something in my DNA, something reconnecting,” adds Delfina.

Outside of the busy festival program (which saw the Fendis dining, dancing and enjoying a sunset boat ride down the Bosphorus with the artist José Parlá, the actress Parker Posey and Sonic Youth’s Thurston Moore), the trio found time to take in such majestic sites as the Hagia Sofia and the Blue Mosque, as well as stock up on local loot. Delfina sought out the celebrated Turkish jeweler Sevan Bicakci and took home a hoard of carpets at the Grand Bazaar, while her mother, unfortunately, found herself face-to-face with Fendi counterfeits. “I had to look away,” Silvia says with resignation. Still, the visual opulence of the metropolis and its artistic traditions proved to be inspiring. “We are both very visual,” says Delfina, nodding toward her mother. “We really wanted to seek out the same things on this trip, so it’s been easy.”


