


CHICAGO — The police here on Friday announced widespread arrests and seizures of numerous weapons and tens of thousands of dollars in drugs as part of a two-day operation the department called one of the largest gang raids in the city’s history.

Minutes after the announcement at Police Headquarters on the South Side, two people were shot about a block away in what apparently was a gang-related shooting. A witness said a young man with a gun had ridden by on a bicycle. Soon after, the police said, a passer-by, a woman in her 40s who had been walking out of a nearby Starbucks, was shot and killed. A man, who the police said was apparently the intended target, was wounded.

In all, 140 people were arrested in an urgent push to tamp down the gun violence that has plagued the city, and that many here fear may rise along with temperatures. As of mid-May, 216 people have been murdered in Chicago, a 62 percent increase from the same period last year, and shootings have increased by 60 percent.

“These initiatives send a clear message to anyone who contributes to the sources of violence in Chicago: You will be subject to the full weight of the department and our partners in law enforcement,” Eddie Johnson, the city’s new police superintendent, said as he announced the sweep. “Put simply, violence this summer will not be tolerated.”

In the raid, the police said, 117 of the 140 people arrested were included on the Police Department’s list of people most likely to be tied to gun violence, either as a victim or as an assailant. The department uses an unusual predictive computer model, known as a Strategic Subject List, which weighs factors related to a person’s previous arrests, gang affiliations and shootings to gauge how likely someone will end up getting shot or shooting someone. Chicago officials say that a small number of people — perhaps only 1,400 in a city of 2.7 million — are driving the majority of the violence.

The police said they seized 23 guns, more than $45,000 worth of drugs and hundreds of packs of illegal cigarettes. Charges included illegal possession of guns and selling drugs.

“Chicago police officers and detectives have been engaged in a significant operation to disrupt organized gang activity that has had our communities in a stranglehold for far too long,” Superintendent Johnson said.

Just outside, a police officer saw the shooting unfold before 4 p.m.

A witness, Kianna Wilson, 36, said she was down the street when a young man rode by on his bike and blew her a kiss while displaying a handgun. “After he blew me the kiss, I heard the gunshots not even a minute later,” she said.

Jackie Smith said she lived on the block where the shots were fired and heard about six loud bangs. “It’s not safe nowhere,” she said, adding, “The police station is right there.”

Superintendent Johnson said later that the shooting highlighted what he had long said about the brazen nature of the violence here. “It illustrates how people have weapons in the City of Chicago and they don’t mind using them,” he said.


