


Two Democrats will battle each other to become California’s next United States senator after winning the top spots in an open primary on Tuesday. The intraparty fight between Kamala Harris, the state’s attorney general, and Loretta Sanchez, a congresswoman from Orange County, will be the first to shut out Republicans since California approved nonpartisan primaries in 2010. Ms. Harris and Ms. Sanchez defeated a crowded field that included two former chairmen of the State Republican Party. The campaign to replace Barbara Boxer, a Democrat who was first elected in 1992, is the first for an open Senate seat in California in more than a generation. JENNIFER MEDINA

Gov. Sam Brownback on Wednesday backed a $38 million increase in state aid for poor school districts as he called a special session to avert a court-mandated school shutdown. Mr. Brownback, a Republican, wants the Republican-dominated Legislature to respond to a State Supreme Court ruling declaring that the state’s system for distributing $4 billion in aid to school districts remains unfair to poor ones. State officials believe the $38 million increase would be in line with the court’s decision, and it would redistribute dollars from wealthier districts. Mr. Brownback said he is willing to consider various ways to raise the money, including shifting it from other aid to schools or cutting other areas of the state’s budget. (AP)

The nonprofit organization run by the wife of Gov. Bruce Rauner, a Republican, has sued him amid the state’s unprecedented budget impasse. The awkward situation has raised eyebrows about Diana Rauner’s twin roles as first lady to the state’s first Republican governor in over a decade and as a longtime social services advocate. Ms. Rauner, a Democrat, is president of the Chicago-based Ounce of Prevention Fund, which offers early childhood programs and is partly state-funded. The fund recently joined a lawsuit against the governor and state agencies brought by social agencies working without payment for nearly a year because of budget gridlock. A hearing in the court case is scheduled for next month. (AP)


