


A German flag with a barely noticeable strip of lace added to its bottom serves as a stage curtain at the beginning of “The Underpants,” a comedy adapted by Steve Martin from a German farce by Carl Sternheim, at Guild Hall in East Hampton.

That delicate edging is the last bit of subtlety to be found in this production, which almost immediately devolves into a loud, in-your-face spectacle that shamelessly begs for laughs and applause.

Two “beer hall girls,” not usually part of Mr. Martin’s play, come skipping out to lead the rest of the cast in a prancing musical introduction, clapping their hands emphatically in a way that suggests that audience members put their hands together, too. The jolly clapping, by all the actors, pops up during every scene change as well.

Mr. Martin’s satirical play, which had an Off-Broadway run in 2002 and has often been revived, seems more strained than it has to be in this version, directed by Bill Fennelly. The production originated at Syracuse Stage last year with largely the same cast. The stylized acting is actually carried off nicely by the performers, including those who introduce the show, Hollybeth Gourlay and Margot Plum, the charming dirndl-clad Mädchen. It’s all just too unrelenting.

The story centers on an incident that befell a naïve young housewife named Louise Maske, whose underpants somehow slipped down to her ankles as she stood on her toes trying to see the king pass by in a parade. The year is 1910, and the mere glimpse of billowy bloomers causes a sensation. Everyone in Düsseldorf knows about it, including Louise’s surly civil-servant husband, Theo. “I can’t believe this happened to me!” he blurts out in outrage.

Marianna McClellan deftly portrays Louise, a sweet young woman who later learns about the conniving ways of the world and how to deal with them. She even manages to keep an innocent demeanor as Louise experiences extreme lust and later is seen copulating, in choreographed simulations. (The play’s schoolboy smuttiness also comes from Mr. Martin’s script, which abounds in double entendres, though it also contains several respectably amusing and clever jokes, like one involving a newspaper headline.) Mark David Watson plays Theo as blustery rather than dangerous, though it’s hard to say how he is supposed to be interpreted, since he also turns out to be anti-Semitic.

That Jew-hating aspect of a German’s psyche — which Mr. Martin clearly intends as a foreshadowing of the Nazi era, not a character’s personal quirk — reveals itself after two men visit Theo and Louise’s apartment, both seeking to rent an extra room that is being advertised. It turns out that the two men had witnessed Louise’s accident, had become smitten and simply wanted to be near her.

Louise rents the room to Frank Versati, a flamboyant poet who woos her aggressively. (Daniel Passer, though he overdoes the foppish part, wrings all the humor he can from a hat-and-coat-tossing shtick, whether he hits the hooks he aims for or not.) But Theo has promised the room to one Benjamin Cohen, who is forced to deny that he is Jewish. (Michael Brian Dunn, who plays Cohen, is also gifted at physical comedy, in particular his mastery of wobbly legs.)

Mr. Martin no doubt meant well in highlighting the mistrust and distaste of Jews by non-Jewish countrymen in early-20th-century Germany, but his approach is discomforting. He has Benjamin making mistakes that would give him away, saying (or almost saying) words like “oy” or “shalom,” and then attempting to cover them up in an American vernacular that is both unlikely and stereotypical.

An annoying affectation that runs through the play is the use of German accents for comic effect by characters who are, after all, speaking their native language, in which they would not have accents. The exception is Versati, who speaks with an exaggerated Italian accent. The production looks good, with the help of Raquel Barreto’s delightful costumes and William Bloodgood’s bright period set.

In another major role, Sabrina Profitt plays Gertrude Deuter, a nosy upstairs neighbor who encourages the browbeaten and sex-starved Louise to have an affair, both to have some fun and to liberate herself. Ms. Profitt tackles the brassy part with gusto, landing her comic lines and frequently lewd gestures with superb timing. Gertrude helps to highlight some of the feminist aspects that Mr. Martin has interpolated into the Sternheim comedy. The play by Mr. Martin is very much an adaptation, not a translation. As a summertime production in a resort town, it is suitably lightweight — and might feel lighter if it didn’t try so hard to be funny.


