


ATLANTIC CITY — As this fading gambling mecca reels on the edge of bankruptcy, its finances scrutinized by a host of auditors, some objectionable expenses have bobbed to the surface. But none have drawn such broad resentment as the realization that Atlantic City pays about $1 million a year to provide pensions for retired lifeguards.

In much of the Northeast, lifeguard stands are the province of youth, teenagers and college students making the most of a break between semesters. But members of the Atlantic City Beach Patrol return year after year, lured by the prospect of turning a summer on the sand into a lifetime of payouts.

Some, like Norman Draper, 69, are collecting $15,000 or more annually for stretching a temporary beach job into a second career — a modest sum, but still an unusual amount for seasonal work. In Mr. Draper’s case, the gig lasted for 51 summers.

But the dedication of weathered veterans like Mr. Draper has not earned much sympathy from those trying to save Atlantic City from economic ruin.

The president of the New Jersey Senate, Stephen M. Sweeney, is calling for the repeal of an 88-year-old statute that created the pension system for Atlantic City’s lifeguards. Senator Sweeney, a union leader who generally supports generous pay and benefits for workers, said providing pensions for what is generally considered part-time summer work was ludicrous.

“I don’t think that public pensions for summer lifeguards are appropriate,” said Mr. Sweeney, a Democrat from Gloucester County. “This is just one of the bad spending habits, but it is symbolic of the budget practices that have long plagued the city and led it to the verge of a financial disaster.”

On the subject of lifetime payments for lifeguards, Mr. Sweeney has an ally in Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican, who wants the state to take control of Atlantic City and rework its contracts with public employees. “Lifeguards get pensions in Atlantic City — could we please? This is ridiculous,” Mr. Christie told reporters at a news conference in March.

Under intense pressure to slash municipal spending, Atlantic City officials have already eliminated jobs and done away with perks that raised eyebrows, including cars that were available for City Council members.

Mayor Donald Guardian, a Republican, has resisted Mr. Sweeney’s push for a state takeover, but supports eliminating lifeguard pensions. He praised the senator “for creating a bill that will allow us to end the lifeguard pension plan that we have been forced to pay by the state for several decades now.”

But that sort of talk irritates Mr. Draper, who just started collecting his pension after retiring last year from the lifeguard job he had held since he was 17.

“It’s only because the lifeguard pension seems to be so frivolous and unnecessary to some people that it’s being picked on and being targeted,” he said in an interview. “People think that the lifeguards just sort of show up every day and flip the boats and go home and go to a bar or whatever.”

But he rescued several people over the years, he said, while maintaining a high level of physical fitness and risking skin cancer from prolonged exposure to the sun. His lifeguard pension should not be viewed any differently from the larger pension he is collecting after 25 years of teaching in public schools.

By the time he retired, as a captain of the beach patrol, Mr. Draper was earning $30,000 for four months’ work, he said. He qualified for a pension, equal to half his final pay, because he was over 45 and had been a lifeguard for at least 20 years. The pension plan allows a surviving spouse to continue collecting the benefits after a retired lifeguard dies.

Those were the rules set by a statute pushed through the New Jersey Legislature in 1928 by Emerson Richards, a Republican state senator who lived along the boardwalk. Lifeguards like Mr. Draper contribute 4 percent of their paychecks to the pension fund; the city is responsible for the balance.

As the roll of retired lifeguards has grown, the city’s obligation has become onerous. Kevin Lavin, the former emergency manager for Atlantic City, found that the lifeguard pension was costing the city more than $1 million a year and suggested amending the law so the pension could be cut off.

Seth Grossman, a lawyer and former city councilman, recalled noticing lifeguards on the city payroll in winter months and wondering why. He learned that lifeguards approaching retirement would paint boats and perform other off-season chores to increase the annual income that would determine the size of their pensions.

“We used to call it the lifeguard mafia,” Mr. Grossman said, listing some of the powerful alumni of the beach patrol, including two men who represent Atlantic County in Trenton: Senator Jim Whelan, a Democrat, and Assemblyman Chris A. Brown, a Republican.

The law was drawn up with Atlantic City in mind, but lifeguards in several other Jersey Shore towns eventually discovered that it applied to them too. Three years ago, the Council in Ocean City, just south of Atlantic City, passed a resolution asking state lawmakers to relieve them of the lifeguard pension’s burden.

Michael Allegretto, a former councilman in Ocean City who sponsored the resolution, said he thought the state law was unfair to taxpayers in beach communities. He said it was also wrong to take some of the pay of lifeguards “who just do it in high school and college” because the qualifications for a pension for most of them were “very unattainable.’’

The issue of pensions for lifeguards has also arisen in places where beaches require year-round monitoring. In 2011, discontent about the high pay and rich pension plan of the lifeguards in Newport Beach, Calif., pressured them to accept a less-lucrative contract.

Mr. Draper vowed to fight in court before he would yield his lifeguard pension, which is something of a Draper family tradition.

He said his father, Elmer, collected a pension of less than $1,000 a year after serving on the beach patrol from 1934 to 1954. He said his sister-in-law had been collecting the pension of his older brother Charles Draper, who was an Atlantic City lifeguard for 34 years, since he died three years ago.

Despite Mayor Guardian’s position, Mr. Draper, who served as the president of the bargaining unit for the union that represents the lifeguards, said he had been assured by representatives of the city that the pension plan was secure. He recalled his counterpart in a negotiation telling him, “If we ever reach the point where we can’t pay the lifeguard pension, the city will be in bigger trouble than you can ever imagine.”


