


INTERNATIONAL

An article on May 20 about signs that some Vietnamese are eager for the American military to return to Cam Ranh Bay base, which the United States used in the Vietnam War, referred incorrectly to the use of the base during the war by American warplanes. While fighter jets took off from the base, B-52 bombers did not.

NEW YORK

A headline on Wednesday for the About New York column, about a lawsuit over subprime loans at Emigrant Savings Bank, referred incorrectly to those loans in the context of the bank’s history. The assertion by Howard Milstein, quoted in the column, that his family “saved” Emigrant referred to the family’s acquisition of the bank in the 1980s; it is not the case that the subprime loans, from the 2000s, “helped save” the bank.

•

An article on Thursday about Jona S. Rechnitz, a cooperating witness in a corruption case against the correction officers union leader and a central figure in one of the corruption investigations focused on Mayor Bill de Blasio’s fund-raising, misstated Mr. Rechnitz’s age. He is 33, not 26. The article also omitted a group of F.B.I. agents who are investigating some of the fund-raising issues. Besides the F.B.I. squad known as C14, a squad called C4 is also part of the inquiry.

•

An article in some editions on Thursday about the renaming of a Manhattan street for Norman Rockwell referred incorrectly to the length of time his family lived at 206 West 103rd Street, where the artist was born in 1894. It was until he was 2 years old, not until he was in his early 20s.

SPORTS

The Sports of The Times column on Tuesday, about Muhammad Ali’s being “an ungentrified black man,” misspelled, in some editions, the given name of a former sports editor at Jet magazine. He is Greg Simms, not Gregg.

WEEKEND

A theater review on Friday about “Shining City,” at the Irish Repertory Theater in Manhattan, misstated the given name of the actor who plays Ian. He is Billy Carter, not Jack.

•

A jazz entry in the Listings pages on Friday about the International Anthem Summer Showcase scheduled for Sunday, at Le Poisson Rouge in Manhattan, referred incorrectly to a trumpeter scheduled to perform. The trumpeter, Jaimie Branch, is a woman.'

•

An article on Friday about a gift of artworks to the Menil Drawing Institute in Houston misstated the given name of an artist whose work is included in the gift. She was Eva Hesse, not Eve.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed tonytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mailcustomercare@nytimes.com.


