


BEIJING — The training session started with a harsh public shaming. A performance coach took to the stage and asked eight employees at a Chinese bank to explain to a room of their peers why they had fallen short.

“I didn’t cooperate well,” a woman said.

“I wasn’t courageous enough,” another confessed.

Then the session took a bizarre turn. The coach brandished a wooden stick and shouted, “Get your behinds ready!” He proceeded to slap the employees on their rears, going down the line four times. A woman recoiled in pain, and several workers gasped.

By Tuesday, a video of the episode had provoked widespread anger in China. The coach, Jiang Yang, apologized, and two executives at the bank that hosted the session, Zhangze Rural and Commercial Bank in Changzhi, a northern city, were suspended.

The bank had hired Mr. Jiang, who works for a Shanghai consulting company that sometimes charges more than $18,000 a day, to help improve the productivity of its workers, according to Chinese news reports. The theme of the training session, which was held on Saturday for more than 200 employees, was “performance breakthroughs.”

In a video apology, Mr. Jiang said the bank’s leaders should not be blamed. “I punished the lowest-performing trainees according to the rules of the competition and hurt them,” he said. “I hereby offer my deepest apologies.”

Mr. Jiang was also reported to have used other methods to shame the employees, including cutting their hair. Bank officials said employees who participated in the sessions might receive compensation.

Corporal punishment is still common in China, especially in rural regions, but many people found Mr. Jiang’s methods extreme. A one-minute clip of the session filmed by an audience member quickly garnered tens of thousands of views online and set off a furious reaction on social media.

“You must be sick.” a user wrote on Weibo, a web service similar to Twitter. “Are employees your slaves?”

“What era are we in now?” another user wrote. “We still spank people?”


