


“Riff this Riff that”

Ephrat Asherie’s “Riff this Riff that,” which rolled through the Atrium Plaza at 180 Maiden Lane on Monday afternoon (it repeated Tuesday), opens on an uncharacteristically subdued note — a point made clear by the wild ride that follows.

Six dancers, some sitting, some standing, congregate around a row of wooden stools and gaze at Ousmane Wiles as he eases forward into space and crouches, spinning back to them before dashing away again with sliding feet in reverse. He stops in place and snaps his fingers. Soon, the others ease away from the stools too and join in to create a percussive suite of bodies.

Ms. Asherie started out in ballet, but like for many who came of age in the 1990s, hip-hop took hold. There are no obvious sign of classical dance in “Riff this,” but Ms. Asherie makes space for just about everything else. Dance forms — from tap to swing and vogueing — are knitted together throughout this production.

Ms. Asherie’s movement phrases — compact bursts of choreography with rapid-fire changes in rhythm and gestural articulation — bubble up and dissipate, quickly paving the way for something new. But it’s more than an exploration of motion and energy. Inspired by “The Spirit Moves: A History of Black Social Dance on Film, 1900–1986,” Mura Dehn’s excellent documentary, Ms. Asherie investigates the jazz roots of contemporary house, breaking and hip-hop.

“Riff this” shows Ms. Asherie’s entrancing qualities as a dancer: She is both tough and supple. But Ms. Asherie has much more room to riff on her ideas about tradition in dance; in its current form, the piece, just 25 minutes, feels like a beginning, not an ending. As problems go, that’s a good one. GIA KOURLAS

“The Planet-Eaters: Seconds”

Through Wednesday

Many artists describe what they do as interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary, but Will Rawls, in the program notes for his work “The Planet-Eaters: Seconds,” offers this alternative, “nondisciplinary.”

A choreographer and writer, Mr. Rawls never lands for too long in any one medium, staying nomadic with the help of his sound and costume collaborators. One pleasure of watching “Seconds,” a reconfiguration of his 2013 “The Planet-Eaters,” is not knowing where to place it.

I didn’t see the first “Planet Eaters,” but I imagine that the second, presented on Monday, resonated differently by virtue of its new setting, the “Circle of Dance” exhibition at the National Museum of the American Indian in Lower Manhattan. (The first performance was at the Chocolate Factory in Long Island City.)

The circular room houses brilliant costumes associated with traditional American Indian dances. These hover in our peripheral vision as Mr. Rawls and the musician Chris Kuklis concoct ceremonial dance and song of their own, clad in rough-hewn regalia by the Serbian designer Sasa Kovacevic.

“The Planet Eaters” grew out of Mr. Rawls’s travels in the Balkans and his study of the region’s folklore. Swerving among dance, storytelling and music-making — the instruments included a laptop, a guitar, a tuning fork and a stainless-steel bowl — it stirs up questions about authenticity, racial identity and cultural appropriation that evade easy answers.

Mr. Rawls has written about his mixed-race background as the son of a former Georgia sharecropper and a woman of Welsh ancestry. I thought about that while watching him, in a headdress of long golden braids capped with a white cross, tussle with Mr. Kuklis over several tracts of fake grass. Eventually, they merged this disputed territory into one small mountain and, sitting on either side of the pile, or the table, began to count, clap, sing and speak in harmony.

In the most dance-heavy passage, Mr. Rawls delivers bouncing, kicking steps with an upright chest and hands on his hips. But the finest moments happen when he takes a break and, aided by Mr. Kuklis’s sonic manipulations, conjures a dreamscape woven from folk tales and personal tales of camping by the Adriatic Sea. Both men are seated; it’s words that do the dancing. SIOBHAN BURKE


