


WASHINGTON — The Senate may be nearing an agreement on emergency funding to respond to the growing threat from the Zika virus, marking a potential reversal by Republicans who had been reluctant to approve more aid.

The financing, which is being considered by some members of the Senate Appropriations Committee, would supplement the $510 million the Obama administration recently redirected from fighting Ebola toward Zika, as congressional Republicans had urged.

So far, congressional Republicans have said they wanted to address the problem of combating Zika through appropriations and needed more information from administration officials. Some Republicans insisted that the money left over from the Ebola fight would be sufficient.

Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the top Democrat on the Health and Human Services appropriations subcommittee who has been involved in the discussions, said lawmakers were working to reach an agreement that would address Zika, which has been linked to serious birth defects.

“Protecting women and families from the serious risks the Zika virus poses should not be a partisan issue, so I’m glad that Republicans are now working with us to put much-needed resources into this effort,” she said in a statement. “Negotiations are continuing and I’m very hopeful we’ll be able to reach a final agreement.”

Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, the top Democrat on the Senate Appropriations Committee, added: “We’re happy a Zika supplemental is finally in play. We’ve been calling on Republicans to act on this urgent issue for months. We’re in ongoing talks with Republicans, and it looks promising.”

The committee has been talks with administration officials and experts to come up with “a timely and responsible response,” said Chris Gallegos, a spokesman for Senator Thad Cochran, Republican of Mississippi and the committee’s chairman.

“The committee continues to scrub the administration request and assemble a responsible recommendation, but no final determination has been made,” Mr. Gallegos said in an email.

Senate aides declined to confirm details of a potential deal, saying talks are continuing. The Senate Appropriations Committee is in the midst of annual markups, with its next meeting scheduled for Thursday.

President Obama requested more than $1.8 billion in February to combat the disease.

At the White House, officials expressed cautious optimism about the glimmers of a potential deal to provide funding to combat Zika after months of refusals by Republicans to consider doing so. But it was not clear whether the package would materialize, and if it did, whether it would be acceptable to the administration.

“While we are reassured that there appear to be initial steps to rectifying Congress’s failure to act to date, any proposal that does not provide needed assistance in this fiscal year and does not protect or replenish the funding critical to our ongoing Ebola response will be insufficient to the risks facing the country, said Peter C. Boogaard, a White House spokesman.


