


In the eyes of his lawyer, Reza Zarrab, a wealthy gold trader from Turkey, was a prominent businessman and philanthropist who stood accused of ill-founded charges in Manhattan, and was certainly no threat to flee.

But prosecutors in the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, had a different opinion of Mr. Zarrab, arguing that he posed “an extraordinary risk of flight.”

The opposing views were on display on Thursday during a bail hearing in Federal District Court that was unusual for its magnitude and curiosity factor, especially in Turkey.

Mr. Zarrab’s lawyer has asked that his client be released from pretrial detention on a $50 million bond, secured by $10 million in cash, with the condition that Mr. Zarrab remain in his apartment with 24-hour armed guards and GPS monitoring at his own expense.

The judge, Richard M. Berman, indicated that he would issue a bail decision soon in the case. Mr. Zarrab was arrested in March on a trip to the United States and was sent to Manhattan to face charges that include conspiring to violate the American sanctions on Iran.

Mr. Bharara’s office has asked that bail be denied, pointing to what it said was “overwhelming” evidence of Mr. Zarrab’s participation in the charged offenses, his considerable wealth and its claim that he had misled a court officer about the extent of his travel and his assets. In court on Thursday, a prosecutor, Michael Lockard, cited what he called Mr. Zarrab’s “history of duplicity.”

The case has been widely watched in Turkey, where in 2013 Mr. Zarrab was detained by the authorities as part of a corruption investigation of businessmen with close ties to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s prime minister and now its president.

The case has also furthered debate in the United States over how the wealthy and the poor are treated in the courts. Mr. Zarrab’s lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, touched on the issue on Thursday, referring to what he called “the elephant in the room — and perhaps in the country.”

“The inequities in the criminal justice system,” he told the judge, “on the state and federal level, between people of means and people of not means, is not something that is Mr. Zarrab’s fault, and it is nothing we are going to remedy in this case.”

Mr. Brafman said Mr. Zarrab had not been dishonest with the court, and if bail conditions were to be set, his client “would comply with them.”

The address of the apartment where Mr. Zarrab and his guards would be based if he is granted bail has not been disclosed, but references in court indicated it was on the 15th floor of a Manhattan building, and had space for him to meet with his lawyers.


