


MINNEAPOLIS — Louise Erdrich is, along with Garrison Keillor and Ann Patchett, among the handful of American writers crazy enough to want to own a bookstore. Hers, in the Kenwood neighborhood here, is in what used to be a dentist’s office, though perhaps not a very busy one. Neighbors remember that the dentist was often asleep in his own chair.

Ms. Erdrich’s store, Birchbark Books, features a canoe hanging upside down from the ceiling and an old Roman Catholic confessional that has been repurposed as a display case. There is also a reading loft marked off by a birch-log railing and a counter displaying Native American jewelry and artifacts.

Ms. Erdrich, who is part Ojibwe, said recently that she started the business so she could have a place to sell such things, which she brought back from frequent trips to the Turtle Mountain Reservation in North Dakota, the home of her tribe, and because it was something she could do with her four daughters.

In the beginning, she recalled, she was so clueless that she didn’t know that unsold books could be returned. She laughed and said, “It might have been easier just to become a dentist.”

Ms. Erdrich, whose new novel, “LaRose,” comes out on Tuesday, was born in Minnesota and grew up in Wahpeton, N.D., where her mother, who is half French-American and half Ojibwe, and her father, a German-American, taught at a boarding school run by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. She attended Dartmouth as part of its first coed class; she was so quiet, she said, that people must have assumed she was stoned all the time.

For the last 20-odd years, Ms. Erdrich, 61, has spent most of her time in Minneapolis, which has a sizable Native American population. The unofficial center of that community is East Franklin Avenue, and Ms. Erdrich, shy and gracious, is a familiar presence there. One recent Friday, she stopped by the Minnesota American Indian Center, where she bought some beaded barrettes at the gift shop, and at a nearby gallery, All My Relations Arts, where her daughter Aza Erdrich, an artist, has a show of her paintings. Everyone recognized her, but no one made a fuss.

“Native people have lived here for generations, which is why I feel so at home,” she said. But they’re always in motion: “They’re always going back and forth from the city to their reservation — that’s how they keep their families together,” Ms. Erdrich said. “They put hundreds of thousands of miles on their cars.” Just then, she recognized one: The license plate said “OJIKWE,” blending two words to signify Ojibwe woman.

“LaRose” forms a sort of trilogy with Ms. Erdrich’s “The Plague of Doves” and National Book Award-winning “The Round House.” Like them, it is set in and around an Indian reservation that readers have come to know as her version of Faulkner’s Yoknapatawpha County — a landscape where many of the same characters or their forebears show up again and again, and where the past is part of the present. Philip Roth said of Ms. Erdrich in an email: “She is, like Faulkner, one of the great American regionalists, bearing the dark knowledge of her place, as he did his.” He added, “She is by now among the very best of American writers.”

Mr. Roth first came upon Ms. Erdrich’s work while judging a short-story contest for The Atlantic and reading part of what eventually became “Love Medicine” (1984), her first novel. Loosely following several generations of an extended Ojibwe family, it almost immediately established her as an essential writer on Native American life, a subject that American fiction had tended to neglect.

“I can see it,” Ms. Erdrich said of her imagined setting, which has now figured in some 15 of her books and, she explained, is mostly based on the world she grew up in. “Sometimes I think I should place it somewhere specific, and sometimes I think it’s better the way it is.”

The title character of the new novel is a young boy descended from generations of female LaRoses who is given to another family after his father accidentally shoots that family’s son, LaRose’s best friend. At first uncomprehending, LaRose becomes a wise and sad ambassador, shuttling back and forth between the two homes.

Ms. Erdrich said such transfers really did happen sometimes. “My mother once mentioned offhand that it wasn’t totally unusual,” she said. “I didn’t set out to write this book, but that’s how it works sometimes. I started writing and couldn’t stop. My mother drops a little pebble in my brain, and on it goes.”

She went on to explain that many Native Americans had an elastic view of family. “You have to remember about the destruction of native populations,” she said. “People had to take care of each other’s children, and sometimes they also took care of nonnative children who were in trouble. This was something that Western culture disliked and didn’t understand.”

It wasn’t until 1978, she said ruefully, that the government stopped removing Indian children from their families and sending them to boarding schools for the sake of assimilation.

It was also not until 1978 that Congress passed a law guaranteeing Native Americans the freedom to practice their religions. “The idea was that the Indian people were just supposed to vanish,” she said. Still, an element of shrewd foresight in the treaties that Native Americans signed over the years made eradicating their cultures more difficult. “Besides being a people, they’re also a legal entity, and the history of Native people quickly became a legal history,” Ms. Erdrich said. She smiled. “That’s why most smart native people are lawyers, not writers,” she said.

She became a writer, she joked, because she didn’t know of any other way to develop a personality. “I thought, I’ll be a recluse and just have books,” she said, adding that she tried not to worry too much about ethnic or tribal identity. “I’m a mixed Ojibwe,” she said. “I’m a citizen of two nations, and that informs everything I think about.”

She added: “I try not to parse it out too much. I’m just writing about the world that I live in and the world that I know.”

To judge from “LaRose,” that world is not only one of familial attachment and loss, of tribal connection, but also of drug abuse, adolescent yearnings, volleyball games, old-age discontent and marital disappointments of a more or less universal sort. It’s a place where it’s not unusual for an ancestor to recall being pursued by a burning head rolling through the woods.

Last year, Ms. Erdrich said, she took the burning head saga out of “LaRose” and had it published it separately as a short story in The New Yorker. She thought about not restoring it, she said, “but then I thought I need to explain why this kid has the gravity of character he’s developed. That made me go back and think about his ancestors.”

Storytelling, she added, is a central part of Native American life, and, inevitably an obsessive part of hers. “It’s probably the most selfish thing I do,” she said. “Truly. I don’t do it for anyone else. I do it because I have the addict’s need to get lost in the story.” She smiled. “And it gets worse and worse every year. I could go to rehab for this, but it’s my life.”


