


You don’t have to be alive to go extinct.

Geologists in Sweden have found what they call the first-ever “extinct” meteorite buried within a 470-million-year old limestone slab. The new space rock belongs to a family of meteorites that once bombarded Earth, but no longer plunge to the planet, according to a paper published Tuesday in the journal Nature Communications.

“No similar meteorite is known on Earth of the 50,000 meteorites that have been found,” said Birger Schmitz, a geologist from Lund University in Sweden, and lead author of the paper.

Half a billion years ago, two asteroids between Jupiter and Mars are believed to have collided, spewing celestial shrapnel across the solar system. Countless pieces flew past Earth, but some crash-landed in its ancient oceans. Following millions of years of sediment buildup and compression, the meteorites fossilized, much like the trilobites and shellfish that shared the seafloor.

Eventually, miners in a Swedish quarry came across the fossilized meteorites among limestone that was destined to be made into floor panels. At first they began throwing the ugly black rocks into the dump, until a geologist finally got a look at one and realized its significance.

Over the past 25 years, Dr. Schmitz and his colleagues collected more than 100 fossilized meteorites from the Swedish quarry. They classified all but one as L-chondrites, a common type of meteorite. These space rocks came from the same parent rock and provided evidence for the first asteroid from the collision.

But the team was stumped by the one leftover. The so-called “mysterious object” landed on Earth around the same time as the other meteorite fossils, but it had different chemical signatures and grain patterns. All clues indicated that it might have been a new type of meteorite, possibly belonging to the second asteroid from the smash, but the team was skeptical of their findings.

“Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence,” Dr. Schmitz said.

For four years they studied the 3-inch-wide black rock to find its origins and prove themselves wrong. Instead, what they found only strengthened their theory. The oddball space rock was exposed to identical levels of cosmic rays as the L-chondrites, which indicated that both meteorite types were ejected from their parent asteroids around the same time. Then they analyzed the fossil for isotopes of the elements oxygen and chromium to determine if it had a composition that was similar to any existing meteorite.

“The chromium isotopes are the nail in the coffin,” Dr. Schmitz said. “This is really, really strong confirmation that this is something completely different than what is known among meteorites on Earth today.”

Dr. Schmitz and his team concluded that the new space rock, which they named Öst 65, came from the asteroid that smashed into the same L-chondrite parent rock that littered the ancient seafloor with debris. They think Öst 65’s parent asteroid was annihilated in the collision, which is why they call the meteorite “extinct,” because it can never again rain down on Earth.

“Our result gives a hint that the types of meteorites that normally fell on Earth 470 million years ago,” he said, “might have been very different from the meteorites that fall to Earth today.”


