


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Mujib Mashal, a reporter based in Kabul, Afghanistan, describes the days and nights that followed the death of Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour, the leader of the Afghan Taliban.

I was awaked by a phone call early Wednesday morning. On the line was David Moll, a news editor for The Times based in Hong Kong. Alerts had just come over the wire that the Taliban had named a new leader and had confirmed the death of Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour. My job was to verify the details and write the story for The Times.

The news of Mullah Mansour’s death was first announced by the Pentagon late Saturday afternoon, which was after midnight in Kabul. Since then, I’d gotten very little sleep, working around the clock to make sense of what had happened — and unpacking what it could mean for the future of the long war in Afghanistan

There was an air of uncertainty surrounding the events, especially since reports of Mullah Mansour’s death had surfaced last December and had turned out to be false. But, now that the Taliban had confirmed his death, we knew this was an important moment. For the first time in 15 years, after so much blood and treasure, and after 150,000 international troops being deployed here at the peak of the war, the Americans had decided to strike the seemingly invulnerable Taliban sanctuaries across the border in Pakistan.

On Tuesday, President Obama — at a news conference in Vietnam — confirmed that Mullah Mansour had been killed. I spent all that day trying to figure out what internal discussions the Taliban leadership was having — about the burial of his body (said to be badly charred, with half of his head missing), and about who would succeed him. Taimoor Shah, my colleague in Kandahar, called his Taliban sources. In Kabul, my colleague Zahra Nader and I tried to follow up with analysts as well as with my own sources — security and government officials, and sources within the Taliban.

Unlike during a similar leadership change last year, when reaching Taliban leaders had been easy, this time a lot of their phones were turned off. Many commanders believed Mullah Mansour’s reckless use of phones had played a role in his demise, so they needed to be vigilant.

The picture we got was one of slow deliberation. The Taliban’s top layer — a couple dozen leaders, stunned by what had happened — was torn between two front-runners: the movement’s second deputy (a ruthless designated terrorist), and the young son of the founding leader (barely 25 years old). Working until 3 a.m., we thought we had an in-depth report on where things stood, one that would remain fresh for at least a couple days, giving us some time to rest.

But early Wednesday morning, the Taliban surprised us.

Drawing on the Taliban statement sent to reporters, which broke their four-day silence, I sent David an initial feed from bed — just two paragraphs about the confirmation and the announcement of a new leader. Within 20 minutes, David had a brief story online, to which we kept adding over the next couple hours.

Within four hours of the news breaking, we had a decently complete story: a basic sketch of the new leader’s life, an explanation as to how he became a consensus candidate when the two front-runners seemed headed toward a stalemate, and analysis of what his selection could mean.

One of the biggest challenges with reporting on the Taliban is that most of their leaders are obscure characters, with a few exceptions. The new supreme leader, Mawlawi Haibatullah Akhundzada, was no different. Even the most basic detail of his life — his age — was difficult to determine, with some putting him and at 47 and others at 56. The tremendous flow of unverified information on social media made our jobs easier and more difficult at the same time.

A grainy picture of Mawlawi Haibatullah began circulating. Some said it was him, others said it wasn’t. (The guy was so deeply fundamentalist that he opposed photography.) But soon enough, a Twitter account associated with the Taliban put out a high-resolution version of the same photograph, and Taliban spokesmen confirmed that it was Mawlawi Haibatullah. The remarkable thing about the earlier, grainy version was that one of Mawlawi Haibatullah’s eyes had been faded so that he’d resemble Mullah Omar, the legendary one-eyed founding leader of the Taliban. It was a clever trick in early perception-building.

When Doug Schorzman, our Afghanistan and Pakistan editor, took over the story in New York, we continued to broaden certain themes. In conversation with our international managing editor, Michael Slackman, we decided the story should be about more than just the announcement of a new leader. After all, the selection of a poor village preacher’s son — one with deep religious credentials — was particularly meaningful to a movement trying to return to core religious values after a tumultuous year with a leader who was seen as flashy, cunning and rolling in narcotics money.

The late hours on Wednesday and early hours on Thursday were made easier by a gift from home. My mother, who does not speak English and thus does not keep up with our coverage, called to check whether I would make it for dinner. (I had slept at the office for the last two nights and hadn’t been home.) I told her it would be another late night. “Too bad,” she said — she was making the bolani delicacy, a sort of leek pancakes, for dinner. But not to worry: She would send some to the office, in a pizza box.

Her gesture, and the delicious food, made the hours ahead much easier.


