


Film festivals usually attract eager, ambitious young directors. But not many feature auteurs quite as young as some of the participants in the 12th kidsfilmfest.

On Saturday this event, part of the Brooklyn Film Festival, will include a visit from James Baras-Miller, a 12-year-old Australian who made “Octavius 3: The Heist” with his own stuffed animals. The title character, a villainous teddy bear who swipes a masterpiece from a museum and then frames the sheriff (also a bear), will appear, too.

“Every year, we try to have at least one or two films that are made by children,” said Lisa King, kidsfilmfest’s director. Granted, such works “are not as quote-unquote professionally done on quote-unquote professional equipment,” she said. (James made his with an iPhone.) But Ms. King, who prescreened this year’s entries with two adults before a panel of children made the final choices, finds that her audiences don’t care.

“If it’s interesting and it’s fun, and the content is something the children are going to enjoy, it doesn’t matter how it was made,” she said.

This year’s slate has two other projects involving filmmakers under 18: “Kraken Attackin’,” by Jago Gould and Nick Tennery, a stop-motion American short, stars two surfer dudes and a sea creature. The animated “Lilly Gets a Pet,” whose creators include the Bum family, a group of Canadian siblings and cousins, has an endearing heroine who happens to be a huge, hairy, one-eyed orange monster.

But kidsfilmfest, which is noncompetitive, also offers serious moments by professionals. “If I had to choose a theme for this year’s festival, it would be overcoming adversity,” Ms. King said. Its 15 shorts, chosen from more than 125 international submissions, include the emotionally resonant and essentially wordless “It Hit Upon the Roof,” from the Iranian director Teymour Ghaderi. Unfolding in a humble family home whose roof leaks during a downpour, “it just gives a glimpse into how other children live,” she said.

Closer to home, Amanda Quaid’s “Toys” uses cutout live-action figures in an animated 1930s-era tale of an American girl whose father wished she had been a boy. And in Peter Nizic’s live-action “Spaghetti,” from Australia, an 8-year-old has to cope with both humiliation and his first crush.

In addition to James, several filmmakers will attend kidsfilmfest for post-screening discussions and presentations. For aspiring directors in the audience, Ms. King said, it’s an opportunity to see how “these little dreams can turn into big realities.”

(At 1 p.m., Made in NY Media Center by IFP, 30 John Street, between Jay and Pearl Streets, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 646-234-5080, kidsfilmfest.org.)


