


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this piece, Fernanda Santos, The Times’s Phoenix bureau chief, recalls growing up in a Brazil that was widely hailed as “a country of the future.” Now? Not so much.

PHOENIX — A friend texted me the other day: “What is going on in your country?”

I was born in Brazil, my entire family is in Brazil and I lived there until I came to the United States 18 years ago, at the age of 24. By then, Brazil had changed the name of its currency five times, each time as part of a plan to rescue its economy. The country had also moved from dictatorship to democracy, and I had cast my first vote for president in the first presidential election held after the military stepped aside.

I voted for the young governor of a tiny state, a man named Fernando Collor de Mello. He won. Three years later, I joined hundreds of thousands of students who took to the streets of Brazil in protest, demanding Mr. Collor’s impeachment. Marred by allegations of corruption, he resigned that year.

In 2006, Mr. Collor was elected to the Brazilian Senate. Last year, he was implicated in the massive graft scandal authorities have nicknamed Operation Car Wash; more than half of Brazil’s Congress has been accused of taking part in the scheme. Earlier this month, Mr. Collor voted for the impeachment of President Dilma Rousseff.

I thought about telling my friend all that, just to give him some perspective. Instead, I wrote back, “It’s a big mess.”

“LOL,” he replied.

In Brazil, we often say, “É rir para não chorar.” Laugh so as not to cry. So I laughed out loud with my friend.

As far back as I can remember, I had heard people say, “Brasil é o país do futuro” — Brazil is a country of the future. And for some years, at least, it seemed as if this elusive future had finally arrived. The middle class expanded. Brazil’s became the first initial in an acronym coined by American investors to represent the economies they thought would be dominant by 2050. (The others were Russia, India and China.) The country was chosen to host the two largest athletic events on the planet, only two years apart: the 2014 soccer World Cup, and the Olympic Games this summer.

But the Brazilian miracle has come undone in spectacular fashion.

Brazil is slogging through a devastating economic crisis. The graft scheme has hobbled the national oil company, Petrobras, whose management and performance ranked as one of Brazil’s greatest points of pride. My little brother works there. He’s worried, but at least he has a job. For every Brazilian between the ages of 18 and 24 who have a job, three do not.

The easy credit that allowed middle-class families to buy what they needed and didn’t need — new cars, big-screen TVs, trips to Disneyworld — has now left them deeply in debt.

Then there are the uncertainties over the Olympics. An epidemic of the mosquito-borne Zika virus has athletes reconsidering their participation. Some have already pulled out, because of Zika and other concerns, such as the safety of hosting sailing competitions on Guanabara Bay, an unwitting receptacle for raw sewage and garbage from some of Rio’s poorest neighborhoods.

As far back as I can remember, I have heard people talk about cleaning up Guanabara Bay.

My father started working when he was 13 because he had no choice. He knows hardship, but he also knows what it’s like to live in a country that rewards people for their hard work. By the time I was born, he and my mother were solidly anchored in the middle class.

He used to tell my siblings and me around the dinner table, “Your only obligation is to study hard.” As I grew older, he became my translator and a barometer of the state of the Brazilian economy. Once, he told me that if anything happened to him and my mother, I’d find a box with a few thousand dollars under their mattress. That was a couple of years after Mr. Collor ordered the confiscation of most of the money people had stored in savings accounts, a failed attempt to control galloping inflation. The dollars under the mattress proved to me that my parents had lost their trust in the government and the banks.

Their trust in the banks has since been restored. My parents, who are both retired, live off their savings and off the dividends from modest investments. Even after all they’ve been through, and all the time I’ve lived in this country, it was only last year that they asked what it would take for them to move to the United States. “Brazil has exhausted me,” my father said.

I called last week to check in on him and gauge his exhaustion. Now that the Brazilian Senate has voted to impeach Ms. Rousseff, does he think things will get better?

“It has to get better,” he said.

“But do you believe it’s going to?”

My father is a numbers guy; he worked in finance for most of his professional life. He responded by telling me about projections for a record-breaking primary budget deficit this year, the growing number of people who have defaulted on their monthly health insurance premiums and the political polarization that has made it so hard to get anything done in Brazil. That reminded me a bit of the United States these days.

“Have you lost hope, Dad?”

“Your mother and I are doing O.K.,” he said. “It’s the people who are out there looking for work who are suffering; young people, just like you were when you left.”


