


In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Thomas Mallon and Leslie Jamison discuss the best writing about brothers and sisters.

By Thomas Mallon

It is the brotherly bond, more than any paternal one, that dominates “Legends of the Fall.”

The late Jim Harrison’s “Legends of the Fall” is itself a sort of sibling, the title novella in a volume containing two others. Best ever? Hardly. But sometimes “interesting” can be better than best, and this moody, unstable story — full of shifts in pacing and focus — stays with a reader well after it has concluded with the burial of Tristan, the middle and most magnetic of the three Ludlow brothers created by its author.

We see them together in the book’s opening pages, as they leave their father’s Montana ranch for the Western Front of World War I. Distinct as brothers in a fairy tale, the boys are partly characterized by their father’s look around their now-empty rooms: Alfred, the striver and future politician, has left behind “sentimental bric-a-brac, dumbbells, self-help books”; Samuel, the gentle and aspiring naturalist, will be separated from stuffed animals and microscopes; the storage trunk of the untamable Tristan contains “cartridges for a Sharps buffalo rifle, a rusty handgun of unknown origin, a jar of flint arrowheads, and a bear claw necklace” that he probably got from the Cheyenne named One Stab, “whom Ludlow often felt was more the boy’s father than he himself.”

We learn that the elder Ludlow has “mismanaged” the “secondary life lived through his sons,” but it is the brotherly bond, more than any paternal one, that dominates the book, uniting and strangling the three young men. After Samuel is cut down in France by gunfire and mustard gas, Tristan cuts out his little brother’s heart (for burial under the Big Sky of home) and then, deranged with grief, scalps several German soldiers, taking care to observe a bit of technique that Harrison passes on to the reader: “You couldn’t scalp a beheaded man because you needed an anchor to gain a good fulcrum.” Tristan’s later wanderings and outlawry are awash in violence, and the novella sometimes feels ready to crumble beneath all its gunplay and carnage and staginess.

And yet Harrison never lets go of several different literary schemas — Celtic, biblical and classical — that seem to frame and discipline the story. The Tristan of legend steals his uncle’s intended bride for himself; Harrison’s Tristan similarly provokes his brother’s jealousy by making off with Susannah, the girl Alfred was supposed to marry, although Tristan really desires her only in order to create a replacement child for the dead Samuel. As in the Old Testament, Susannah is spied upon when she’s at her bath, and just as allusively, when One Stab picks up the ill-­fated Samuel’s saddle, it is “as if he were picking up doom herself, doom always owning the furthest, darkest reaches of the feminine gender. Pandora, Medusa, the Bacchantes, the Furies. . . .”

The story’s narrative voice is arbitrary and godlike, always very distant but by turns lyrical and essayistic, superbly telling instead of showing: “Susannah’s character owed more to the early 19th than the early 20th century.” When the narrator has the future on his mind, he doesn’t foreshadow what he can simply foretell: We learn that Tristan will die “on a snowy hillside in Alberta late in December in 1977 at the age of 84,” nearly 50 pages and more than 50 years before it happens.

Not so much world-weary as cosmically tired, Harrison’s storytelling is sometimes hushed and sometime sonorous, rolling out on waves of complicated syntax that are averse to commas. This tale of brothers has so much on its mind that the author’s choice of the compact novella form seems almost perverse, a kind of stunt. A Tolstoyan view of the world (“There is little to tell of happiness — happiness is only itself, placid, emotionally dormant”) must also make room for “the Cheyenne sense of fatality that what had happened had already happened.” By the time “Legends of the Fall” is finished, it has the reader believing that life is little more than death’s back story.

Thomas Mallon’s eight novels include “Henry and Clara,” “Bandbox,” “Fellow Travelers” and “Watergate,” a finalist for the PEN/Faulkner Award. He has also published nonfiction about plagiarism (“Stolen Words”), diaries (“A Book of One’s Own”), letters (“Yours Ever”) and the Kennedy assassination (“Mrs. Paine’s Garage”), as well as two books of essays. His work appears in The New Yorker, The Atlantic Monthly and other publications. A recipient of the Vursell prize of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, for distinguished prose style, he is currently professor of English at George Washington University.

◆ ◆ ◆

By Leslie Jamison

People often find incest in “The Sound and the Fury,” but I saw something else.

When I first read William Faulkner’s “The Sound and the Fury,” I loved that he wrote about siblings in terms of longing. People often find incest in that book, but I saw something else, a different kind of desire: The desire to stay inside a certain dream of closeness, and the desire to articulate a bond others couldn’t easily understand. I read Quentin Compson’s famous declaration “I have committed incest, Father” as a fabrication, perhaps even an imagined one. It wanted a label for an intimacy the world couldn’t recognize or protect: the love of a brother who doesn’t want to give his sister up to the world beyond the one they shared.

In college, when I wrote my senior thesis about siblings in Faulkner’s work, it seemed to me as if all the critics wanted to read Faulkner’s siblings in terms of history or political identity — to make their bonds about chivalric obsession with female purity, or else an obsessive allegiance to the South or the past, an unwillingness to move forward into the future — but I wanted to read them as siblings: brothers who didn’t want to let their sister go.

Why doesn’t Caddy get a voice? People asked. It was just her brothers talking about her instead: idiot Benjy, smitten Quentin, bitter Jason. “Did you ever have a sister? Did you?” Quentin asks, and Faulkner didn’t himself. He only had three brothers, which is perhaps why he felt more comfortable writing the sister as imagined by her brothers. And perhaps I loved the novel because it was all about brothers obsessed with their absent sister, and I’d spent much of my childhood as a sister obsessed with her absent brothers.

People had often told me, “It must have been like being an only child,” after finding out my two brothers were nine and 10 years older, and I tried a thousand ways to tell them: No, it hadn’t been like that at all. It was more like having gods for brothers, who defined me with their presence and then defined me with their absence. When I fought the critics in my thesis, I fought them with an anger I was probably directing at all the people who hadn’t understood what my brothers meant to me.

But I felt “The Sound and the Fury” understood something about how our siblings sear into us as children: the vision of a sister’s muddy drawers in a tree, or the sound of her name. It got how losing your siblings can get bound up in the loss of certain fantasies: fantasies of innocence or dependence, the fantasy of being totally known by others or totally enmeshed with them. When Quentin looks at a leaf in water and mourns how “after a while the tissue will be gone and the delicate fibers . . . don’t touch one another, no matter how knotted up they once were, no matter how close they lay once to the bones,” he is also mourning something else — the possibility of losing a sister who once felt closer than anyone else.

I dedicated my thesis to my brothers and concluded — at its close — that absence could yield a shattered kind of empathy, could become somehow honest about incompletion in its splinters. Looking back now, I see my desperate desire to believe that distance could drive closeness rather than making it impossible. I needed to believe that the gaps between me and my brothers were part of our closeness rather than proof we didn’t have it. I wanted to believe more broadly in a vision of intimacy that acknowledged all sorts of holes and gaps and ruptures; that wasn’t refuted by the distance between people but contoured by it.

That’s what I felt Faulkner intuited about siblings: that there were all sorts of gaps and harms and distances that might befall them, that they might inflict on each other, but that they loved each other anyway. Even when they were cruel to each other, or opaque to each other, or imagined each other rather than really hearing each other, they still felt bound to each other — connected beyond all arguments to the contrary.

Leslie Jamison is the author of an essay collection, “The Empathy Exams,” winner of the Graywolf Press Nonfiction Prize. Her first novel, “The Gin Closet,” was a finalist for the Los Angeles Times Art Seidenbaum Award for First Fiction; and her essays and stories have been published in numerous publications, including Harper’s, The Oxford American, A Public Space and The Believer.


