


“I think the descriptor we used for the video was ‘Weimar acid trip,’” says Elizabeth Bougerol, the lead singer of the jazz collective the Hot Sardines, of the visual accompaniment to “When I Get Low I Get High,” an Ella Fitzgerald cover that’s the centerpiece of the band’s new album, “French Fries and Champagne.” “As we were brainstorming what exactly we meant by that, our director Alex Peacock brought us these Rorschach blotch smoke puffs and created ‘Fantasia’-style animations of the band, and we were off and running.”

Both the song and video also prominently feature someone who knows a thing or two about Weimar fantasy: the actor Alan Cumming, who won a Tony for his portrayal of the M.C. in “Cabaret” back in 1998. Bougerol and the group’s co-founder and bandleader, Evan Palazzo, got in touch with Cumming through their producer, Eli Wolf, who reached out about a collaboration only to find that Cumming was already a fan of the band’s work. “He said yes immediately,” Bougerol says. “He knew the song and dug into it with the same verve he brings to everything.”

It’s a deceptively peppy cut, whose melancholic lyrics are offset by a swingy horn line and the give-and-take of Cumming’s and Bougerol’s vocal parts. For Bougerol, who was educated at the London School of Economics and worked as a travel writer before founding the band, the song has a feminist appeal, too: It was written by the actress and lyricist Marion Sunshine, one of the only female songwriters of her era. “You didn’t hear many tunes written by women nearly a hundred years ago, much less ones with these kinds of subversive themes,” Bougerol says. “So we wanted to call that out, with the extra twist of Alan Cumming singing lyrics originally written from a female perspective.”

The video, shot in black and white with occasional splashes and plumes of vivid illustrated color, plays off the natural chemistry Bougerol and Cumming discovered while creating it. “We wanted something a little darker and abstract, with Alan as a kind of Puck figure at the center of this woozy fever dream,” Bougerol says — but all figured out on the fly. “We shot very fast, in a studio that shares a bathroom with the Epoch Times offices. You had to go through their kitchen, where there’d be a dozen Chinese women chopping carrots and chicken feet for this massive staff meal, and they’d freeze as I teetered through on my insane 6-inch heels in full makeup. So this video’s for them.”


