


My octogenarian mother remembers when going to the airport in Newark was a delightful experience, full of wonder.

In the early 1950s, her parents would take her to the Newarker, a sophisticated and theatrical restaurant with white tablecloths, a clear view of the planes and showstopping entrees like flaming skewers of meat. It was the work of Joseph H. Baum, the impresario who would later create the Four Seasons and Windows on the World.

Nowadays at Newark Liberty International Airport, shish kabob flambé has mostly been replaced by shrink-wrapped apples and lukewarm burritos from Qdoba.

But now there is a culinary oasis of sorts in Newark’s Terminal C. As part of its $120 million overhaul of the terminal, United Airlines formed a partnership with OTG, which designs, builds and operates restaurants and stores in airport terminals. OTG expects to have completed 55 restaurants and shops in Terminal C by the end of the year, said Eric Brinker, OTG’s vice president for experience.

These days, no one eats in the airport without a plane ticket, so I needed a special day pass. The only catch? I had to be escorted. My companions would be Mr. Brinker and Rich Bamberger, managing director of Kivvit, which oversees public relations for OTG. According to Transportation Security Administration rules, the escorter and escortee have to be able to see and hear each other at all times.

So, as flights departed for Tokyo and Wilkes-Barre, Pa., I grazed from restaurant to restaurant, as if on some never-ending layover, while imagining that I had my own Secret Service detail. The three of us visited four of the seven restaurants that have been fully completed.

With my bodyguards seated at another table, I placed an order on an iPad at my first stop, CBGB L.A.B. (lounge and bar). This place may share a name with the New York City music club that closed in 2006, but little else. The vibe is hip Midwest boutique hotel, and only a cocktail called the Dirty Ashtray (Tecate, tequila, salt, pepper and Worcestershire sauce) seemed to evoke anything remotely similar to a grungy, 20th-century rock venue on the Bowery.

Every restaurant seat in Terminal C is equipped with an iPad to create what OTG refers to as “tech-enhanced hospitality.” Diners can scan their boarding pass for updates on their flight, play video games, and even order products from the terminal’s shops to be brought to their table.

The user interface is straightforward but multilayered. Once I found the menu app at the bottom of the screen, I had to choose from different categories (appetizers, main dishes, cocktails) and drill down further from there, scrolling through photos and descriptions, then clicking on my final choices, and finally adding a tip (even before I’d gotten a glass of water from my server). I would then pay and wait.

For customers uncomfortable using an iPad, such as the hungry retired teacher who sat next to me at one of the other restaurants, a waiter is usually available to help.

Within 10 minutes of ordering, my Taylor ham, egg and cheese sandwich ($9.50) arrived. A fluffy egg soufflé replaced the usual fried egg, and the addition of spicy mayonnaise gave the sandwich some elegance. As I spooned a creamy yogurt parfait ($8) into my mouth and tried a video game on the iPad, I realized my waitress was hovering by my side. She wanted to know if I’d ever been to the real CBGB, and when I said that I had (I saw Spinal Tap perform there), she asked how the two compared. Between mouthfuls of parfait, I explained that this was an impossible comparison and that she should be grateful the bathrooms were somewhat nicer at the airport.

My next stop was Saison, a French restaurant under the guidance of Alain Ducasse’s restaurant group.

A few taps on the iPad and 15 minutes later, I had a Flintstones-size portion of roasted bone marrow ($18) in front of me. Dramatically presented on a large wooden slab, with a lone French radish and a pile of “cocoa salt,” it would have made Mr. Baum proud. The pomme frites were also admirable, as was a croque-monsieur ($16) that would be welcomed in any bistro in France, with its creamy béchamel sauce, ham and thick layer of melted Gruyère cheese.

After a walk around the terminal to rebuild my appetite, I directed us to the Happy Clam, whose menu and concept were overseen by the chef Mario Carbone, of Torrisi Italian Specialties fame. While it gave me pause to eat raw seafood in the middle of an airport, I can report that my oysters ($18 for six) were meaty and fresh.

The tender clams in my “linguine clams” ($20) made me happy as a mollusk, but I ignored the pasta, which was undercooked. Instead, I stuffed myself with hunks of semolina bread soaked in the garlicky sauce. Dessert was a deliciously obscene Nutella budino ($8.50), a Nutella-lined butterscotch tart with caramelized bananas.

The bodyguards paled as I suggested one more meal, but we all managed to power through a late-afternoon snack of chilled lobster and sushi at Caps Beer Garden, whose menu was created by Dale Talde, a former “Top Chef” contestant who is the chef and owner of restaurants including Talde Jersey City. The sweet, succulent lobster ($19) was unshelled before our eyes and served simply on a bed of lettuce. My crunchy shrimp roll ($12), a concoction of seared shrimp, mayonnaise and eel sauce, tempura crunch and scallion was inventive and delicious.

There are also some exceptional food markets that may be a bit twee for some, with their watermelon water and protein bars made from high-protein cricket flour. But kudos to OTG for shaking up the Hudson News paradigm (and fear not, you can still buy a Coke and a candy bar).

Terminal C goes a long way to make flying a less horrible experience. If the other terminals at Newark had even a smidgen of the choices here, the airport itself might once again become an enjoyable destination.


