


Mark Teixeira had hit three home runs in nine career at-bats against Toronto Blue Jays starter Marco Estrada. So with Estrada on the hill Wednesday, it seemed likely that Teixeira, who has three homers in 149 at-bats this season, would be in the Yankees’ lineup, feeling good about the prospect of ending a prolonged slump.

But before the game, a recurring ailment that has been as distressing as Teixeira’s struggles with the bat “reared its ugly head again,” Manager Joe Girardi said, and for the second time in two weeks, Teixeira was benched because of neck spasms.

Girardi said that he was not told about any problems after Tuesday’s game but that Teixeira, who is hitting only .195, told him Wednesday afternoon that his neck “kind of locked up.”

“It definitely concerns me because we don’t want to be without him,” Girardi said.

Without Teixeira, the Yankees fell to the Blue Jays, 8-4, at Yankee Stadium, ending a six-game winning streak. Ivan Nova took the loss as Russell Martin, a former Yankee, led the Blue Jays with two home runs.

Nova was seconds from putting the cap on four scoreless innings to open the game, but Kevin Pillar barely beat out a throw at first base after Chase Headley made a diving snare on a ground ball along the third-base line.

When the umpire Jim Joyce signaled safe, Headley snapped his head and cursed, having not gotten the third out of the inning.

Pillar’s speed would haunt Headley and the Yankees.

Devon Travis followed by hitting a slow grounder toward Headley, who cleanly fielded the ball but lost his grip trying to transfer it to his throwing hand.

With two runners on, Ryan Goins laced a fastball into the right-center-field gap. Pillar scored easily, and as Travis rounded third, shortstop Didi Gregorius fired the relay throw home. It beat Travis, but catcher Brian McCann could not handle the throw, and Travis was safe.

“I made a mistake there,” Nova said of Goins’s run-scoring double. “That ball went inside, and he took advantage of it.”

Martin hit his first home run off Nova in the sixth, a solo shot. He added a two-run blast in the seventh off Chasen Shreve, who also gave up a two-run homer to Michael Saunders in the inning. Martin came close to a third home run, but Jacoby Ellsbury caught the fly ball against the center-field wall in the eighth.

Nova, who moved into the rotation May 9, had his longest outing of the season, lasting six and two-third innings, but the Blue Jays scored four runs off him, the most he has allowed this season as a starter.

“He pitched better than what his line was,” Girardi said. “I thought he threw a pretty good game.”

The Yankees’ best chance to throw Estrada off balance came in the third when they loaded the bases with no outs. Ellsbury then lined out, and Brett Gardner drove in a run on a fielder’s choice to second. Carlos Beltran flied out as Estrada escaped relatively unscathed.

In recent days, Teixeira had occasionally hit third in the order and could have been up against Estrada in Beltran’s place.

“That was a chance to put up a crooked number, and we weren’t able to do it,” Girardi said.

Teixeira, who had a magnetic resonance imaging scan during the day, did not speak to reporters after the game.

“There’s a chance we won’t have him for a few days here,” Girardi said, adding that a trip to the disabled list for Teixeira was not a consideration. “It’s something I believe we can get through.”

Dustin Ackley started at first base in place of Teixeira, going hitless in three at-bats. If Teixeira’s injury sidelines him for an extended period, the backup catcher Austin Romine and, if necessary, McCann or Ronald Torreyes could play first, Girardi suggested.

Romine pinch-hit for Ackley in the ninth and hit a solo home run.

While Teixeira may sit over the next few days, one sliver of positive news for the Yankees was the imminent return of Alex Rodriguez. Girardi said after the game that the plan was to activate Rodriguez and have him play against the Blue Jays on Thursday.

Rodriguez has been on the disabled list since May 4 with a strained right hamstring and has been rehabbing with Class AA Trenton. He homered in the second inning of Wednesday’s game with Trenton.

INSIDE PITCH

X-rays on the Yankees’ top catching prospect, GARY SANCHEZ, revealed a nondisplaced fracture of his right thumb. Sanchez, who was with Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre after briefly being called up this month, will be re-evaluated and have new X-rays taken in two weeks.


