


How do you memorialize a priest like the Rev. John C. Flynn? From 1989 until he retired — reluctantly — in 2010, he led St. Martin of Tours Church, and became famous for taking his ministry into the Bronx neighborhood of Crotona. When he despaired over saying funeral Masses for teenagers felled by drugs and gang violence, he took to the streets, offering to exchange a crucifix for a gun. It was symbolic, he admitted. But so, he said, was the cross that was at the center of his faith.

Symbols matter. So why not a street sign for a street priest?

On Friday, several dozen friends and parishioners gathered on East 182nd Street, at the corner of Grote Street, for the unveiling of a sign for John C. Flynn Way. The last time so many people gathered on the corner to celebrate Father Flynn was in September 2012, when hundreds spilled onto the streets after his own funeral Mass at the church. That was a gray day, with rain hiding the tears that streamed down mourners’ faces.

It was sunny on Friday, the kind of day Father Flynn relished, especially during his regular walks through the neighborhood. The warmth held the promise of summer. But it also salved a fresh wound: The week had begun with a funeral for Sister Cecilia McCarthy, a longtime ally of Father Flynn’s and the principal of St. Martin of Tours School from 1967 to 2001. The school closed in 2011, a victim of falling enrollment and growing deficits, despite the entreaties of Father Flynn and others.

One by one, those who dedicated decades to improving the spiritual and material lives of residents of this part of the Bronx have gone on to their eternal rewards. Today, there is much talk about a so-called New Bronx, where developers and investors promise to bring jobs and housing (though skeptics of gentrification question whom it is all for). But if the once-ravaged parts of the borough have enjoyed a modest comeback, it is because of people like Father Flynn, Sister Cecilia and her successor, Sister Nora McArt, and Astin Jacobo, the school’s custodian, a relentless community advocate.

They represent the Old Bronx, in the best sense of that phrase. Father Flynn’s legacy, forged on the streets, included helping residents organize and demand their fair share from the city, whether in housing, public safety or education. He was among a group of clergy members who acted as liaisons to the police in the unsettled days after the shooting of Amadou Diallo in 1999. And when drug dealers said real jobs would get them off the streets, Father Flynn put together the Save a Generation program to get them high school diplomas and employment training.

The strength of the Old Bronx was its people, who learned to have confidence in themselves and pride in their communities at a time when both qualities were in short supply. Father Flynn’s early years at the church were marked by murders more or less on every nearby block. On some days, he could stand on the church steps and watch customers filing into the apartment building across the street to buy crack vials labeled “St. Martin Green Cap,” a brand name inspired by the church.

Despite these trials, Father Flynn always managed to find a way to smile. And he always made sure to be out on the street, where he would learn who was sick, hungry or looking for work. On Friday, his old friend Ramona Robles showed up for the unveiling of the sign wearing a shirt adorned with a faded image of Father Flynn in his vestments. She had helped him cook for church events. Now, she returned to honor him.

“Whenever someone was killed in the neighborhood, he would go and pray, to bless the place,” she said. “When my husband was sick with cancer, Father Flynn dedicated himself to being with him. They talked about the Yankees. And when my husband died, Father Flynn let us have his wake at the church for three days.”

A few of the young people who met him decades ago also gathered on Friday, including Jose Padilla, who led the effort to persuade Councilman Ritchie Torres, a Bronx Democrat, to sponsor the street naming. Father Flynn loved being among young people, whether to toss a ball — he remained slim and fit into his 70s — or to talk baseball and religion during visits to the school.

The school’s closing had been heartbreaking for the community. Though Father Flynn’s memory was failing by then, he cobbled together a proposal to save the school. His idea was to run it for Catholics, evangelical Christians and Muslims who would share academic courses and study religion separately. He wrote to officials of the Archdiocese of New York, but the proposal went nowhere. Today, the old St. Martin of Tours School is a public school.

Father Flynn died at 83, a year after the school closed. A devotee of Saint Francis of Assisi, he never got to savor the election of Pope Francis. But his life — spent among the poor, in love and service — had already presaged Francis’s pastoral priorities. In a diary he kept for The New York Times in 1994, Father Flynn was clear about his life’s work.

“Love includes suffering, but nonlove (not facing love’s responsibility) also includes suffering,” he wrote. “The choice you must make is which suffering to avoid: the suffering that love demands and that brings peace, or the suffering that comes from emptiness and feelings of nonfulfillment.”


