


Paul George had 21 points and 11 rebounds, and the Indiana Pacers had a big fourth quarter, beating the visiting Toronto Raptors, 101-83, on Friday night and sending their first-round series to a deciding seventh game.

Myles Turner had 15 points, and Monta Ellis added 14 for the Pacers.

Indiana scored 18 straight points in the second half, pulling away from the second-seeded Raptors, who have not won a postseason series since the first round in 2001.

DeMarre Carroll and Cory Joseph led the Raptors with 15 points each. The Raptors’ DeMar DeRozan was held to 8 points on just 3 of 13 shooting.

Game 7 will be Sunday at Toronto.

HEAT 97, HORNETS 90 Dwyane Wade scored 10 of his 23 points in the fourth quarter, and Miami forced the first-round series to a seventh game with a victory at Charlotte.

Luol Deng was 9 of 14 from the field and finished with 21 points, while Goran Dragic added 14 points and 7 rebounds for the Heat, who will host Game 7 on Sunday.

The Heat overcame a playoff career-high 37 points from Kemba Walker and handed the Hornets only their 11th loss of the season at home. Al Jefferson had 18 points and 9 rebounds, and Cody Zeller had 12 points off the bench for Charlotte.

With Miami leading by 2, Wade hit his first 3-pointer of 2016 with 46 seconds left and added an 18-foot turnaround jump shot over Courtney Lee, helping seal the win.

CURRY PUSHES RECOVERY Stephen Curry said he was optimistic about returning earlier than the two-week estimate that Golden State officials had given for his recovery from a sprained knee.

Curry, the N.B.A.’s reigning most valuable player, said that he was getting treatment daily in an effort to get back on the floor.

“When the body says it’s time, then we’ll push that button,” he said.

Curry said he expected to begin shooting in the coming days.

Curry said he considered himself fortunate that he had not seriously damaged the knee when he slipped during Sunday’s Game 4 win at Houston. The Warriors eliminated the Rockets on Wednesday.

If Curry were to be out two weeks, he would miss at least the first three games of the second round.


