


HYÈRES, France — “I cannot believe this has happened,” said Wataru Tominaga, a 28-year-old Japanese men’s wear designer, after winning the Première Vision Grand Prize at the Hyères International Festival of Fashion and Photography in France. “Never, even in my dreams, did I think I was going to win.”

A visibly shaken Mr. Tominaga, a graduate of Central Saint Martins in London, added that he had applied at the last minute for Europe’s oldest fashion prize for emerging talent, now in its 31st year, after the stress of presenting his final school collection. He is living in Britain, but he is unsure where he will eventually be based as his student visa runs out this year.

“It is quite overwhelming to try and contemplate what might happen next to me now, both professionally and personally,” he said. “I have met so many useful and kind people in the last few days in Hyères, and so many talented peers. I can’t really put into words how I feel; just know that I am so grateful.”

If the previous winners’ dizzying ascents on the fashion industry ladder are anything to go by, Mr. Tominaga’s victory spoils are likely to go far beyond his winnings Sunday night: a prize of 15,000 euros, or about $16,830, and mentorship by experts at some Chanel-controlled ateliers.

Past winners include Anthony Vaccarello, the Italian-Belgian designer who this month succeeded Hedi Slimane as creative director at Yves Saint Laurent; the Amsterdam-based design pair Viktor and Rolf; and Julien Dossena, creative director at Paco Rabanne, who was the jury president this year, a decade after winning several awards at the competition.

“I feel incredibly proud to be able to come back here and see such intelligent, insightful bodies of work on display,” Mr. Dossena said. “It certainly brings back many memories of my own Hyères experiences.”

Four Japanese, three Finnish, two French and one Swiss entrant made up the 10 finalists, whittled down from more than 300 entries in December. Although there are more and more prizes up for grabs for young designers, including the LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton competition in Paris and the Council of Fashion Designers of America prize in New York, Mr. Dossena said Hyères was unique in feel and format.

“This festival stands out because it is rooted around a sense of family and fun,” he continued. “Yes, it is getting more and more press as more winners go on to big things, and more big brands start supporting its endeavors.”

“But it is not glossy, it is about being inspired and learning in a beautiful, relaxed environment,” he said. “The energy has always been like this, long before the media started speculating about the festival’s ability to spot future stars.”

Held over four days each April, the bulk of the festival takes place at the Villa Noailles, an Art Deco house turned cultural center high up in the hills of Hyères, a pretty beach town on the Côte d’Azur with cobbled streets, old bistros and terra cotta homes with traditional, pistachio-hued shutters. The center, the brainchild of Jean-Pierre Blanc when he was just 20, is now host to dozens of exhibits in the house and gardens, which are open to the public.

“This is not an elitist event — everyone is welcome,” said Mr. Blanc, its director and founder. He was wearing shorts and a T-shirt during an interview on his office terrace, overlooking the lively mishmash of fashion industry insiders, artists, young students and tourists milling around in the sunshine.

“The fashion prize and the photography prize which takes place alongside it are at the center of events, of course,” he said. “But in its orbit we do dozens of talks, concerts, film screenings and workshops by houses like Chanel, so people can truly understand the artistry that goes into that type of work.”

“Paco Rabanne has also put on a spectacular display that will stay long after the festival is over,” Mr. Blanc added. “Really, Hyères is about opening up access to the talent in creative fields to all, and highlight what they are trying to tell us about the world we are living in today.”

The fashion prize’s judging panel this year, which also included the Hermès footwear designer Pierre Hardy and the Barneys New York senior fashion director Tomoko Ogura, said it had been impressed by Mr. Tominaga’s colorful mix of prints, maximalist volumes and gender-bending silhouettes, finding form in pleated sleeves, cotton shirting, dyed corduroy and patterned trousers.

Mr. Tominaga said: “My starting point was an exploration of textures and the differences between men and women’s fashion particularly when it comes to textiles. Ideas of what constitutes masculinity can become much more fluid.”

Such ideas were also considered by the Finnish pair Hanne Jurmu and Anton Vartiainen, whose sustainably sourced, flower power-infused men’s wear looks scooped the second prize, €15,000 from Chloé, another major partner of the festival.

“Winning a prize like this today can mean everything to aspiring young designers today,” Mr. Dossena said, “but the connections they can make are just as important. An informal support system in helping them make the right choices for their careers can go on for years after a ceremony.”

For Mr. Tominaga — as with many Hyères winners before him — a job at a major fashion house, rather than immediately setting up his own label, appears to be his dream.

“Someday, perhaps I’d like to set something up on my own, but for now there is still so much I need to learn,” he said, clutching his gold, palm tree-shaped award backstage after the show. “I’m not sure I’m ready to do this by myself.”

“But who knows,” he said. “What tonight has given me is the chance to make the most of my options.”


