


LOUISVILLE, Ky. — There are no holes in Nyquist’s résumé. He is the reigning 2-year-old champion and is undefeated in seven starts. He has soundly beaten three of the top contenders in previous races — Exaggerator, Brody’s Cause and Mohaymen. His trainer and jockey already have Kentucky Derby victories under their belts.

So why do horse aficionados believe Nyquist is immensely beatable Saturday, in the 142nd running of the Derby? The racetrack is a place where irrational logic rules. And there are several reasons that this colt is deemed vulnerable despite accomplishments better than last year’s Triple Crown champion, American Pharoah, and rivaling those of the 1977 Triple Crown champ, Seattle Slew.

Atop them is a recent statistical anomaly: Can the morning-line favorite really win the Kentucky Derby for a fourth year in a row?

Probably not.

In the past 17 years, the average payoff for a $2 win bet in the Derby was more than $29.70, a number diminished in recent years by the three previous victors. American Pharoah paid $7.80, California Chrome $7 and Orb $12.80.

In fact, there would be some symmetry if a horse with double-digit odds thwarted Nyquist. The colt’s trainer, Doug O’Neill, and rider, Mario Gutierrez, teamed up for the last Derby bomber in 2012 with I’ll Have Another (15-1). That colt was good enough to win the Preakness Stakes before scratching on the eve of the Belmont with a sudden tendon injury.

On paper, Nyquist seems to be a far superior horse. He has already beaten some highly regarded contenders in this Derby field. He turned back Mohaymen in the Florida Derby, Brody’s Cause last year in the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile and Exaggerator twice — in the San Vicente Stakes as well as the Juvenile.

He is the son of Uncle Mo, who was a 2-year-old champion that relished shorter distance but finished 10th in his only attempt at a mile and a quarter — the Derby distance — in the 2011 Breeders’ Cup Classic. Nyquist is among his first crop of runners to hit the track. In addition, O’Neill has given Nyquist just two prep races this spring, one of them a seven-furlong sprint.

“I know my colt can get the distance,” said Kent Desormeaux, the Hall of Fame rider who is riding Exaggerator for his brother, the trainer Keith Desormeaux. “I’m not sure Nyquist can.”

Even since romping to a six-and-a-half-length victory last month in the Santa Anita Derby, Kent Desormeaux has been itching for another shot at Nyquist.

“I think it’s our race,” he said.

Keith Desormeaux is not as brash, but he made it clear he liked his colt’s chances.

“He’s happy, healthy and fit,” he said. “He’s settled in and is a happy horse. He isn’t fidgety. I couldn’t ask for more. I have no complaints.”

The brothers are hardly alone in thinking they have a capable horse. The Hall of Fame trainer Bob Baffert, fresh off a historic Triple Crown with American Pharoah, has been quietly confident in Mor Spirit, who has never been worse than second in seven starts. Gary Stevens, another Hall of Famer, will guide Mor Spirit out of the No. 17 hole, the only gate that has not produced a Kentucky Derby winner in the 141-year history of the race.

“The last time I had Post 17, it was with Gary Stevens and Point Given, and we all know how that turned out,” Baffert said of the colt that was the beaten favorite in the 2001 Derby. He went on to win the Preakness and Belmont Stakes as well as Horse of the Year.

“The post didn’t get him beat,” he said. “Now, we just need to go and make history again.”

Even the trainer of an outsider like Majesto — 30-1 on the odds board — believes that Nyquist can be had. Gustavo Delgado is convinced that Majesto will make up the three-and-a-quarter lengths that separated the colt from Nyquist the last time they met, in the Florida Derby.

“I think there’s going to be a lot of speed,” Delgado said. “Someone will soften Nyquist up and my horse will be in the middle. I want him to run the last five furlongs. Remember, in the Derby, you need luck. Anything can happen.”

O’Neill, the trainer of Nyquist, has taken the skepticism of his colt in stride. In 2012, he had a difficult experience during the Triple Crown season when The New York Times reported that over 14 years and in four states, he had received more than a dozen violations for giving his horses improper drugs, and that his horses also had a tendency to break down or show signs of injury at more than twice the average rate nationally.

In the weeks before Belmont, O’Neill was given a 45-day suspension because one of his horses was found to have an elevated level of carbon dioxide after a race in 2010, which can indicate that the horse was given a “milkshake,” a mix of baking soda, sugar and electrolytes delivered through a tube down a horse’s nose to combat fatigue.

At the time, O’Neill denied that he had ever employed the technique. He did acknowledge that he had been careless operating his stable, running too many horses at too many racetracks, and that he had made mistakes. Beyond the public scrutiny, New York regulators instituted stricter drug monitoring and surveillance policies before the Belmont Stakes.

The trainer has said that he has tightened up his operation, and that the experience, no matter how uncomfortable, benefits him now, when he is under the pressure of having the favorite in the year’s most important race.

“It has allowed me to not be overwhelmed this time,” O’Neill said. “We found out that time that we had success doing what we’d been doing all along. It worked. So we’re just doing that again — same patterns, same style. We just want to stay on course. That’s what’s going to work.”


