


Vipers were thought to have the fastest strike of all snakes until researchers at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette decided to test two different kinds of vipers along with the nonvenomous rat snake.

They were all equally, and impressively, fast, the researchers reported in Biology Letters in March.

The project began with a rat snake, according to David A. Penning, who is a doctoral candidate at the university, and the first author of the study. Another author, Baxter Sawvel, an undergraduate at the time, was helping research how a snake’s body size affects the way it strikes.

They had recorded video of rat snakes, which can grow from eight inches as babies to six feet when grown, offering a wide range of sizes. Mr. Sawvel was comparing the speed of rat snake strikes on video with known speeds for vipers, just to make sure the software was working properly.

The rat snakes were just as fast as the known times for vipers, which did not seem correct, given the prevailing view of viper speed, Mr. Penning said.

“I said, ‘Do it again.’ ” Then he repeated the analysis himself. After going through 10 or 15 more videos, he realized there was no mistake and set about designing a new experiment to do controlled tests of snake strikes.

He and his adviser, Brad R. Moon, and Mr. Sawvel tested 14 Texas rat snakes, six western cottonmouths and 12 western diamondback rattlesnakes. Cottonmouths and rattlers are vipers, and rat snakes are not.

The rat snakes strike at their prey to catch it, but kill it by constriction, wrapping their body around the rat or other animal, and squeezing the life out of it.

The researchers used a stuffed glove on the end of an extendable pole to provoke defensive strikes. All of the snakes were impressive, but the vipers were no better than the rat snakes.

Mr. Penning said it made sense in evolutionary terms for nonvenomous snakes to strike just as quickly. All of them need to get the jump on prey.

The snake strikes they recorded took 48 to 84 milliseconds. By comparison, the blink of an eye — a human eye — takes about 200 milliseconds. More important, it takes mammals 60 to 395 milliseconds to get their muscles moving when they are startled.

That means that the snakes often have the advantage on the rodents and other animals they eat — but not always, which is what might be expected when both sides are always evolving.

Mr. Penning said that the study just scratched the surface in terms of how fast snakes struck. The black mamba, for example, is supposed to be very fast in moving across the ground. How fast does it strike?

“I’m not sure,” he said. “We have quantified striking behavior from less than 1 percent of the snakes.

“I’d love to be able to answer who’s the fastest,” he added. “There’s just so much left to do.”


