


Federal prosecutors in Manhattan asked a judge on Wednesday to deny bail to Reza Zarrab, a prominent gold trader based in Turkey who has been jailed in New York pending trial on charges that he conspired to violate United States sanctions on Iran.

Mr. Zarrab’s lawyer had asked the judge, Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court, to allow his client to be released on $50 million bond, secured by $10 million in cash, along with a proposal that Mr. Zarrab remain in his New York residence under 24-hour armed guard and GPS monitoring.

But prosecutors in the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said in a memorandum to the judge that no bail conditions would reasonably assure Mr. Zarrab’s appearance in court.

“Zarrab’s proposed bail conditions,” Mr. Bharara’s office wrote, “are an attempt to use his tremendous wealth to obscure the flight risk through a facade of security that is beyond the reach of all but a small subset of fabulously wealthy defendants.”

The prosecutors added that “the evidence of Zarrab’s participation in the charged offenses is overwhelming,” and that his culpability had been captured “in voluminous and unimpeachable email communications” and other evidence. If convicted, they said, he faced potentially decades in prison.

Mr. Zarrab’s lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, had no comment on the government’s filing, except to say, “We intend to vigorously respond in a formal reply memorandum.” Mr. Zarrab has pleaded not guilty.

In asking that bail be denied, Mr. Bharara’s office claimed that Mr. Zarrab, when interviewed by a court officer, “made several significant misrepresentations regarding his international travel and his assets, apparently seeking to minimize both.”

Contending that Mr. Zarrab had amassed “a considerable fortune,” the prosecutors cited evidence that he had ownership in about 20 properties, seven sea vessels, 17 luxury automobiles, a private airplane, horses and art worth more than $10 million.

The prosecutors also said Mr. Zarrab had been accused by the Turkish authorities of using his influence to secure his recent release from prison in Turkey.

He had used “his tremendous wealth not only to purchase several homes, yachts and other assets,” prosecutors said, “but also to buy access to corrupt politicians in Turkey.”

Mr. Zarrab was detained in 2013 by the Turkish authorities as part of a broad corruption investigation of businessmen with close ties to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the country’s prime minister at the time and is now its president.

The prosecution of Mr. Zarrab in federal court is being closely watched in Turkey.


