


Much like Machiavelli’s “The Prince,” with which it shares a name, the small hotel that has stood on a corner in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, for four decades is valued by some and loathed by many more for what appears to be a longstanding disregard for rules of any kind.

Now, the Prince Hotel is set to be auctioned off by the city, following a raid on the building in February, the culmination of what for some in the neighborhood has been a 40-year campaign against the budget hotel. In particular, neighbors have been rankled by what they say are unsavory characters and behaviors — prostitution, fights and drugs — that the hotel’s low prices and loose policies draw to their sleepy neighborhood.

“Prince Hotel has long been a notorious hot spot for drug dealing and prostitution, made worse by a slew of Building Code violations and zoning-related problems,” Austin Finan, a spokesman for Mayor Bill de Blasio, said in an email. “For too long, the property has impinged on local residents’ quality of life.”

According to the city, the hotel has amassed hundreds of thousands of dollars in unpaid fines for various code violations.

The Prince was originally a 20-unit apartment building, according to the New York City Buildings Department. Over the years it has been sliced into ever smaller compartments and rented out by the day or month. There are now over 40 rooms, but the entire building has had no certificate of occupancy since a temporary one expired in the 1980s. It has still managed to keep operating, while piling up fines.

The owner of the Prince, Moses Fried, did not respond to several phone calls to the Prince’s offices, seeking comment for this article. Mr. Fried, 87, has owned other royally named hotels, according to The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, including the Princess in Downtown Brooklyn and a second Prince in Clinton Hill. Both were shut down at times over prostitution complaints and building violations.

In past interviews regarding troubles at his hotels over the years, including prostitution at the Prince in Clinton Hill, Mr. Fried, who is Jewish, has repeatedly said that his faith would not allow him to condone such activities and that he was not responsible when they occurred. Instead, he blamed nefarious staff members or bad residents.

Vincent J. Gentile, the city councilman who represents Bay Ridge, dismissed such explanations, pointing to similar problems at all of Mr. Fried’s properties. “We are the victims of Moses Fried,” Mr. Gentile said. “This community is the victim.”

But the Prince in Bay Ridge has its loyalists. About a half-dozen people call it their permanent home, said one resident, who declined to give her name, citing neighbors’ revulsion at the building and its occupants. She has lived there 37 years, she said, in a one-bedroom unit without a kitchen and with a bathroom across the hall; she said she paid less than $200 a month.

The fate of the few residents should the Prince close is unclear.

“Any hotel is going to have something sometimes,” she said. “But you don’t go off the deep end with it, ‘Oh, we have to close it down!’ Where do we go from here? Where do we go with high rents?”

In the past two years, there have been 70 calls to 911 involving the address, according to the New York Police Department, for complaints that included fights and disorderly persons. “Every iteration of the neighborhood for the past couple of decades has had a problem with this place,” said Justin Brannan, 37, a lifelong resident who, like many, has called for the hotel to shape up or close.

The Prince drew renewed attention when the city announced plans for a new prekindergarten on 93rd Street, just a few steps from the Prince, leading to fears of small children mingling with the people that the hotel supposedly draws.

In February, Mayor de Blasio held a town-hall-style session in Bay Ridge. During the meeting, a resident asked what steps the mayor was taking about the Prince — the hotel had been under investigation for months following a concerted push by Community Board 10, which for years has compiled a dossier of the Prince’s problems. A day after the session, deputies from the Brooklyn sheriff’s office raided the building, for which nearly $400,000 is owed for code violations, according to the city’s Finance Department.

The auction, scheduled for June 8, is intended to ensure that the city is paid what it is owed, and possibly to lead to the replacement of the Prince.

For now, the hotel, with its pretty lobby of chandeliers and ceiling fresco of the zodiac in gold, is still operating, advertising rates of $75 to $95 a night, and receiving a polarized mix of pleased and disgusted reviews from customers on rating sites like Yelp.

“You may see people who look shady,” said a man in the lobby recently who gave his name as Vinny Borgese, 40, and said he had been coming to the Prince every month for over 15 years, but refused to say what his profession was or why he was in the neighborhood so regularly.

“But it’s clean,” he said. “There’s nothing bad to say going on here. It’s a good hotel.” He grabbed a towel from the concierge and headed to his room.


