


PARIS — As rain again drenched the French Open, the lone Grand Slam tournament without at least one roofed court, no men’s matches were played to completion for a second straight day on Tuesday.

But two women’s fourth-round matches interrupted by rain on Sunday were finished despite intermittent drizzle, leaving the favorites losing and fuming.

The more striking reversal came on Suzanne Lenglen Court, where second-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska led 102nd-ranked Tsvetana Pironkova, 6-2, 3-0, when play was halted on Sunday. Pironkova turned the tables on Tuesday and completed a 2-6, 6-3, 6-3 victory.

Pironkova raced out of the gates and did not look back, winning the first 10 games to take the second set and build a commanding 4-0 lead in the third. Radwanska had trouble guiding the weighty, waterlogged balls in the changed conditions, and she received medical attention for her right hand midway through the third set.

Mentioning an operation she had on her hand years before, Radwanska said she “couldn’t really play in that conditions, end of story,” before criticizing tournament officials.

“I’m just so surprised and angry that we have to play in the rain,” Radwanska said before unfavorably comparing the decision to those made at a low level of sanctioned professional tennis. “I mean, it’s not a $10,000 tournament; it’s a Grand Slam. How can you allow players to play in the rain?”

Radwanska was not the only favorite whose play was bogged down. Sixth-seeded Simona Halep led Samantha Stosur, the No. 21 seed, 3-5, in the first set when play was stopped on Sunday, but Stosur returned Tuesday with newfound purpose and poise. In sopping conditions on Court 1, Stosur quickly gained the upper hand, beating Halep, 7-6 (0), 6-3.

Stosur, a finalist here in 2010, was beaten badly by Halep three weeks ago in the semifinals at Madrid, losing by 6-2, 6-0 in less than an hour.

“I’ve really had to learn quickly what went wrong there — and why it went wrong, more importantly,” Stosur said. “Again, I was pretty sure about all those things, and then had a good plan of what I wanted to do and had to stay on that path.”

Halep, like Radwanska, was upset about having to play through the drizzle.

“I have no words,” Halep said. “It was impossible to play, in my opinion, and to play tennis matches during the rain, I think, is a bit too much. But everyone was in the same situation, and who was stronger won today.”

Stosur voiced fewer complaints about the conditions.

“I’m just playing,” she said. “If the umpire says we’re stopping, we’re stopping. I don’t know what the forecast is. I know what it feels like out there, and I know it was raining for the first time we went out today, but the court was O.K., for the most part.”

In a quarterfinal scheduled for Wednesday, Stosur will face Pironkova, a 28-year-old Bulgarian, who has been known more for her savvy on grass and other fast surfaces, having reached the Wimbledon semifinals in 2010 and the quarterfinals there in 2011.

Like Stosur, she was more accepting of the conditions.

“Usually if the court is not fit for play, like if it’s slippery, they would cancel the match right away,’’ Pironkova said. “But today the court was still hanging in; it was O.K. We could have played, and so we did.”

The men in action Tuesday were more vocal about their grievances midmatch, though since no matches finished, none of the men made it into news conferences, where they could have provided more details.

In the match after Stosur and Halep’s on Court 1, David Goffin and Ernests Gulbis fumed about the conditions before the match was suspended with Gulbis leading, 3-0. Goffin, normally one of the tour’s most placid players, was irate from the beginning of the match and received a code violation for launching a ball out of the stadium after only two games.

He expressed skepticism at the ability of the supervisor Donna Kelso to assess the conditions as play stopped and started despite the rain, saying that she had “never played tennis.”

Goffin had frequently complained about the risk of injury, and he and Gulbis had packed their bags to leave the court before any postponement was declared.

Goffin’s coach, Thomas Johansson, was more supportive of the officials, saying, “They know what they are talking about.”

Monday’s entire schedule was washed out, creating a backlog of fourth-round matches for Tuesday, the day the quarterfinals were supposed to begin. On Tuesday, with only two singles matches completed, play was called off shortly before 7 p.m.

“I think they made a great decision yesterday canceling early — they were right,” Johansson said. “I think today, they also made a good decision.”

Justin Gimelstob, a former player who is working as a Tennis Channel commentator at this tournament, said the officials’ decision involved more factors than just the slippery clay surface, which can absorb more moisture than any other surface on tour.

“When you don’t have any traction on the clay, then you can’t play on it,” Gimelstob said. “That’s what they look for. But it’s not just the clay. It’s the lines, it’s water in your eyes, it’s the increased weight of the wet ball that puts more pressure on your arm. Everything is affected. Everything matters. There is nothing that isn’t affected by the rain.”

Marcel Granollers, like Radwanska, received medical attention on his wrist and hand during his match against Dominic Thiem, who won the first set, 6-2, before dropping the second, 6-7 (2). David Ferrer led Tomas Berdych, 2-1, in the first set when the match was stopped.

Top-seeded Novak Djokovic, who was leading Roberto Bautista Agut, 3-6, 6-4, 4-1, when play was suspended, had expressed eagerness to play on after a subpar start in which he dropped the first set in 47 minutes.

During one stoppage, he walked back onto the court to a smattering of applause. He then politely took a Roland Garros-branded umbrella from a woman sitting courtside and began jauntily skipping along the baseline in a scene reminiscent of Gene Kelly in “Singin’ in the Rain.”

Four women’s fourth-round matches, including those involving Serena Williams and Venus Williams, and two men’s quarterfinals scheduled for Tuesday will be played Wednesday. Weather permitting, of course.


