


These are the strange and tortuous days in Presumptive Trump America.

It’s Cinco de Mayo, and the Republican National Committee just put out a statement honoring “the many ways Mexican-Americans have enriched our country’s culture.” It’s not clear whether this includes the millions of them that the party’s likely standard-bearer has vowed to deport, but these are the kinds of awkward matters that will preoccupy Presumptive Trump America in the weeks and months ahead. Where to even begin?

Maybe here, with something that popped onto my Twitter machine yesterday via The Manchester Union-Leader: “N.H. Senator Ayotte Will Support — but Not Endorse — Trump,” reads the headline. That certainly clarifies things.

It also helps explain why so many people think politicians are weenies. And why they are fundamentally correct. And why Donald Trump is now completing his bull-rush though the paper wall of the Republican Party.

For as remarkable as Trump’s rise has been, what’s maybe more remarkable is how he has exposed the lameness of the political ranks he is seeking to join. Why does he even have to bother with some of these losers now? Trump seemed to be wondering as much Wednesday morning when he was asked on the “Today” show whether he would be able to unite the Republican Party. “I am confident that I can unite much of it,” he said. “There are parts of it I don’t want.” This struck me as the kind of perfectly Trumpian declaration — smirking, confident and dismissive — that explains how Trump’s romp over what was supposedly an elite Republican field looked almost easy in the end.

With the ranks of the defeated now completed — John Kasich quit the race on Wednesday — Trump’s victims are now lining up to demonstrate their rationalized devotion to their abuser. It is a diminishing spectacle. Bobby Jindal, a onetime Republican star who flailed wildly at Trump during his short-lived quiver of a campaign, said on Wednesday that he would most likely be voting for Trump in November. “I’m not happy about it,” he felt the need to add.

Neither, apparently, are some officials at the Republican National Committee. Committee staff members were told that if they can’t support Trump, “they should leave by the end of the week,” according to The New York Times. The words “kicking and screaming” come to mind: unity, or else.

On Monday, Jon Huntsman, a former Republican governor of Utah and proponent of the gentleman’s centrism embodied by his nonprofit group, “No Labels,” seemed to endorse Trump, the Master Labeler himself — the man who labeled “Lyin’ Ted” Cruz, “Little Marco” Rubio and “Low Energy” Jeb Bush, among others. Yes labels.

You can certainly see how many Republicans find themselves in a tough spot. They think that Hillary Clinton is awful and that it might be politically problematic for them as Republicans to say they’d vote for her, even if they believe Trump would be worse. It’s considered unseemly for politicians to say they plan to stay home in November rather than vote, even if that’s what they plan to do. No third-party option has come forward. But there’s also something hilarious about Marco Rubio calling Trump the “most vulgar person to ever aspire to the presidency” during his campaign and then last week pivoting to say that Trump’s performance has “improved significantly.” He added that he’s more certain than ever that he will support the Republican nominee “now that it’s apparent that Hillary Clinton is going to be the Democratic nominee,” as if that prospect came out of nowhere (or that he might be Feeling the Bern otherwise).

Ted Cruz, meanwhile, called Trump a “pathological liar” and “a narcissist at a level I don’t think this country’s ever seen” as recently as Tuesday. (This was after his father said electing “the alternative” to his son would signal “the destruction of America,” which led Trump to insinuate that Raphael Cruz had a role in the John F. Kennedy assassination. 2016.). And yet Cruz has said repeatedly that he would support Trump if he were the Republican nominee — though he did show signs of perhaps reconsidering after Trump started mocking Cruz’s wife. Cruz said nothing about supporting Trump in his departure speech on Tuesday night, while Trump played gracious and praised Lyin’ Ted as “tough,” “smart” and “one hell of a competitor.”

If Cruz really does plan to be the skunk at the garden party that he claimed, shouldn’t he have made it clear by now that he would not support Trump under any circumstances? But this is Presumptive Trump America, a land of heavy pressure to finesse and contort — even if it lands you on the side of a pathological liar who would ensure the destruction of America. Also, Cruz will probably run again in 2020, for what that’s worth. There are always considerations. It will be awkward.


