


Another week, another No. 1 for Drake.

Drake’s “Views” (Young Money/Cash Money/Republic) holds the top spot on the Billboard album chart for a fifth week straight, the longest such run since Adele’s “25” notched seven weeks at No. 1 at the end of last year and the beginning of 2016. Yet the success of the two albums shows a music industry divided between technologies past and future.

Adele did not make her full album available for streaming, which meant that sales of “25” came from the lucrative but declining formats of CDs and downloads. Taylor Swift’s “1989,” the industry’s other recent mega blockbuster, was also not streamed until long after it first came out.

But those titles are outliers as the music world shifts rapidly toward streaming, with Drake leading the charge. This week “Views” sold only 37,000 copies in the United States, according to Nielsen, and by sales alone it would have come in fifth. Yet “Views” also had 137.4 million streams — about four times as many as the next-most-streamed album (Rihanna’s “Anti,” with 34.9 million this week), which vaulted it to No. 1.

Since it came out, “Views” has sold almost 1.2 million albums in the United States, and songs from it have been streamed 875 million times. Meanwhile, despite Adele and Ms. Swift’s success, CD sales declined last year by almost 11 percent, and album downloads by 3 percent, according to Nielsen, while audio streams were up by 83 percent.

Also on the album chart this week, the country star Dierks Bentley’s “Black” (Capitol Nashville) opened at No. 2, with 88,000 sales of the full album — more than any other record this week — but a modest five million streams. Beyoncé’s “Lemonade” (Parkwood/Columbia) is in third place, Fifth Harmony’s “7/27” (Syco/Epic) opened at No. 4, and Blake Shelton’s “If I’m Honest” (Warner Bros. Nashville) dropped two spots to No. 5.

Flume, an electronic producer and D.J. from Australia, makes his debut on the Billboard album chart, opening at No. 8 with “Skin” (Mom + Pop), his second LP.


