


Most triple plays happen so quickly that fans do not realize what they have witnessed until they see it on the scoreboard. A hard liner to third base, a step on the bag for a second out, a quick throw to another base, and suddenly a promising inning is over.

On Friday night, the Chicago White Sox turned that notion on its head, executing a triple play so long and convoluted that even fans who had been at the concession stands would have had time to catch up on the action.

It started simply enough. Mitch Moreland came to the plate with the bases loaded in the seventh inning and the Rangers trailing, 5-0. It looked as if it was soon to be 5-1 when Moreland hit a soft liner to right field that Adam Eaton caught easily. On a normal night, the runners at first and second would have quickly retreated to their bases, and the runner at third would have tagged up and headed for home. But this was no normal night.

Ian Desmond, who had been on first, misread the play and was caught well off the bag. Eaton’s initial attempt to double him off at first base went astray because of an off-line throw to first baseman Jose Abreu, but then Desmond overran the bag, giving Abreu time to race toward him with the ball. Desmond tried to dance away from Abreu’s glove, but when a diving lunge paid off with a solid tag to the chest, the second out was secured.

Through all this, Prince Fielder, the admittedly slow-footed designated hitter and the runner at third, still had not made his way home. Abreu threw to catcher Dioner Navarro from his knees, keeping Fielder on the base.

In the confusion, Adrian Beltre found himself stranded between second base and third. Beltre, a 19-year veteran and four-time All-Star, said after the game that he had simply assumed Fielder had scored earlier in the play.

Confident that Fielder was not fleet enough to try to make things interesting, Navarro threw to shortstop Tyler Saladino, who was near second base, and he initially ran Beltre toward third base before seeing Fielder inexplicably ambling toward home. Saladino altered course, giving chase to Fielder before throwing back to Navarro at home. It briefly seemed as though a pickle could extend the play even further, but Navarro finished things off by throwing to third baseman Todd Frazier, who tagged Fielder out to end the inning.

It was a 9-3-2-6-2-5 triple play in the score book, the first on record. It killed off the Rangers’ best rally of the night and helped secure a 5-0 win for Chicago.

Beltre was not shy in doling out the blame.

“It was a disaster by everybody,” he said. “All the runners screwed up. Awful base running by everybody.”


