


On Thursday, the jewelry store Quiet Storms will open in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. You’ll find a Sophie Bille Brahe gold and pearl earring ($650) among a mix of modern fine jewelers that include Jemma Wynne and Delfina Delettrez. At 142 Grand Street.

That same day, Away, a direct-to-consumer travel company founded by two former Warby Parker executives, will open a pop-up with its inaugural product, a carry-on — a smart rollerboard with a patent-pending compression system and USB charging ($225) — along with a curated range of souvenirs. These include incense from Tokyo ($18) and Sockerbit candy ($5) from Stockholm. At 325 Lafayette Street.

On Friday, the Indian jewelry house Munnu/the Gem Palace will open a three-day exhibition at Barneys on Madison Avenue with elaborate pieces from the company’s archives. They were exhibited previously at the Kremlin and Somerset House in London, including a small box with more than 900 calibrated rubies set in gold.

On Saturday, Warby Parker will open its first Brooklyn outpost in Cobble Hill and will mark the occasion with the introduction of store-exclusive Milton frames with round mirrored lenses ($145). At 55 Bergen Street.

The Outnet has a holiday shop featuring a series of six limited-edition designer collections rolling out over the course of the summer. First up is Adam Lippes, who has created 12 easy pieces, including a chambray wrap skirt ($296) and a ribbon-trimmed cotton top ($245). At theoutnet.com.

The Jonathan Simkhai prefall collection, which includes an organza midi-dress ($1,275) and a cold-shoulder ruffled silk top ($395), is available for two weeks exclusively on a digital pop-up on the Intermix website and at Intermix boutiques. At intermixonline.com and at 98 Prince Street.

Also this week, Pierre Hardy debuts a new e-commerce site that includes styles like the Biba platform embellished with psychedelic stripe ($1,144) available only at the online store and the New York boutique. At pierrehardy.com, 30 Jane Street.

From Friday to Monday, Comme des Garçons will host what promises to be a typically epic once-every-three-years sample sale, called Super-Market-Market 2016. For the first time, the sale will include Dover Street Market merchandise, like a J. W. Anderson box bag ($183, originally $915) and a Craig Green bomber jacket ($203, originally $1,015), for up to 80 percent off. The sale will also have pieces from the full range of Comme des Garçons lines. At Skylight Clarkson Sq, 550 Washington Street.


