


The executive director of an arts charity who was attacked with drain cleaner last year was fired by the board of the charity on Friday, along with the financial officer who helped her unearth what the authorities have called a $750,000 embezzlement scheme.

The ousters were the latest twist in a continuing drama that has shaken the quiet Queens offices of the charity, Healing Arts Initiative, which brings concerts, performances and other cultural events to hundreds of thousands of disabled, elderly and poor New Yorkers each year.

The executive, D. Alexandra Dyer, was assaulted with a chemical drain cleaner containing lye in August — only several weeks into her tenure at Healing Arts — after she had questioned a staff accountant about years of bookkeeping lapses and missing money. She had also hired a new chief financial officer, Frank Williams, to resolve the accounting inconsistencies. (The staff accountant was eventually arrested.)

The board said in a statement that it fired Ms. Dyer and Mr. Williams for withholding “critical financial and other information.”

Mr. Williams said the firings were retaliatory, and that the board did not want scrutiny of its history of negligence that allowed the thefts to occur.

He and Ms. Dyer, both 60, complained to the state attorney general last fall about the board’s stewardship. And last month, Ms. Dyer sued the board on behalf of the charity itself, seeking the board’s removal. In recent settlement negotiations, Ms. Dyer said, she insisted on an audit committee of two new board members and one holdover that would report its findings to the attorney general.

“This is happening because we exposed them,” Mr. Williams said of the board. “They’re trying to kill a great organization.”

A spokesman for the board, Timothy Gilles, said, “the lawsuit is not the reason for the terminations.”

In April, the staff accountant, Kim Williams, was indicted on charges that she stole more than $750,000 over three years and orchestrated the lye attack to silence Ms. Dyer. Two other people have been charged, one with committing the attack and the other with conspiring with Ms. Williams, who is not related to Frank Williams. All have pleaded not guilty.

Ms. Dyer said that as far back as 2011, the board had fired another chief financial officer after that person complained that Ms. Williams was issuing duplicate payroll checks, the same method prosecutors now say Ms. Williams used to siphon funds. A dissident former board member, Kitty Lunn, has said that the board ignored her pleas last year to seriously investigate why Healing Arts’ checks were bouncing and its credit cards were being declined.

Ms. Dyer was hospitalized for months after the lye attack. She required multiple facial operations and is badly disfigured, but she returned to work in January.

The firings on Friday come at a crucial time for Healing Arts: Most of its $5 million annual budget is from contracts with the city, which in turn depend on Healing Arts’ having its paperwork in order. Federal forms that must be filed by tax-exempt organizations, known as 990s, are due from Healing Arts on May 15.

“With deadlines for I.R.S. tax filings, audited financial statements and various requests from funders just a week away,” the board said in a statement, it had become apparent “that Healing Arts Initiative will not survive if Ms. Dyer remains as executive director.”

The statement added, “The board and outside financial advisers and consultants have made numerous requests and had multiple conversations with Ms. Dyer and Chief Financial Officer Frank Williams in an attempt to get critical financial and other information, but that information has not been forthcoming.”

Ms. Dyer said the information “has been so forthcoming it’s laughable.” Her lawyer, Ronald G. Russo, said she was considering filing a whistle-blower lawsuit.

Doug Cohen, a spokesman for the attorney general’s office, said on Friday that despite the firings, the charities bureau would work with Healing Arts to make sure it had necessary internal reforms in place.

Ms. Dyer’s position has been assumed by Ken Berger, a former president of a watchdog group, Charity Navigator. Inside Healing Arts’ offices on Friday, he gathered the remaining employees in a circle.

“The only way to save this place,” Mr. Berger said, was for them to work with him over “these precious few days.” He said that though he knew some might be skeptical of him, there was no time to vet another executive director.

“A decision has been made,” Mr. Berger said.

The staff members sat expressionless, except for a middle-aged man sitting across from Mr. Berger, who covered his face with his hands.


