


GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Henrik Lundqvist’s pads had been propped up at his stall in the dressing room on Tuesday as if he would get another chance to save the Rangers.

But he kept his leather jacket on when he showed up to talk to reporters about the season, which ended unceremoniously, even stunningly, when the Rangers were ousted in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs by the Pittsburgh Penguins in a mere five games.

The Rangers’ demise, especially coming after a four-year stretch in which they reached the Eastern Conference finals three times, was so startling that Lundqvist was asked if an eye injury he sustained in the series opener had prevented him from tracking pucks.

“I wish that was the case,” said Lundqvist, who was benched in the last two games after allowing 10 goals on 51 shots in 66 minutes. “It would have been easy to say that was the reason I didn’t play better in Games 4 and 5, but it’s not.”

Lundqvist, 34, signed for five more seasons, said he would try to find better answers, but he had made it clear that the Penguins, who play Washington, were a much better team.

He injured his neck when defenseman Ryan McDonagh collided with him in a March 3 loss to Pittsburgh. Defenseman Marc Staal poked him near his right eye in the first period of a Game 1 loss to the Penguins on April 13.

“That’s extra tough when you play a really confident team, a good team that really exposed you,” Lundqvist said.

Alain Vigneault, the third-year coach, would not elaborate on exactly what the Penguins exposed. But he did say Tuesday that his defensemen’s ability to move the puck “really dropped” and, as a result, “affected a lot of parts of our game.”

McDonagh, the team captain, said stonily: “Other years, you might be able to say we deserved better. This year, it’s tough to think like that.” The Penguins, he said, made the Rangers pay for their hesitation and incohesiveness.

Vigneault would not say if he would retain his entire coaching staff, but it could be interpreted as a lack of confidence in Ulf Samuelsson, the coach of a defensive corps that allowed 25 more goals than it did last season.

“I think we’re at the stage now where we need to look at some changes,” Vigneault said of the team.

Rick Nash, coming off a regular season in which he scored 15 goals in 60 games, and who has 11 goals in 61 playoff games since joining the Rangers, said, “It’s going to be an interesting summer.”

Dan Boyle will become a free agent and will turn 40 in July, so he is all but certain to be swapped out for Brady Skjei, 22, the former first-round draft choice who appeared in all five playoff games, even playing next to McDonagh, after seven N.H.L. regular-season games.

Dan Girardi, who turns 32 on Friday, appeared in only two playoff games after sustaining what he said Tuesday was a concussion. He played poorly this season and, under contract for four more years and $19 million, is a candidate to be bought out.

Keith Yandle, 29, becomes an unrestricted free agent — “a tough decision moving forward,” Vigneault said. Yandle had 20 power-play assists and is highly regarded by Vigneault as a creative playmaker and team leader, not so much for his ability to shut down opponents.

“I can definitely see myself playing here,” Yandle said.

Forwards Dominic Moore, Viktor Stalberg and Eric Staal will be unrestricted free agents. J. T. Miller, Chris Kreider and Kevin Hayes are restricted free agents. Vigneault sounded as if he wanted to keep Hayes, even though he was benched for the last two playoff games.

“There’s so much potential,” Vigneault said of Hayes, who dropped to 36 points from 45 last season, “but I’ve seen tons of guys who have potential, and not all of them figure it out.”

Vigneault said he and club executives would not do anything drastic quickly. He also said there were some good pieces in place. Lundqvist said the Rangers had to find ways to win games in different ways.

“This game is about determination, and how much you want it,” Lundqvist said. “You talk about age: I want it as bad as I did 10 years ago, maybe even more. That’s going to be my biggest motivation moving forward.”

Before Lundqvist entered the room, the fan favorite Mats Zuccarello said the Penguins were as responsible for winning the series as the Rangers were for losing it. It clearly still stung: After 76 playoff games over four seasons, the Rangers had only five this year.

Zuccarello smiled weakly when he said, “We’re a team with guys who expect to be playing hockey when there’s good weather outside.”


