


BOGOTÁ, Colombia — Colombian health officials said on Tuesday that they had confirmed two more cases of babies born with brain damage to mothers who had Zika during pregnancy, but said overall cases of the mosquito-borne virus were decreasing in the country.

“We are absolutely certain that Zika is on the decrease in Colombia,” said Fernando Ruiz, Colombia’s vice minister of Health, during a briefing here.

At the briefing, officials said they had now confirmed a total of four cases of microcephaly, a condition in which babies are born with unusally small heads and damaged brains, and that they expect to see many more over the next three months as women who contracted Zika during an outbreak this year begin to give birth. They said they were studying 22 more newborns with microcephaly to determine if Zika was the cause. They also announced a total of 304 cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome — a condition that can cause paralysis, usually temporary — that are suspected to have been caused by Zika.

Separately this week, a new study published in the journal PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases reported that the Zika virus has been circulating in Haiti at least since 2014, and possibly since 2013, well before an outbreak in Brazil raised the alarm of public health officials around the world.

Researchers at the University of Florida found Zika gene sequences in the blood of three children from different rural towns who had visited clinics in the Gressier-Léogâne region of Haiti in December 2014. Comparisons with Zika DNA from elsewhere suggested the virus could have been in Haiti for months.

The Zika virus was confirmed in Brazil only in May 2015, but the new finding does not mean that it arrived in Haiti first. Instead, the authors said, the virus probably went from French Polynesia to Easter Island, then around the Americas, circulating for far longer than has been realized.

In recent weeks, according to various state health departments, more than a dozen Americans in five states have returned from missionary work in Haiti with confirmed Zika infections.


