


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Jeré Longman, a sports reporter, describes the evolution of his story on the quest for a two-hour marathon.

Last September, I flew to Ethiopia on what was intended to be a weeklong assignment about an attempt by a provocative scientist, Yannis Pitsiladis, to train a runner to complete a marathon in less than two hours. That is nearly three minutes faster than the current world record and a mark that would join the four-minute mile as a test of human endurance.

Instead, the assignment became a seven-month odyssey as I followed Mr. Pitsiladis around Ethiopia, across Europe and even to the Dead Sea. I’ve always been fascinated by people who have challenged common wisdom and were determined to do what others thought was impossible.

Mr. Pitsiladis wants to apply science to assist East African runners, who have achieved greatness using little science. He tells the story of Tsegaye Kebede, an Ethiopian who won a bronze medal in the marathon at the 2008 Beijing Olympics and has won the London and Chicago marathons, all without eating breakfast beforehand.

“I would argue that Joe Blow who is running four hours is using more science than these guys,” Mr. Pitsiladis said.

The test subject for Mr. Pitsiladis’s Sub2 Project is Kenenisa Bekele of Ethiopia, a three-time Olympic champion who is widely considered one of the two greatest distance runners of all time. Nearly 34 and almost broken by repeat injury, Mr. Bekele recovered with Mr. Pitsiladis’s guidance to finish third at the London Marathon in April.

It was fascinating, over the months, to see Mr. Bekele recover his confidence. At lunch at his home last September, he removed one of his Olympic medals from a trophy case in his living room and held it up.

“You have room for one more?” asked Jos Hermens, his Dutch manager.

“I’ll get a new house,” Mr. Bekele said.

In February, at a traditional restaurant in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital, it became clear how important Mr. Bekele’s success was to his country, one of the world’s poorest, but one with a rich running tradition.

As dancers onstage whipped their necks at impossible angles, the usually reserved Mr. Bekele stood at his table. Briefly, buoyantly, he moved his shoulders, and his body shivered.

“Kenenisa is the hero of the country,” one of the dancers shouted. “His mother can be proud. She doesn’t need to have five or six children. This one is strong enough.”


