


Midtown East has long been known as an area of expensive hotels, easy access to Grand Central Terminal and the United Nations. But proper pubs? Not really. The area (those who live there call it Turtle Bay) has long specialized in rowdy white-collar hookup joints, expensive wine bars and paint-by-number Irish saloons. Not to mention the occasional sketchy massage parlor.

That all changed in the fall of 2013 when Hudson Malone opened. Doug Quinn, a former bartender at the beloved P.J. Clarke’s, opened the bar on 218 East 53rd Street, replacing another of the neighborhood’s ubiquitous frat-house watering holes (this one called Tammany Hall) in a 116-year-old two-story building. On the menu are burgers and what the staff refers to as “New York comfort food.”

But the draw at Hudson Malone is its owner. Depending on whom you ask, Mr. Quinn’s firing from P.J. Clarke’s was either an outrage or totally justified. There was a heated dispute between two patrons, and Mr. Quinn was not hesitant about picking sides and stating his case. P.J. Clarke’s did not respond to a call seeking comment.

Not in dispute is that as a bartender, he has a devoted following.

Joe Carey, 48, a crisis communications consultant who works in Midtown, has been ordering pints from Mr. Quinn for more than a decade.

“Doug is the real deal,” he said on a recent spring evening at Hudson Malone. He called Mr. Quinn flat out “the best bartender in New York.”

Mr. Quinn’s idea for Hudson Malone (which is named after his sons) was “doctors and lawyers mixing it up with carpenters and contractors.” On that night, the mix was pretty balanced.

Imogen Lloyd Webber, daughter of Andrew, senior editor at Broadway.com and author of a new book called “The Intelligent Conversationalist,” was enjoying a glass of white wine. She is about as local as you can get. “It really is an old-school neighborhood place,” Ms. Webber said.

Nearby was another right-brained regular, Kaytlin Bailey, a 29-year-old comedian. “When I was even more poor than I am now, Doug would tolerate me just ordering water, while watching me con dudes into buying me dinner,” she said. “He always had my back.”

The décor at Hudson Malone is from another time — turn-of-the-century lamps, coffered tin ceilings, various Knickerbocker-themed knickknacks. Just as anachronistic is the owner’s wardrobe, which usually consists of French-cuffed button down shirts and a rotation of Turnbull & Asser bow ties.

The bow tie is built into the bar’s neon marquee, and it is also emblazoned on an indoor chalkboard labeled Quinn’s Laws. Among adages like “failure creates success” is what might well be the motto of the bar: Revenge is a beer best poured cold.

But Mr. Quinn, 48, no longer wants to talk about his former job. (The only picture of that place happens to be strategically located above the men’s toilet in the basement.)

On Tuesday nights, when the upstairs piano is pounding and customers convene among paintings of legendary saloon proprietors like Toots Shor and Elaine Kaufman, it’s clear what Mr. Quinn is aspiring to.

“The bartenders know my drink the minute I get in,” said Greg Williams, a 38-year-old research analyst who works two blocks away. “It’s like a speakeasy minus the waxed mustaches and stupid suspenders in actual annoying speakeasies.”

Mr. Williams was drinking with his identical twin, Robert, near the bar’s antique jukebox. “You won’t find much Pearl Jam and Elvis Costello playing at any other East Midtown bar,” he said. “Plus, no plastic cups, which is rare for this area.”


