


The exit polls in the last few presidential elections point to a younger and more diverse electorate than the census and the voter file do, as we reported here. But just because it’s two against one doesn’t mean the exit polls are wrong.

“It’s an interesting problem, where it’s like you have three watches,” said Michael McDonald, a political scientist who researches voter turnout. “Two watches look like they’re in agreement, so we might come to the conclusion that two watches in agreement must be correct. But that doesn’t mean there aren’t biases in these data sources that lead to similarities without necessarily reflecting the true population.”

One way to help clarify the debate is to look at the actual results to see whether any turnout scenario makes considerably more sense than any other one.

On balance, the results look a lot more like the electorate in the Current Population Survey or voter file than the exit polls — at least in the places where the disagreement is greatest.

To extend Mr. McDonald’s analogy further, sometimes it’s not just two watches saying it’s noon against one that says it’s the evening — it also looks awfully bright outside.

The approach here is to consider the implied turnout rate among adult citizens. For instance, the exit polls say that black voters represented 12.6 percent of the national electorate. That would imply a turnout of 16.4 million black voters (12.6 percent of 130 million votes), or about 60.6 percent of the 27.1 million black adult citizens in the 2012 American Community Survey. Here, the figures aren’t especially telling either way. Sixty-one-percent black turnout is certainly plausible. But other times, they yield numbers that make little or no sense, or can’t be backed up in the results.

Take age — the place where the voter file offers such a clear verdict that we don’t really need any additional evidence. But if we were looking to see whether the exit poll turnout rates made sense, we would note that they actually imply a higher turnout among young voters than voters over age 65 in 2012 — a finding at odds with decades of research on participation by age, or just common sense. It’s not a one-year pattern, either.

The exit poll results for Hispanic voters is nearly as stark, with Hispanic turnout virtually even with non-Hispanic turnout — for both 2004 and 2012. If true, it would overturn years of research about the issue, which has long held that Hispanic participation trails far below the national average.

The actual results, however, suggest that the conventional wisdom about Hispanic turnout is right. The turnout in heavily Hispanic areas was far lower than in non-Hispanic places.

This type of analysis has its own weaknesses. The kinds of Hispanic voters who live in overwhelmingly Hispanic areas, for instance, may not be representative of all Hispanic voters. It also assumes that the exit poll’s definition of Hispanic voters is close enough to the census definition that the two can be compared in these terms. Nonetheless, it’s hard to reconcile the self-evidently low turnout of heavily Hispanic areas with the apparent parity in Hispanic and non-Hispanic turnout reported by the exit polls.

The disparity between the reported turnout in the exit polls and the actual results is even more striking in the states where the exit polls portray a far more diverse electorate than the C.P.S., like Ohio or Missouri.

There, the exit poll findings are clearly questionable. In Ohio, for instance, the exit polls imply that 88 percent of black adult citizens turned out. That’s an astonishingly high figure for any demographic group.

There were similar turnout rates in nearby Wisconsin and Missouri. These rates vastly exceeded the national turnout rate for black voters, which the exit polls would have placed near 60 percent.

There is virtually no evidence of such high black turnout in the actual results. In Cleveland, for example, the turnout rate was 57 percent.

For brevity we’ve grouped the states where black turnout exceeds 75 percent of adult citizens in the exit polls (excluding Minnesota, where there is not a large enough black population to facilitate the analysis).There just aren’t many places where the turnout rate exceeded 75 percent at all, let alone on average.

Pennsylvania is probably the only state with a modest difference between the C.P.S. and the exit polls where the election returns are consistent with a black turnout in the 70 percent range. Interestingly, Pennsylvania is also one of the few states where Catalist shows a more diverse electorate than the C.P.S.

Importantly, many of these state level trends aren’t consistent from year to year. Many of the states with the highest black turnout in 2012 had a big increase from 2008 or 2004. Once again, there’s no evidence of a surge in black turnout in these same areas — the turnout in Cleveland may not have increased at all. Together, it’s a pattern that’s very consistent with the theory that it’s mainly noise from precinct selection.

The census, in comparison, tends to posit more reasonable estimates for turnout. There are exceptions: In North Carolina in 2012, for instance, the exit poll turnout rate among black voters seems more likely than the census data — and indeed is confirmed by the state’s voter file data.

But North Carolina is hardly a clear victory for the exit polls. In 2004, it showed John Kerry benefiting from an electorate that was even more diverse than it was in 2008 or 2012. Few analysts used this data to argue that the black share of the electorate actually dropped in North Carolina with Mr. Obama’s historic election — it was self-evidently wrong. But often the exit polls miss by just as much without it being nearly so clear.

None of the data is perfect. But on balance, the Catalist data and the C.P.S. are more consistent with the actual results and common sense than the exit polls, at least in the places where the disagreements are largest.


