


OAKMONT, Pa. — Shane Lowry placed the putter behind his golf ball on the 16th green Saturday to line up a long birdie putt. He then saw the ball move ever so slightly backward. No one else saw the ball change positions.

But Lowry knew it was a rules violation, and he acted immediately. He called a penalty on himself even though he knew that lost stroke could topple him from the upper echelon of the leaderboard in the second round at the 116th United States Open.

As if the devilish Oakmont Country Club course were not grueling enough, Lowry, an Irishman ranked 41st in the world, was punishing himself.

Lowry’s gesture was noble, but don’t think it was easy on him. Once he re-marked the ball — he was now facing a 30-foot par putt — he stepped away with a look of anguish. He grasped his putter with both hands and placed it behind his neck as if he wanted to break it over his shoulders. And he turned his eyes skyward as if to say, “This is what you’re doing to me as I try to win my first major championship?”

If you believe in karma, or providence, Lowry made seven birdies and just two bogeys the rest of the day as the Open advanced into the third round. And when the sun set and play was suspended Saturday night, it was Lowry who held a two-stroke lead over the American Andrew Landry. At five under par for the tournament, Lowry was one of only six golfers under par.

And he could have been one stroke lower.

Lowry, however, never wavered on his decision and never considered doing anything else.

“I had to penalize myself,” he said.

But again, reinforcing the notion that golfers are not emotionless robots who find it easy to conform to conventions of integrity without feeling the consequences, Lowry added, “It’s very frustrating.”

With Lowry in the midst of what is perhaps golf’s most demanding tournament and a life-changing championship on the line, consider how uncommon Lowry’s action is in modern sports.

On Sunday night, in the N.B.A. finals, it is unlikely that any player will outwardly try to cheat, but it is part of the unwritten code of basketball that players bend certain rules as much as possible to gain advantages. That is just part of the back and forth of the game. It is the reason there are referees on the court to police the action.

Baseball has unstated, if widely understood, protocols for play in which players routinely try to influence the outcome beyond the basic parameters set out in the rule book. Catchers frame pitches to fool umpires, batters pretend to be struck by pitches, and base runners leave the baseline to interfere with fielders.

Football has a host of behaviors developed over time that are outside the rule book. No one is calling it cheating, but as just one example, it is acknowledged that there is holding by one or more offensive linemen on every single play from scrimmage.

Those are different games that have developed over centuries with their own codes of conduct. But it does not change the fact that on Saturday, a golfer playing in one of the biggest tournaments of the year chose to call a significant penalty on himself when he did not have to.

Interestingly, golf has odd phrases and lingo to interpret the unexplainable things that routinely happen on the golf course. The one most used for these almost paranormal results is rub of the green, which is meant to be a mystical description of luck, both good and bad.

But there is no established, cutesy saying to explain how and why golfers, especially in competition, are expected to behave within the rules — even when it means accepting a penalty when the golfer very likely did nothing to cause the violation.

Lowry, who tied for ninth at last year’s United States Open, refused to dwell on the penalty stroke at any time after his second round was complete. He only noted that it distracted him enough that his next putt was substandard.

Of the 30-footer on the 16th hole that quickly went from a birdie putt to a par putt, Lowry said: “If anything, I was a bit immature with how quickly I hit the putt after the penalty. And I hit an awful putt that ended up 8 feet right of the hole.”

But Lowry made his bogey putt. (Karma.)

“If I would have missed that,” he said of the bogey putt, “it would have been difficult to get back from there. That kind of kept me going, and from there on, I just played good golf. In fact, I played good golf all day. I hit plenty of fairways, plenty of greens, and that’s what you need to do out here.”

In other words, Shane Lowry did what was expected of him and moved on. On Sunday, he tees off as the leader of the 116th United States Open.

Late Saturday, Lowry was asked to assess his mood. It had been a long day. He smiled easily.

“I feel very comfortable about everything out there,” he said.


