


He was hard-pressed to explain it even to himself. Possibly the whole idea was daft. His “rugby dream,” the aspiration to start a professional rugby league in North America, had taken over his life. It had him raiding his bank account to pay for logos, trademarks, websites. For visa specialists, branding wizards, a high-powered sports lawyer. It had him hacking through jungles of marketing jargon. His Midtown Manhattan office was cluttered with cartons of new business cards, boxes of hats, sample jerseys. There was a litter of unorganized receipts on the desk. In 18 months he’d racked up 250,000 frequent flier miles. He’d watched the Rugby World Cup in London from the Royal Box at Olympic Stadium; someone joked he could plunge New Zealand into a national depression if he lured their stars to America. He’d delved into venue contracts, hot-dog sales projections and turf heights on rugby-compliant fields. In conversation after conversation, on the phone, by email and in person, at mixers and conferences, in airports and foyers and hallways, he pitched his plans, parried critics and cajoled skeptics into the fold. Some guardians of amateur rugby were threatened by the prospect of losing prized club players to a pro league. Some just wondered who the hell he was — Douglas Schoninger, a not-particularly-athletic 55-year-old former bond trader who had never played rugby, who dimly remembered seeing a few games 30 or 40 years ago but didn’t know a ruck from a maul or a lock from a hooker until he bought a copy of “Rugby Union for Dummies.”

Last fall, he was thinking of his late father and the National Football League games they used to attend at the old Giants Stadium in the Meadowlands. On cold days, they sat on copies of the Sunday paper and used phone books to keep their feet from freezing on the frigid concrete. They saw the same people every weekend in the stands. They felt they were part of the game in a way that was hard to put into words. All his life, Schoninger had been going to N.F.L. games — 10 last year with his teenage son, Charlie. Charlie loved football, but to Schoninger it seemed that on the professional level, the ethos of the game, which evolved from rugby more than a century ago, had curdled. Materialism and profiteering had eaten away any nobility the N.F.L. game once possessed, leaving in its place a violent, vainglorious, $13-billion-a-year entertainment spectacle staged by helmeted mercenaries for the enrichment of grasping billionaires. Rugby was different, or seemed so, even in the nature of the game: Players vied for the ball in scrums, bulled it forward in mauls, booted it through goal posts or dashed with it across the try line in the course of 80 nearly continuous minutes of free-flowing improvisation, versus what unfolded in the three-plus hours it took to play a 60-minute N.F.L. game, where the actual amount of action averages only 10 minutes 43 seconds. In football, specialists did the same thing over and over; in rugby, you played offense and defense — anyone could score.

One day in February, Schoninger confided to me that his secret ambition was to supplant the N.F.L. He was kidding. Or not. It was hard to tell.

“The N.F.L. is on top right now, and rugby is at the bottom,” he said. “But things always look better at the top and worse at the bottom than they really are.”

PRO Rugby, his new league for a sport that in America has a fan base that would barely register as an N.F.L. rounding error, was just two months from kicking off its 30-game season in April, with clubs in Denver, Sacramento, San Francisco, San Diego and Obetz, Ohio. Opening day was marked D-Day on a wall calendar.

“What if nobody comes?” I asked. Rugby-dream stress was showing on Schoninger’s face in a way it hadn’t when I asked the same heartless question in October.

“You mean what happens if I don’t sell a single ticket, or a single hot dog, or a single parking space? If nobody buys any PRO Rugby T-shirts or hats? If I don’t get one sponsor? If nobody wants to broadcast a single game?”

He shuddered.

“I’m all in,” he said. “I’ve become a rugby believer. If I fail, it’s not the money I’ve spent — well, it’s the money I’ve spent, but it’s also that I was wrong. Wrong about the support from the rugby community. Wrong about the time being right. That’s what would hurt. It’s like opening a restaurant and then no one comes. That would hurt. But then, if this were easy, it would have been done already.”

Why it took so long has a lot to do with the history of the game. Legend has it that rugby sprang into being one day in 1823 at the Rugby School in Rugby, England, when 16-year-old William Webb Ellis, “with a fine disregard for the rules of football as played in his time, first took the ball in his arms and ran with it.” Until the beginning of the professional era in 1995, the main branch of the game, known as Rugby Union, held fast to its amateur status, and to a manly, aristocratic ethos that idealized the carnage of concussions and separated shoulders as unselfish character-building sacrifice for Team, God and Country. Vestiges of those values are still celebrated by club players and boosters who credit rugby with fostering a rare fellowship and mutual respect, rugby brawls notwithstanding. Players often call the ref “sir.” Stars have been known to help clean up the locker room. When the mayhem on the pitch is over, it’s customary for adversaries to share a pint at a pub. Of what is sometimes called “the game they play in Heaven,” the English rugby champion Jason Leonard once wrote: “There is a way of life that comes with it; and a way of thinking that believes in honor, sacrifice, pain and love of teammates and country. We can never compare sport with war, but we can perhaps discover here the wellspring of those beliefs.”

The first bona fide rugby in the United States was played in 1874, between Harvard and McGill University. Six years later, at Yale, the future T. rex of American sports was hatched when Walter Camp, the innovative coach and writer known as the father of American football, separated the rugby scrum into football’s “line of scrimmage.” Both rugby and football were popular in American colleges and universities in the early 20th century, and at one point, alarmed by the prevalence of injuries, Stanford and Berkeley gave up football for rugby — a programming decision that was reversed after New Zealand’s mighty All Blacks, on a tour in 1913, humiliated a squad of all-stars in California, 51-3.

New Zealand and other top teams were not represented when the United States won Olympic rugby gold medals in Antwerp in 1920 and Paris in 1924. The 17-3 victory in Paris over a heavily favored French team by a United States squad made up mostly of California collegians was one of the greatest upsets in Olympic history. But the outraged reaction of some 40,000 French fans at the Stade Colombes jeopardized the very principle of the better and more peaceful world through sports on which the modern Olympics were based. David Wallechinsky recounts the scene in “The Complete Book of the Olympics”: “After two French players were injured, the U.S. team was booed and hissed the remainder of the game. Fighting broke out in the stands, and Gideon Nelson, an art teacher from Illinois” — and a United States reserve player — “was knocked unconscious after being hit in the face with a walking stick.” The Americans left the field under a police escort and a barrage of rocks and bottles.

Rugby was dropped from subsequent Olympics. In America the game went into a long dormancy from which it did not emerge until the 1960s, when it began to catch on again with colleges and clubs. Ed Hagerty, whose life before rugby included a turn as an altar boy in Grace Kelly’s wedding in 1956, discovered his passion for the game at Holy Cross in 1963. “It was kind of countercultural,” he recalls. “We wore discarded football jerseys.” After graduation, Hagerty played for local clubs in New York and was working as the publisher of Popular Science when he quit to eke out a living as editor of Scrumdown, a rugby newspaper started in 1975 by Jon Prusmack. One of the first Scrumdown editorials summed up the state of the American game, suggesting that ruggers from New Zealand, Australia and Britain were to their American counterparts what Rudolf Nureyev was to Zorba the Greek.

To close the talent gap, promote and govern the sport at all levels and establish a United States national team, the 115,000-member organization known today as USA Rugby was formed in 1976. This August, rugby is returning to the Olympics after a 92-year hiatus. The United States will defend its gold medal in Rio de Janeiro, playing a shorter, less complex form of the game that features seven players on a side instead of the traditional 15.

A professional rugby league is about the last thing Doug Schoninger imagined he would be pouring time and money into. Hockey, basketball and tennis were his games growing up in Great Neck, Long Island. His father, a voracious reader who left high school early to help put a brother through college, worked six days a week running an extermination company. “Somewhat like ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ but with no angels,” Schoninger recalls. He was 25 when his father died at 66.

Reflecting his faith and his cool appraisal of numbers, Schoninger spent a year at Emory University studying theology, then transferred to Tulane, from which he graduated in 1982 with a degree in mechanical engineering. He landed a $13,000-a-year job as a runner on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange and later worked as a construction manager for Morse Diesel, the general contractor for the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Times Square. He returned to Wall Street in 2000 to trade stocks and bonds at Morgan Stanley and Oppenheimer. Bearish by temperament, with a keen feel for risk, he eventually started his own shop, DJS Capital Management, managing a bond portfolio of several hundred million dollars for more than a dozen clients.

In 2013 Schoninger bought an inactive company called Stadium Capital Financing Group that Morgan Stanley needed to unload to comply with new banking regulations. Trying to revive the business, he began shopping for undervalued second-tier sports teams (minor-league baseball, lacrosse, D-league basketball) whose revenues might be leveraged to raise capital for new stadiums. He wasn’t having much luck when, in the autumn of 2014, he was introduced to Jason Moore, an Australian sports-marketing impresario who for years had been trying to raise up to $300 million to create an American rugby league drawing on the N.F.L.’s gladiatorial-entertainment template. “We wanted to showcase rugby the way Americans consume sports, marketing it with American pizazz and style,” Moore told me. He aimed to sell franchises, host games in midsize soccer venues and pay players upward of $100,000, but he had yet to secure the all-important “sanction” from USA Rugby, without which it is difficult to hire referees, coaches or players or to get insurance.

Moore arranged for Schoninger to attend a match in Chicago featuring the United States national team, the Eagles, and New Zealand’s All Blacks, the titans of the sport. Beyond the score — the Eagles were slaughtered, 74-6 — what impressed Schoninger was the choreographic precision of the All Blacks and the fervor of the crowd.

“There were 61,500 people at Soldier Field, the largest rugby crowd in American history,” he recalls. “That was the moment things changed for me. I realized that if great teams wanted to play here, and you could fill Soldier Field, you could do well building a professional league.”

Schoninger met with USA Rugby’s chief executive, Nigel Melville, a former scrum-half captain of the English national team, in fall 2014. Using USA Rugby’s demographic and event data, Schoninger spent the winter doing due diligence. He drew up budgets for what he envisioned would be six league-owned franchises. He would start modestly, building around cities with vibrant rugby clubs and prominent teams among the hundreds of college and university rugby programs. Salaries ranging from $20,000 to $35,000 would be on a par with other second-tier professional sports vying for sunlight in the shadow of the N.F.L. Through Facebook, he could reach rugby fans with a precision never before possible. “I couldn’t have built a league on my budget without social media,” he says.

The expenses for each team — salaries, coaches, training facilities, venue costs, marketing, uniforms — would run to about $1.5 million per year. Schoninger didn’t have, or want, partners, and would be financing everything himself the first year. Revenues — who knew? Could he get sponsors? Sell broadcast rights? How many people would buy tickets? When professional rugby began in England, the first Harlequins game, at Stoop stadium, drew around 1,400. Fans now routinely fill all 14,800 seats, and games at the national stadium in Twickenham attract capacity crowds of 82,000. A survey by the Sports and Fitness Industry Association found that there were 1.3 million rugby “participants” in the United States, some 431,000 of them hard-core devotees who played or watched the game more than eight times a year. (The N.F.L., for comparison’s sake, estimates its fan base at 202 million.)

In April 2015, the USA Rugby board, which had considered many proposals over the years, agreed to sanction Schoninger’s plan. Schoninger intended to kick off exactly a year later — hoping to ride the public interest generated by the Rugby World Cup in the fall of 2015 and the return of rugby to the Olympics in Rio this summer. First, he needed a name and a logo. He couldn’t use the word “league” because “rugby league” signified a much less popular version of the game that developed after the so-called Great Schism of 1895, when working-class players from northern England who wanted to be paid split off from teams adhering to the supposed purity of amateur competition. A branding firm in San Francisco proposed a number of logos and names. Some, like the National Rugby Association, or N.R.A., were red-carded for unwanted connotations. Logos that looked decent on a ball or jersey might look crummy on a trailer or a pitch. He finally settled on a red oval shaped like a rugby ball with the winning name in block letters: PRO, for Professional Rugby Organization. He added the word “Rugby” below the acronym lest there be any confusion about what PRO actually stood for.

Having never been the public face of an organization, Schoninger found himself in some novel situations. In December he sat down in the Pig ’N’ Whistle bar in Manhattan with Matt McCarthy, a host of a webcast called Rugby Wrap Up. McCar­thy reached across the table and palpated Schoninger’s arm.

“Doug, I just want to make sure you’re real — ”

“I’m as real as you are,” Schoninger said.

“— because you’re like Sasquatch to most American rugby fans.”

The league’s initial website and its Facebook page went up in October, and Sasquatch had been living and dying on the number of “likes.” He was relieved that only one fussbudget had taken issue with the redundancy in the name PRO Rugby. He hired a director of operations, Stephen Lewis, a well-connected Scotsman who was named USA Rugby’s 2014 coach of the year. Dominic DeFalco, a recent Penn State graduate who played rugby there, came aboard over the summer as assistant director. Just before Christmas, Schoninger organized a skills combine in San Diego to assess domestic prospects and shoot footage for video spots.

There were setbacks. Schoninger couldn’t find a venue for a team in New York, and his hopes were further hindered by the state’s exorbitant workman’s-compensation insurance rates. Philadelphia’s rugby community was not as vigorous as he’d hoped. Venues in the Boston area didn’t pan out. By January it was clear that the first season would feature no teams on the East Coast. But Sacramento proved fertile ground. Having three teams in California meant that players could travel to some games by bus instead of plane, saving Schoninger $1,500 a game on transportation.

When I stopped by the office in February, coaches had been hired, the schedule set, but Schoninger wasn’t sure how many players — drawn mostly from the U.S., with a sprinkling of international stars — would sign contracts, and he hadn’t found a national sponsor or settled on a broadcast deal.

“I was always the downside guy,” he said. “You can’t take risks if you don’t understand the downside. But here we are, two months away, and no one can tell me what our revenues are going to be.”

Lewis, the director of operations, came in to say he’d heard from the San Francisco coach, Paul Keeler, that no one liked the colors of the team’s uniform.

“Too much gray,” Lewis said.

“The designer wanted gray — it’s supposed to be evocative of San Francisco fog,” Schoninger said.

“No one likes it.”

“We can change it.”

DeFalco pulled up computer photos of all the proposed league uniforms — a palette of bold colors meant to evoke the geography of each team’s city.

“Are we paying this guy to come up with these designs?” said Lewis, who had already dubbed his boss the Mad Couturier because he insisted on putting a line across the jerseys to mark the upper limit of a legal tackle.

“What’s our rule?” Schoninger said.

“Criticism is only accepted with suggested solutions,” DeFalco said.

“In some ways, the reason you have a Season 1 is so you can fix things in Season 2,” Schoninger said, sighing.

D-Day at last: Before sunup on April 17, Schoninger and his son, Charlie, drove from their downtown Sacramento hotel to the local ABC affiliate for a 6:10 interview. Schoninger took along a rugby ball and some home-team jerseys.

“I feel like I’m running for court clerk in one of those elections where there’s only one candidate,” he said as he parked.

When he finished explaining why viewers might want to witness the fruition of his rugby dream instead of, say, assess the structural features of Finnish lapphunds at the Sacramento Dog Show, also taking place that day, he headed to Bonney Field. The temperature was climbing to near-record levels. He was frazzled from weeks of cross-country travel and negotiations. The cable channel ONE World Sports would be broadcasting a third of the season. AOL was live-streaming the Sacramento game. Hawk-Eye Innovations, a sports-technology company, was producing the seven-camera video feed. Thanks to a payroll imbroglio, he’d recently spent seven hours manually entering salary information for his 130 new players. Where was the credit-card machine Bank of America had promised? And why, oh why, had he scheduled opening-day games in two cities? The Ohio team’s flight barely got in to Denver in the midst of a blizzard.

“Maybe it’ll be like a snow day, and people will show up,” he said.

“Douglas wakes up every morning, and the glass is half full,” said his wife, Abigail Asher, a noted art consultant.

When the gates of Bonney Field opened, early arrivals huddled in the shade of the press box. In the V.I.P. tent, waitresses were loading tables with dishes of salsa and colored tortilla chips.

At 3:30 the players were announced — Sacramento in green and white; San Francisco in fog-free red and black. It’s a risible misconception that rugby is populated by athletes inferior to high-level American footballers. The “boys,” as they are called by coaches, fans and even the players themselves, are built like a herd of genetically modified water buffalo and seem as inexhaustible as a class of A.D.H.D. preschoolers.

For all the finesse and savvy the players need to succeed in a game that they, not the coaches on the sideline, control, rugby still has a brutal heart. Lest there be any doubt, an ambulance was parked behind the bleachers. But it’s a paradox of the sport that helmetless rugby players may actually suffer fewer concussions than their cousins in the N.F.L. The concussion rate at last year’s World Cup, according to USA Rugby, was 11 per 1,000 player-hours, compared with an estimated 54 per 1,000 player-hours last season in the N.F.L. (The N.F.L. calculates concussions per game, not per player-hour.) Credit below-the-shoulder tackling rules and self-preservation — not having a helmet lessens the temptation to deploy your head as a spear.

At 4 o’clock, Dan Power, a loquacious former rugby player with a gift for decoding the chaos on the pitch, leaned into his press-box mike and said, “Ladies and gentlemen, the wait is finally over.”

Preseason odds had made the talent-laden San Francisco team the heavy favorite, and at first the game unfolded accordingly. It was all a bit bewildering to the untutored eye. The ball would vanish in a clot of bodies and then mysteriously reappear on the grass like a giant egg, and a scrum half would pluck it up and fling it underhand across the field in what might become a series of thrilling laterals that delivered it to a speedster on the wing who would hie down the sideline and fling himself across the try-line, jabbing the ball onto the ground for the proverbial “touch down.” The heat began to afflict players on both sides with cramps, and occasionally some of the boys were leveled by head-on collisions that left them looking as if the next game they played might in fact be the game they played in heaven.

At the half, San Francisco led, 17-13. Schoninger went onto the field for an interview with Dan Power, who called him “the man behind the madness.” He had been following the game on his iPhone, roving from the press box to a V.I.P. tent table where his wife and son were sitting. He was buoyed by reports from Denver, where the home team won in overtime before a snow-day crowd of 2,300.

When play resumed, San Francisco lock Nick Grass, evidently having missed the memo about fellowship and respect, was sent off with a yellow card after he appeared to gouge the eyes of Sacramento flanker Kyle Sumsion. “A little bit of ‘How’s your father’ going on out there,” said the color commentator, Lou Stanfill, framing the fisticuffs in sports-talk fashion as an exchange of pleasantries. (Grass was later suspended for six games.) When San Francisco hooker Tom Coolican was yellow-carded, Sacramento used its two-man advantage to pull ahead. The crowd of just under 3,400 drummed their feet on the aluminum bleachers. The home team closed out the win, 37-25. The fans stood and clapped, and then the players from both teams lined up in front of the stands and applauded the crowd.

Schoninger lingered at the stadium long after the game. Already next season was on his mind — what he needed to fix, change, invent; what had to be done to get teams in Canada, Houston, Boston, New York, elsewhere. The weeks to come would flesh out the rugby dream, replacing theory with praxis. He would soon learn, for example, never to schedule a sporting event on Mother’s Day. Otherwise attendance was what he expected — between 1,500 and 3,000 per game, paying $20 to $30 per ticket, with V.I.P. seats fetching $100. More than 6,000 fans entered the league’s online team-naming contest. By late May, undefeated Denver was the league’s surprise star. San Francisco, the preseason favorite, was a disappointment in many ways: negligible media coverage, a skilled but poorly conditioned squad with a pitiful 0-5 record. Hopes for a turnaround were riding on the arrival of the New Zealand star Mils Muliaina, the 35-year-old former three-time captain of the All Blacks. The city’s Recreation and Park Department wanted to charge Schoninger $18,000 for installing a rugby goal post, removing one and making a few other improvements at Boxer Stadium. He had been pleasantly surprised by the interest in the league in Europe; PRO Rugby stats were being published in French newspapers. He had always known money wouldn’t be the initial index of success — what he hoped for was something different, like maybe being mentioned in a joke on a late-night talk show. He planned to add more teams, but if he didn’t, he could see the league almost breaking even next year.

For the moment, as the heat of a sun-baked afternoon ebbed, he lingered in the afterglow of the day’s success, reviewing the debut with anyone who wanted to talk about it. He fell into conversations with the announcers as they packed up, and the coaches, and one of the stadium managers, who said 800 people had paid for parking. Even the Mad Couturier’s jersey tackle line had gotten good reviews. He chatted with the players who were gathered under the V.I.P. tent swigging beer and carbo-loading plates of lasagna in preparation for their professional responsibilities next week. A few fans who recognized Schoninger waited patiently to thank him, and he fell into conversation with them too. It was getting dark. His wife and son were waiting to go back to the hotel, but he kept getting tangled in talk — in essence the same conversation he’d been having day after day for the last year and a half, a rolling, jabbering maul of rugby rugby rugby. Sure, it was all in a day’s work, but it was more than that. It was what needed to be done; it was part of what he’d come to think of as his mission, spreading the gospel of the professional game, one convert at a time.

“These,” he said, still a bit amazed, “are my people.”


