


Leicester City missed its first chance to clinch the Premier League title, drawing, 1-1, at Manchester United on Sunday to move to within 2 points of the most unlikely championship in English soccer.

Second-place Tottenham, which is 8 points behind Leicester, must beat Chelsea on the road Monday to stay alive in the title race.

Leicester fought back after falling behind on Anthony Martial’s eighth-minute goal when its captain, Wes Morgan, headed in a free kick to tie the game in the 17th minute.

A win would have sealed the title for Leicester, a modest team from central England that narrowly escaped relegation last season and entered bankruptcy protection only seven years ago while in the third tier. Leicester’s remaining games are home against Everton and at Chelsea.

United’s failure to win kept the team in fifth place and dented its ambitions of qualifying for the Champions League. But this game was all about Leicester and whether Claudio Ranieri’s team — a 5,000-to-1 long shot with British bookmakers before the season — could achieve the seemingly impossible, a feat that would rank among the biggest underdog stories in sports.

It would be the most implausible top-flight title since Brian Clough’s Nottingham Forest won in 1978.

The Foxes are still heavy favorites — their vocal, flag-waving traveling contingent chanted, “We’re going to win the league” over and over after the final whistle — but Spurs still have hope ahead of their match at Stamford Bridge.

United took the early lead when Antonio Valencia cut inside from the right and sent a cross to the feet of Martial, who scored powerfully past Kasper Schmeichel at the far post.

Ranieri’s team, which has been confounding the doubters all season, hit back with its first genuine chance of the game.

Morgan was just too strong for Marcos Rojo as he barged his way into the six-yard box to meet midfielder Danny Drinkwater’s free kick with a header past goalkeeper David de Gea.

“We had to dig in and be resilient,” Morgan said. “It’s a point and it’s a step in the right direction.”

United was lucky to finish the first half with 11 men after the referee missed Marouane Fellaini lashing out at Robert Huth, first with his forearm and then with his elbow. Fellaini could get a retrospective ban, which might rule him out for the rest of the season.

In the second half, Leicester looked more dangerous on the counterattack and from open play. But de Gea wasn’t seriously tested aside from long-range efforts, and United came closest to scoring when Chris Smalling glanced a header against the post.

Drinkwater was sent off in the 86th for a second yellow card, pulling back Memphis Depay as he raced toward the penalty area.

MANCHESTER CITY FALLS Manchester City dropped to fourth place by losing, 4-2, at Southampton as manager Manuel Pellegrini’s risk of fielding a weakened team backfired.

Key players like Sergio Aguero, Kevin de Bruyne and Vincent Kompany were rested ahead of the second leg of the Champions League semifinal against Real Madrid on Wednesday.

Sadio Mane scored a hat trick for seventh-place Southampton, while Kelechi Iheanacho scored both of City’s goals.

Swansea guaranteed Premier League football for another season by beating Liverpool, 3-1, with two goals by Andre Ayew.

VILLARREAL CLINCHES BERTH Villarreal warmed up for Thursday’s decisive Europa League semifinal at Liverpool by clinching a berth in Europe’s top competition.

Villarreal’s 2-0 win at its regional rival Valencia guaranteed it will finish in fourth place in the Spanish league, giving the club a Champions League playoff spot next season.

Roberto Soldado set up goals by Samuel Garcia in the 14th minute and Adrian Lopez in the 33rd.

JUVENTUS STAYS SHARP Juventus celebrated its fifth consecutive Serie A title, which was clinched last week, with a 2-0 victory over Carpi in Turin.

Hernanes scored his first goal for the club before the substitute Simone Zaza added another. Juventus has won 25 of its last 26 matches.


