


As “Silicon Valley” begins its third season on HBO on Sunday night, the genius of its central metaphor for the American condition — intellectual, cultural, economic — becomes ever more apparent. The algorithm that drives Pied Piper, the MacGuffinish string of computer code around which the series revolves, has existed since the first episode. Yet this season, it is no closer to existing in the real world. The show’s young code-writing heroes are still running like gerbils from one white knight or black hat to another, generating lively misadventures but no revenue. Everything happens, and nothing happens.

Actually, one major thing changes in Season 3, and its effect on the show’s messy, casual vibe is an open question. (HBO made only three of 10 episodes available for review, a curiously small number these days.) Like other great comedies of stasis — “Barney Miller” with its squad room, “Taxi” with its garage, “Cheers” with Cheers — “Silicon Valley” has been rooted in a place, a slightly squalid Palo Alto house being illegally used as a tech incubator. Through a series of events that won’t be spoiled here, the Pied Piper programmers find themselves moving into new offices that are a parody of Google-style adolescent luxury (snack machines, made-to-order breakfasts). Their nights are still spent at the house, though, and by the third episode events point toward a possible return of operations to their Palo Alto garage.

The season picks up where the previous one ended, repeating the moment when Richard Hendricks (Thomas Middleditch), the chief brain and chief executive of Pied Piper, tells his crew, “I just got fired.” The subsequent maneuvering, in which everyone but Richard — and his acolyte Jared (Zach Woods) — acknowledges that he’s better suited for a different role, is a showcase for Mr. Middleditch’s delineation of the ubergeek personality: strangled awkwardness that barely holds in check overpowering arrogance and rage. It also allows for the introduction of the fine comic actor Stephen Tobolowsky as Jack Barker, the fake-folksy new executive with whom Richard has to do battle for the soul of Pied Piper. (In a repeated gag, Richard tentatively gives his interpretations of how things are going, and Mr. Tobolowsky, as Barker, responds with variations on his trademarked, high-pitched “Oh, GOD no!”)

The show continues to score points off the real Silicon Valley’s culture of unapologetic excess — forced to track down Jack, Richard finds him monitoring two of his thoroughbred horses engaging in some extremely graphic breeding — and to generate laughs from the interplay of the misanthropic Gilfoyle (Martin Starr) and the miserable Dinesh (Kumail Nanjiani), the show’s Norm and Cliff. It also continues to demonstrate a knack for making business and technology strategies a comprehensible and effective component of its storytelling, as Richard encounters a sales force that wants to turn Pied Piper into a faceless commodity sold to soulless corporations. (Less admirably, it continues to indulge in lazy stereotyping and easy, unfunny jokes when it comes to Asian characters like Jimmy O. Yang’s heavily accented Jian-Yang and occasionally even Dinesh.)

“Silicon Valley” is, among other things, a morality play, with Richard and his crew endlessly battling the forces that would strip away the democratizing, world-changing features of Pied Piper (which are mostly obscure and swaddled in tech speak) and that sniff at the notion of five adult friends living, working and smoking together in a suburban ranch house. That insistence can get a little tedious, and it’s worth noting that the smartest, funniest moments of Season 2 involved the craven Gavin Belson (wonderfully played by Matt Ross), chief executive of the evil Google-esque behemoth Hooli, as he fought to stave off ruin. That subplot is fainter but still present, as Gavin uses a loophole to dismiss an entire division and announces, “It is I who must remain and bear the heavy burden of their failure.” In comedy as in life, the villains are usually the most fun.


