


NEW YORK

An article last Sunday about how subjects of last year’s Summer Love series have fared misstated the complications involved in the birth of a gorilla in the Bronx Zoo, where several gorillas were part of a mating program that was featured in the series. The birth was natural, followed by anesthesia to remove the placenta; it was not chemically induced.

METROPOLITAN

A music and dance listing in the Westchester Calendar in some editions last Sunday about the Angelica Women’s Choir misidentified the location of a performance scheduled for next Sunday, June 12. It is at Holy Name of Mary Church in Croton-on-Hudson, not at the Church of St. Matthew in Hastings-on-Hudson.

SPORTS

A picture in some editions last Sunday with an article about a rule change that extended the time college basketball players have to decide whether to enter the N.B.A. draft was published in error. It showed Oregon’s Elgin Cook taking a shot against Duke in the N.C.A.A. tournament — not his teammate Dillon Brooks, who recently chose to return to Oregon instead of entering the draft.

•

An article in some editions last Sunday about the Mets’ 9-1 loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers in which Mets pitcher Noah Syndergaard was ejected for throwing at Chase Utley misidentified the player Mets pitcher Shawn Estes tried and failed to hit in a 2002 game against the Yankees. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, the player was Roger Clemens — not Mike Piazza, who played for the Mets at the time.

•

A chart last Sunday about the longest hitting streaks for each Major League Baseball franchise misstated the nickname of the Cleveland team for which Napoleon Lajoie had a 31-game hitting streak in 1906. It was the Naps, not the Nips.

TRAVEL

An article on Page 12 this weekend about a family-friendly trip to New Orleans misstates part of the name of a green space in the French Quarter. It is Jackson Square, not Jackson Park. The article also refers incorrectly to a sightseeing carriage. It is led by a mule, not by a donkey. In addition, the article misstates part of the names of two streets. They are Frenchmen Street, not Frenchmen’s Street, and Washington Avenue, not Washington Street. And the article misidentifies the departure location for a jazz cruise. It is the Toulouse Street Wharf, not Canal Place. (The errors about Jackson Square, the carriage and Frenchmen Street also appear in an accompanying article on Page 11 about five vacation alternatives to Disney World.)

•

A cover article on May 29 about Vladimir and Véra Nabokov’s cross-country journeys to the American West, during which the author re-searched “Lolita,” misidentified the handgun Mrs. Nabokov carried in her purse. It was a pistol, not a revolver.

•

A 36 Hours column on May 22, about Oahu, Hawaii, incorrectly implied that alcohol consumption is permitted on Lanikai Beach. It is not allowed on Oahu’s public beaches without a permit.

•

An article on May 29 about a longtime journalist who wrote about restaurants frequented by civil rights activists made an outdated reference to Willie Bates, the owner of the Four Way restaurant in Memphis. Editors learned of Mr. Bates’s May 20 death after the section had gone to press.

T: TRAVEL

An article on May 22 about the cultural resilience of the people of Beirut in the face of continuing political strife gave outdated information about Beirut’s night life spots Skybar and Behind the Green Door. They are no longer open.

REAL ESTATE

The continuation of a cover article this weekend about deciding whether to buy a home or rent appears twice in some copies, on Pages 12 and 13. Because of that error, the Ask Real Estate column was omitted. The column can be found at nytimes.com/realestate.

MAGAZINE

An article on May 29 about attorney general Kamala Harris of California included an erroneous detail about her first race for attorney general, in 2010. While the outcome of that election took weeks to determine, there was no formal recount.

SUNDAY STYLES

An article last Sunday about Paula Broadwell described imprecisely her academic record at the United States Military Academy at West Point. While Ms. Broadwell graduated in the top 5 percent of her class in fitness and military and in the top 10 percent in academics, she did not graduate “at the top of her class.”

ARTS & LEISURE

An article on May 22 about the rock group Blue Öyster Cult misspelled the surname of the band’s guitarist and co-vocalist. Though he is known as Buck Dharma, he was born Donald Roeser, not Roesser.

•

An article last Sunday about the authors Michael Marissen and Lauren Belfer misstated the area where Ms. Belfer grew up. It is Buffalo, not Greenwich Village.

•

An article last Sunday about the film “Popstar: Never Stop Never Stopping” misidentified part of the name of a concert film about Katy Perry. It is “Katy Perry: Part of Me” (not “All of Me”)

•

A picture credit last Sunday with an article about a documentary about the murder of Kitty Genovese misidentified the source of the photograph. It was supplied by The Witnesses Film LLC, not by FilmRise.

BOOK REVIEW

A subheading on May 22 with a review of “The Edge of the Empire. A Journey to Britannia: From the Heart of Rome to Hadrian’s Wall” misspelled the author’s given name. As the review correctly noted, she is Bronwen Riley, not Bronwyn.

•

A review on May 8 about “Before the Wind,” by Jim Lynch, misstated the type of racing sailboat represented by the Star class. The Star is a keelboat, not a dinghy. (Instead of a fixed keel, a dinghy generally has a retractable centerboard.)

SUNDAY REVIEW

An opinion article last Sunday about Hulk Hogan’s lawsuit against Gawker Media described the suit incorrectly. It claimed invasion of privacy, not defamation.

•

An opinion article last Sunday about why we like to categorize things misidentified the journal in which a study about responses to “gender ambiguous” images was published. The study appeared in PLOS One, not The Journal of Experimental Psychology.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


