


Even before two deeply unpleasant days in her Madrid hotel room, Lucie Safarova, last year’s surprise French Open finalist, had had enough.

There had been a powerful bacterial infection, followed by a debilitating condition that was slow to be diagnosed and turned out to be reactive arthritis. There had been weeks in a Czech hospital bed, months without running, much less hitting a tennis ball.

When Safarova made it back to the WTA Tour, where she had only recently become a main attraction, there were five consecutive opening-round losses in singles, the first four in straight sets.

Relief finally arrived in her home country, the Czech Republic, where she swept to the title in Prague on April 30 and was showered in confetti on the court before boarding a flight for Madrid.

“Very special and very emotional,” she said in an interview last week.

But instead of basking in the afterglow and enjoying the Madrid Open, Safarova ended up with food poisoning. She suffered in her hotel for two days after her first-round victory over CoCo Vandeweghe and was forced to withdraw.

Safarova, however sweet natured and newly philosophical, had really had enough.

“I’m like O.K., well, this is the last thing,” she said. “I was like, now I come back and you give me food poisoning. I have to be super lucky the entire rest of the year. You owe me.”

Safarova was laughing as she described her latest painful memory, and laughter has served her well in the last two years — both in boom times with her impish and unconventional Canadian coach, Rob Steckley, and during the unexpectedly big dips that have followed.

The trouble began in August at the tournament in New Haven, Conn., where she reached the final but tore an abdominal muscle, which contributed to her first-round defeat at the United States Open. After a vacation with her boyfriend on the Greek island of Corfu, she returned to the Czech Republic and was soon hospitalized with a bacterial infection.

She returned to the tour in October in a push to reach her first WTA Tour Finals. She managed it, but the quest affected her now-fragile health.

While doctors in the Czech Republic tried to pinpoint the source of her acute joint pain and inflammation, she had to cancel a Florida training camp with Steckley and withdraw from the Australian Open. She did not return to the tour until late February after recovering from a left wrist injury that also had developed.

“I had a long career,” she said. “And finally I’m figuring everything out, doing so well and being at my best, feeling like, yeah, I’m finally enjoying the moment, and then this comes, like, out of nowhere, and then you are just wondering, Why?”

Reactive arthritis is set off by an infection, and though Safarova now must monitor her immune system and tournament schedule in order to reduce the risk of a relapse, she said she was back to normal training and had recovered most of her endurance. She is now on a gluten-free and lactose-free diet.

“Just to really detox my body from all the medicine I’ve had to take in the last half year,” she said. “And so far, I have to say that I’ve felt really, really good on the court after changing it, so I might maintain it even if the idea was just to do it for a month or so. I feel still energized. It’s just hard, especially in Italy. All the good pasta and mozzarella, just looking at it and crying.”

In an interview earlier this year, Steckley said they should have paid more attention to warning signs that Safarova was getting worn down last year.

“Any of these types of symptoms have to be dealt with immediately, no matter where you are,” he said. “If you’re being fatigued too quickly or not recovering properly, you can’t just put it down to diet or dehydration. It could be something that is forming, like it had been with Lucie throughout the year.”

She took advantage of her forced layoff by working on her new house in Brno, spending time with her family and friends and reading Robin Sharma’s self-help hit “The Monk Who Sold His Ferrari.”

But there is no escaping that at 29, she has lost time and momentum in a sport in which disorder continues to reign behind top-ranked Serena Williams, a champion who has bounced back from plenty of adversity of her own.

That includes last year’s French Open, where Williams fought through the flu and wildly fluctuating form to win the title, holding off Safarova in a final that started out as one-way traffic and turned into something closer to the Arc de Triomphe roundabout at rush hour.

Safarova, seemingly on her way to straightforward defeat, rallied with help from an edgy Williams. Then, up two games to none, Safarova took a 30-0 lead in the third game of the third set before Williams clawed and cursed her way back in front to win, 6-3, 6-7 (2), 6-2.

“Honestly, Serena stepped up and played a couple really good games and just pressured me so much,” Safarova said. “Maybe if I would be back there again, what I would do different is just take more risk. Even though I would maybe do mistakes, I would just take the risk because she was anyway so strong that just keeping the ball in play wouldn’t be the solution.”

Safarova’s ability to swing more freely on the big points and returns was a key to her surge in 2015, along with her improved fitness and her left-handed serve, which is a lot nastier than her personality.

“She is one of those really genuine girls that she could have just had the worst loss in her career, and if you had something going on in your life that you needed to talk to her about, she would take the time to sit down,” said Bethanie Mattek-Sands, her regular doubles partner.

Their pairing — with the hashtag #teambucie — has been a major success, with Grand Slam titles last year at the Australian Open and the French Open and another significant tour title in Miami this year. They intend to play at Roland Garros and at Wimbledon.

Steckley, a driving and creative force behind Safarova’s 2015 success and her eventual return to the tour this year, will miss the French Open, citing his own health concerns and personal reasons he declined to elaborate on.

“It’s sad he won’t be in Paris, but I hope he will be back after that,” Safarova said.

Steckley indicated that he intended to continue coaching Safarova, but his absence from Roland Garros will make it harder for her to recapture the buoyant spirit of her selfie-infused run that included victories over Maria Sharapova, Garbiñe Muguruza and Ana Ivanovic.

“But I think they’re in touch almost every day, so it’s not too far-off,” said Mattek-Sands, who is also close to Steckley. “He’s just not going to be here in person, and we’ll miss him. But he has his priorities in life, too, and I think we all understand it.”

Safarova, back at No. 13 in the rankings with a daunting bundle of points to defend at Roland Garros, said her own priorities and perspective had shifted, too.

“Right now, honestly, everybody is asking me, ‘Do you feel pressure about going into the French Open and everything?’” she said. “And you know what? I’m just really happy I can play.”


