


“The big reveal,” the fashion designer and high-end furrier Dennis Basso announced one afternoon last week, flinging open the doors leading to his latest redecorating project — a chapel.

“Those are planters from France,” Mr. Basso said in a gravelly voice that seems to know only one volume level, booming. “The carved candleholders are from Italy.” And the chapel — officially the Leland Eggleston Cofer Memorial Chapel at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center on the Upper East Side of Manhattan — still had that new-carpet smell, thanks to 93 square yards of the stuff, customized for the project, installed not long before.

“This is God’s workroom,” he said. “You walk in here and feel like you’re in the place of the Lord, no matter who your god is.”

Mr. Basso has ideas about how rooms should look, down to the details: He has been known to place the name cards for his fashion show guests on their chairs himself, one by one. He said he and his husband, Michael Cominotto, underwrote the renovation because, as a public space, the chapel was not all that it could be. Like so many places in New York that are taken for granted, that people go to once or twice and then forget about, the room had the potential to be inspiring, but was not.

Mr. Basso realized as much when he was a patient at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell a couple of years ago. “A friend came to visit,” he said, “and we decided to go down to the chapel. We looked at each other and we said this is the greatest hospital in world with the finest equipment, but this chapel really needs some help.” (As for why he was in the hospital, he explained, “I needed some checkups, and there’s nothing like good news to make you feel generous.”)

The chapel has been there for more than 60 years. A quiet place for patients and their families, it was named for a doctor who died in 1948 — he and his wife, Luisita Leland Cofer, had been boldface names in their day, and she donated the chapel in 1952. Mrs. Cofer died, at St. Luke’s Hospital, four years later. Her obituary said she contributed to the chapel there, too.

When Mr. Basso discovered the Weill Cornell chapel, which a plaque indicates was redone in the 1990s, during his hospital stay, it was “perfectly nice and neat,” he said, but it was undistinguished. “The chairs were mismatched,” he said. “The altar wasn’t high enough. It didn’t have atmosphere. It had track lighting.”

“I thought, as someone who’s creative, this needs to be changed,” Mr. Basso said. “This should be beautiful, no matter what your religion is. You should walk in and feel like you’re in a holy place.”

He met Dr. Laura L. Forese, Weill Cornell’s executive vice president and chief operating officer, when he staged a fashion show to benefit the hospital last year. He called her later and said he wanted to make a very specific donation. “I told her, ‘I don’t want to do an X-ray machine, I don’t want to do a waiting room,’” he said. “I told her, ‘It’s great there are people who want to do that. I’m a designer. I’m creative. I want to do this.’”

Then he and Mr. Cominotto called Kenneth Alpert, the interior designer who had done their apartment, their house in the Hamptons and Mr. Basso’s first store on Madison Avenue. “He said, ‘Are you looking at a new apartment?’” Mr. Basso recalled. “I said, ‘We’re doing a chapel, Kenny.’ He thought he didn’t hear me right.”

From the beginning, Mr. Basso and Mr. Cominotto had something particular in mind. “We didn’t want the contemporary look; we wanted to follow the bones of the room,” Mr. Basso said. “We wanted to enhance the stained-glass windows. They don’t even do stained-glass work like this anymore. The big one looks like it came out of Notre Dame. It has a feeling.”

They installed chandeliers that echo arches on one wall that Dr. Forese said are themselves echoes of elements in the Palace of the Popes in Avignon, France, home to the bishops of Rome in the 14th century and one of the largest Gothic palaces in the world. They also transformed the foyer, where a window looked out on a courtyard that, as Mr. Basso described it, “wasn’t the most beautiful.”

“We had them frost the window,” he said.

He and Mr. Cominotto were married in 2011 in the first same-sex ceremony to be held at the Pierre Hotel. Mr. Basso said he and Mr. Cominotto were both practicing Catholics. “We grew up in Catholic homes,” Mr. Basso said. They dedicated the renovation to his late parents and Mr. Cominotto’s late father, as well as to his mother, Joan Cominotto, who attended a ceremony for the chapel’s reopening last week. But the chapel is nondenominational. “When it’s open during the day, there’s really no visual religion” — no crosses or other symbols, he said.

“On Sunday, they do the Catholic Mass,” he said. “On Friday night, they do a Jewish service. We had to make all the chairs easily stackable so when the Muslims come, they take the prayer rugs out of the closet.”

The project was different from decorating an apartment or a boutique. “We had to follow the criteria of the hospital,” Mr. Basso said, and Mr. Alpert added that the hospital had sent him a list of requirements for materials.

This was followed by what Dr. Forese called “the carpet conversation.”

Hospital officials prepared a presentation with a sample of carpet that met its standards for washability, among other things.

“It wasn’t beautiful,” she said. “It would have been fine.”

But Mr. Basso, who described it as “utilitarian looking,” said it would not do.

Mr. Alpert came up with a carpet that was dyed to meet the hospital’s specifications. It is red, though not the red of the red carpet at fashion shows and galas, and it has a pattern. What to call it?

“Regal,” Mr. Alpert said. “That’s Dennis’s middle name.”


