


All New Yorkers think their neighborhoods have personalities. But it takes the imagination of a comic-book artist to give them feelings and a soul.

“What if Brooklyn was sentient?” the cartoonist Dean Haspiel wondered. “And its heart was broken, and physically seceded from America?” The result is “New Brooklyn,” a free weekly comic web series that chronicles life in the anthropomorphized borough. Appearing in its panels are new heroes and villains like the Red Hook, Benson Hurst, Billy Burg and the Brooklynite.

Mr. Haspiel grew up in Manhattan on the Upper West Side but moved to Brooklyn in 1997. He has the borough pride of a new recruit. He is the consummate Brooklyn comic-book artist. He even served as the basis for a larger-than-life Brooklyn comic-book artist played by Zach Galifianakis in the HBO comedy series “Bored to Death.”

“New Brooklyn,” which began appearing on the comics website LINE Webtoon this month, combines many of Mr. Haspiel’s touchstones. There is his adoration of the superheroes and creators of Silver Age comics (like the Fantastic Four and Jack Kirby). There are romantic notions of years of artistic pursuits finally paying off — in the fantasy barter system of “New Brooklyn,” art is practically gold. “We’d rise to the cream of the crop,” Mr. Haspiel said during an interview at his art studio in Gowanus.

And crucially, there is the network of contributors that Mr. Haspiel seems to inspire and move among. His collaborators on “New Brooklyn” include Vito Delsante, the writer of “The Purple Heart,” whom he met at a comic store and who later joined his studio, and Shamus Beyale, the cartoonist on “The Brooklynite,” who worked with his friend Seth Kushner, a photographer and comic book writer who died last year.

Mr. Haspiel, who lives in Carroll Gardens, had the idea for the Red Hook, the pulp hero who stars in the first 26-week installment, in 2012. The initial conceit was “a superthief that is forced to become a superhero,” he said. “It’s like the reverse of ‘Breaking Bad.’ ‘Breaking Good’ is the corny way of describing it.”

But things didn’t really jell until 2014, when two American flags on the Brooklyn Bridge were mysteriously replaced with white flags. It turned out to be an art stunt about celebrating public spaces, but it inspired Mr. Haspiel to ponder why Brooklyn had given up. He decided the borough was tired of modern America and wanted to revert to the ways of old.

That kind of thinking is not a surprise to anyone familiar with Mr. Haspiel, 48, who comes across like a comic-book tough guy but is quickly unmasked as a soft touch. A visit to his studio began with him introducing the other comic artists working in the subdivided warehouse. (Though he founded the online comic collective ACT-I-VATE, he’s still a firm believer in print and does his inking by hand.) A couple of his studio mates, including Christa Cassano, listened in on the interview and gently scoffed when he said things like “You can’t gift a GIF” while talking about the emotional value of books.

Mr. Haspiel has worked for Marvel and DC Comics, and has illustrated autobiographical work for Harvey Pekar, Inverna Lockpez and Jonathan Ames. He won an Emmy Award in 2010 for his design of the title sequences for comedy “Bored to Death.”

He pitched his Red Hook concept to LINE Webtoon, an online portal for free digital comics that was founded in South Korea and last year started making a push into the American market. The pitch’s success may have been helped by the fact that the site’s head of content, Tom Akel, is a third-generation Brooklynite who recently relocated to the West Coast.

Webtoon’s comics are designed to be read on mobile devices; readers scroll through each chapter, one panel at a time. It’s a striking departure from classic newsprint comics, and even the original web versions of them. There is a fixed width for the artwork that requires a different approach to creating a comic, which typically allowed for panels of varying size and drawings as big as double-page spreads. “There is no pinching or making things bigger or smaller,” Mr. Haspiel said. He and the other “New Brooklyn” creators became their own support network to rethink everything from pacing to lettering.

“The Brooklynite,” written and drawn by Mr. Beyale, expands on a character created by Mr. Kushner, who was a former studio-mate of Mr. Haspiel’s in Gowanus. “Seth wrote about two issues’ worth of script. I expanded it to about six issues,” Mr. Beyale said. Mr. Haspiel describes the Brooklynite as having “Superman powers, but Peter Parker problems.”

Besides dealing with the Brooklynite’s secret identity, the story will introduce other characters, including a gay superhero couple. “Trying to make the characters more diverse and more progressive is important,” said Mr. Beyale, who is Navajo, and lives in Bay Ridge. “Brooklyn itself is a big mishmash of backgrounds.” Other heroes to be introduced are Mexican, Chinese and Navajo. He is also keeping Mr. Kushner’s wife, Terra Kushner, apprised of his progress with the story. “Knowing that his family is still there and I can talk to them about Seth is a good feeling,” he said.

“Seth had this love and passion for Brooklyn his whole life,” Ms. Kushner said of her husband, who was born at Coney Island Hospital. She is eager to see the final product and trusts that his creation is in good hands. “Even if Seth was here, whatever he originally created would change,” she said. “That’s naturally going to happen.”

Rounding out “New Brooklyn” is “The Purple Heart,” written by Mr. Delsante and drawn by Ricardo Venâncio, the only creative team that is not made up of local residents. Mr. Delsante is now based in Pittsburgh; Mr. Venâncio in Portugal.

“The Purple Heart is basically the avatar of the heart of Brooklyn,” Mr. Delsante said. His part of the story will focus on the origin of his hero, and what led Brooklyn to break away from the rest of the country.

“There is a certain sort of pride to being from Brooklyn,” he said. “They don’t want outsiders to come. Whatever caused the separation, they’re glad.”

Naturally, where there are villains and superheroes, there will be conflict.

“You have these small clans — these little neighborhoods — who are now trying to take political power. It’s basically an exploration of politics and the needs and desires of an entire group of people,” Mr. Delsante said. “It sounds so highbrow, but it’s really not. It’s just a comic.”


