


CHARLOTTE, N.C. — For 14 years, they seemed made for each other: affable, glad-handing “Mayor Pat,” and this city, North Carolina’s largest and a place long defined more by entrepreneurial hustle and economic success than ideology and hard-edge politics.

These days, it is not entirely clear whether Pat McCrory, the Republican who was mayor from 1995 to 2009, or Charlotte, which Mr. McCrory is now feuding with as North Carolina’s governor, has changed more. But it is apparent that the antidiscrimination ordinance that Charlotte sought to change this year and the successful effort by Mr. McCrory and state lawmakers to block the modification have left both the city and its former mayor reeling and distant.

“With social issues, you never satisfy the litmus test of either the right or the left,” Mr. McCrory said over a Styrofoam cup of lemonade on Thursday. “And the social issues are much more complex than the media and the political pundits will give credit for, including the one we’re dealing with today.”

The state has faced a backlash since the Republican-controlled General Assembly, during a one-day special session in March, passed a measure to limit public restroom access for transgender people and prohibit local governments from passing antidiscrimination ordinances. And Charlotte, a city of about 810,000 people that promoted itself in the 1970s as “a good place to make money,” has taken a particularly hard hit since the law known as House Bill 2 took effect.

The Charlotte Regional Visitors Authority said the legislation, which Mr. McCrory called crucial to public safety and signed hours after its passage in the General Assembly, had jeopardized more than $86 million in event-related spending. PayPal dropped a plan to bring more than 400 jobs to the city, and Mayor Jennifer Roberts said she was spending substantial time reassuring companies about Charlotte.

“We’ve never been characterized as so out of step with the mainstream of America,” Ms. Roberts said.

Mr. McCrory still has plenty of supporters here as he seeks a second term and faces Roy Cooper, the state’s attorney general, in a campaign that is already shaping up to be among the nation’s most bruising, in large part because of the law. But there are others who fondly remember his mayoralty and find themselves dismayed by his gradual emergence as a symbol of the legislature’s conservative agenda.

“He had an appeal,” said Lelia Johnson, 59, a Democrat. “When he was here as mayor, he wanted to do good.”

She is far less impressed by the McCrory in the headlines now. “It actually goes beyond being disappointed,” she said. “I’m totally disillusioned.”

Mr. McCrory’s allies say that the governor’s priorities have not shifted, but that he faces a more rigid and partisan political culture in Raleigh, the state capital.

“He has not changed as a person,” said Edwin Peacock III, a Republican who ran for mayor last year. “He has not changed as who you saw as mayor. His environment has changed. He is in an environment where collaboration is not rewarded.”

In 1990, not long after Mr. McCrory was first elected to the City Council, Charlotte’s population stood at about 395,000 people. As municipal leaders imagined Charlotte as a regional powerhouse, they focused intensely on matters like transportation, crime and economic development.

The city’s corporate leaders held outsize influence as Charlotte grew into what it is now: a place where Uptown glimmers and boosterism can border on pageantry. Residents across the city are still crowing about the Carolina Panthers’s Super Bowl appearance and grousing about a rare public corruption scandal that surfaced in 2014. And as the city has grown — it hosted the Democratic National Convention in 2012 — and drawn more outsiders, it has moved somewhat to the left. No Republican has been elected to a two-year term as mayor since Mr. McCrory.

When Mr. McCrory was mayor, he generally faced a Democratic-controlled City Council, and he assembled a record that alternately delighted and frustrated officials across the political spectrum.

And although Mr. McCrory is now enmeshed in what could become landmark litigation about transgender rights — he and the Justice Department sued each other last week over whether HB 2 violated the Civil Rights Act of 1964 — social issues rarely animated him. Still, he repeatedly demonstrated his commitment to the conservatives who prized them. In 1992, for instance, Mr. McCrory opposed a proposal that would have broadened Charlotte’s anti-bias ordinance to include sexual orientation.

“We have laws in our constitution which forbid discrimination based on race, gender and religion,” The Charlotte Observer quoted Mr. McCrory as saying in 1995. “Beyond that, no other group should be given special status, and this community is often wanting special status,” he said then, referring to gay people.

He ran for governor in 2012 as a centrist and, bolstered by his record in Charlotte, won.

Now, after repeatedly chiding Charlotte for approving an ordinance that he warned would provoke the legislature to act, he says that the city’s politics have evolved more than his own.

“The city has gone more left than I’ve gone right,” he said. “In fact, I haven’t gone right; the city has actually moved very left.”

His critics believe that he has either shifted sharply to the right or been forced to agree to the demands of Republican lawmakers from more conservative parts of North Carolina.

“I believe he went in with the intentions of being a moderate governor, but he’s never had the ability to be that governor,” said LaWana Mayfield, a Democrat who joined the City Council after Mr. McCrory left municipal politics. “He is not a puppet master. Unfortunately, he’s a puppet, and I hate that. I hate that for him; I hate that for his legacy.”

Within months, voters here will return a verdict that will clarify Mr. McCrory’s standing and whether Charlotte’s residents support Governor McCrory the way they did Mayor McCrory. For now, it seems that the current clamor has left everyone a bit staggered and, as ever, worried about how Charlotte will be perceived elsewhere.

“When I travel, people say they hear Charlotte is a friendly and beautiful place,” said Tim Hamilton, 55, a 31-year resident who runs a gift shop. “I think we’re going to be getting, ‘Oh, you’re from Charlotte — what is going on there?’ for a long time. You can try to explain this is Raleigh, this is not Charlotte, but on the news it just says ‘North Carolina,’ and people don’t always look deeper.”

And so Mr. McCrory’s town can sometimes appear to be frustrated, to the point that the mention of his name drew snickers at a community meeting last week.

On the other hand, it is also clear that he has enhanced his standing among those voters who had long wondered whether he was sufficiently conservative, voters who could be crucial to his re-election hopes.

“About that H2B, B2,” a middle-age woman told Mr. McCrory as he left a restaurant here and she struggled to remember the shorthand for House Bill 2. “Thank you. Fight, fight, fight.”

Mr. McCrory smiled. A few moments before, a man had greeted him as “Governor Pat.”


