


Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Tuesday that he would earmark additional money for New York City’s third water tunnel to ensure that clean drinking water could be delivered to Brooklyn and Queens within 48 hours of an emergency shutdown of City Water Tunnel No. 2.

Previously, officials said that it would take several months to make even nondrinkable water available, which would have been crippling to the five million residents and the businesses in the area.

The city will spend $21 million to disinfect and test the new section of City Water Tunnel No. 3 to prepare it as a backup water source to Tunnel No. 2 by the end of 2017. Tunnel No. 2 is 80 years old, has been in continuous use and has never been shut for inspection. The mayor said the investment would provide “critical redundancy in our system.”

Most of the infrastructure for Tunnel No. 3 is in place, except for two shafts that will connect parts of the tunnel in Queens to the current distribution system and future parts of the system. But the tunnel can deliver water without them and already carries water to parts of the Bronx, Manhattan and Queens.

Originally, the plan had been to wait until the shafts were completed before disinfecting the tunnel, a necessary step before it could carry drinking water, Emily Lloyd, the commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, said.

But at the mayor’s insistence, engineers began devising a way to prepare the tunnel ahead of that work, which Ms. Lloyd said would probably be completed in 2025.

“I wish we had thought of it sooner,” she said. “But I think it’s a really good way to go.”

Even now, in the event of an emergency with Tunnel No. 2, the city could deliver water to Brooklyn and Queens through Tunnel No. 3, but it would probably have to be boiled, Ms. Lloyd said.

Under the revised plan, residents in those boroughs would have a backup supply of clean water at the ready within about two days, Ms. Lloyd said, adding that the details were still being worked out.

Over the past decade, the city has spent about $10 billion to build redundancy into a system that relies on three main tunnels to deliver about 1.1 billion gallons of water to the city every day.

After reports that money had fallen out of the budget for the shafts for Tunnel No. 3, the mayor, a Democrat, reasserted his commitment to complete the $657 million project.

Jim Roberts, who manages the city’s water and sewage operations, welcomed the announcement.

“It’s always good news when we have more flexibility and more redundancy available to us,” he said.


