


BEIRUT, Lebanon — The Australian mother and television crew accused of snatching two young children on a Beirut street amid a custody dispute were released from prison by a Lebanese court on Wednesday, the Lebanese news media reported.

The children’s mother, Sally Faulkner, and the four-person crew, including the prominent Australian journalist Tara Brown, had been charged with kidnapping at gunpoint and threatening the lives of children.

But four others charged in the attempt — two Britons, including a man who ran a so-called child recovery agency, and two Lebanese — remained in prison under what was said to be a deal on custody arrangements and other matters struck with Ali al-Amin, the children’s father.

“We are still waiting to confirm details, but yes, reports out of Beirut are that the team and Sally Faulkner are being released to return home,” a spokeswoman for Channel Nine, Victoria Buchan, wrote in an email on Wednesday.

Quoting a judicial source, The Daily Star of Lebanon said that Ms. Faulkner had agreed to give up custody rights and not claim them in the future, but that she would be allowed to see the children in Lebanon in their father’s presence.

The case, and what appeared to be the Australian channel’s plan to film the kidnapping and portray it as a rescue, has prompted some commentators in the Arab world and elsewhere to highlight what they say is a double standard: What would the reaction be, they ask, if an Arab parent and television crew did the same in Australia, Europe or the United States?

Ms. Faulkner had accused her husband of seizing the children by taking them on what he said was a vacation to Lebanon and telling her they would never return.

The seizure of the children was captured on CCTV footage and was later broadcast by the Lebanese news media. It appeared to show people jumping out of a car and grabbing them from their grandmother on a busy street.

In interviews with the news media, the grandmother said that both she and a domestic helper had been hit or pushed to the ground.

Channel Nine has said it had no connection to the people who snatched the children, denying reports that they had paid a six-figure fee to the child-recovery agency that essentially abducts children on behalf of one parent from estranged spouses accused of abducting the youngsters.

Women seeking to retrieve children in Lebanese custody cases are at a disadvantage. Lebanese courts reflexively give custody to fathers in a system where family law is governed by the religion of the family involved. Lebanon has not signed the Hague Abduction Convention, which calls for children to be returned to their country of residence if taken by a family member.

The children, Lahela, 5, and Noah, 3, were returned to their father after their mother was arrested last week.


