


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. The evenings are growing long now, and many of us tonight will sit in the long run to sunset thinking about the horrors of the Orlando shooting, mute and saddened. Some will pray, others will editorialize. (Some will play “Gay Bar,” by Electric Six, over and over again.) Perhaps you could bake, in order to bring comfort to others.

Remember Lewis Hyde? “A work of art is a gift,” he wrote, “not a commodity.” He might have been talking about cookies.

Take a look at Kim Severson’s peanut butter cookies, a recipe she learned from Christopher Kimball, then the boss of America’s Test Kitchen. (He’s now running an outfit in Boston called Milk Street Kitchen.)

You might try the cowboy cookies that Marian Burros picked from Laura Bush during the 2000 presidential campaign. (In a poll put together by Family Circle, they crushed Tipper Gore’s recipe for ginger snaps.)

You could take on Nigella Lawson’s recipe for chocolate and salty-peanut cookies.

Or you could just make good-old chocolate chip cookies, a balm against pain and suffering, a warm embrace in difficult times. Amanda Hesser gave us three terrific recipes for them a while back. There’s one for thin-and-crisp chocolate chip cookies. Another for flat-and-chewy ones. And a third for the thick-and-gooey version. Which is your favorite?

We have recipes for orange butter cookies, for date and walnut cookies, for tangerine-scented almond cookies. Cue Snakehips: “All My Friends.”

You can return to the savory side later in the week. Roast chicken would be good. But tonight, champion sweetness. Bake. Eat a few warm cookies from the cooling rack, accompanied by milk. Then wrap the rest nicely and give them away in the morning, to friends, to colleagues, to anyone you come in contact with who deserves the treatment.

Of course, if really what you’re looking for here is dinner, you can find lots of ideas for what to cook on Cooking. (Maybe cheese-stuffed lamb burgers?) Let us know if you run into trouble with any of them, or with our site or apps. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

Live updates on the Orlando shooting can be found here.


