


Jeremy McAlpine is constantly looking for underwear — and the older it is, the better. The founder and C.E.O. of the two-year-old brand BLACKYOTO has dealers in Paris, London and all over the Alpine region of Europe who call when they’ve found something good. “Late 19th- and early 20th-century undergarments — bloomers, petticoats, nightdresses and slips — make up the core of our women’s collection,” he says. He visits flea markets around Europe and works with vintage dealers to collect these garments. But, before going to out to luxury clothing retailers around the world, each garment is dyed black.

McAlpine, who previously developed the global launch strategy for Y-3, Adidas’s partnership with the Japanese fashion designer Yohji Yamamoto, fell in love with Japan on his extensive travels. In 2013, he experienced garment-dyeing firsthand when he visited Kyoto Montsuki, a century-old company dedicated to the process. The depth of the black they were able to achieve in clothing amazed him. “I wanted to bring together the incredible craftsmanship of vintage garments with the artistry of Japanese dyeing,” McAlpine says.

So began BLACKYOTO, a line of men’s wear and women’s wear consisting entirely of pieces that McAlpine and his team have collected all over Europe and sent to be dyed at Kyoto Montsuki. “We were able to convince them to apply a process meant for kimonos to vintage clothing,” McAlpine says. “This form of ‘upcycling’ allows us to revitalize and reposition older pieces.” Once dyed, 100-year-old hand-sewn dresses and embroidered blouses look surprisingly modern. “People ask, ‘Will your clothes always be black?’” McAlpine says. “The answer is yes, but the black isn’t just any old black.”

Kyoto Montsuki uses their signature shinkuro process, an environmentally sound black oxide dyeing method they’ve perfected over decades. “What makes black blacker is reducing the reflection of light,” McAlpine explains. Each garment is dyed at least twice in extremely high temperatures. The dye composition doesn’t just coat the fabric in black, but wraps each individual fiber. The clothing is then dried on the company’s roof, wrapped in paper and then sent back to Munich. A second dyeing house, Banba, dyes BLACKYOTO’s delicate silks. Not only do the clothes come back softer from Kyoto (thanks to the use of naturally derived plant matter rather than harsh chemicals), they take on a whole sensibility. “The culottes we have with open siding and lace detailing would have been worn by farmers’ wives beneath their clothing 100 years ago,” says McAlpine. “Now, they’re very popular in Los Angeles. But they really don’t look like a period piece; the black dye gives them new life.”

This July, pieces rescued from a German castle will become available exclusively at Dover Street Market in New York, London and Ginza; Louis in Antwerp; Maxfield in L.A.; and L’Eclaireur Hérold in Paris. “The castle was sold to Kuwaiti developers with plans to turn it into a luxury hotel,” McAlpine says, “but the gowns that date back to between 1860 and 1930, pieces that had simply been hanging in armoires for decades, were saved.” Aside from fixing minor rips and adding a missing button, the garments are unaltered.

For men, BLACKYOTO sources vintage military surplus pieces, including Swiss field jackets with 16 pockets each and snow jackets once used by Italian paratroopers in the Alps. One of the first batches ever sent to Kyoto included tees from the ’50s woven in an Airtex fabric for British military deployment in warmer climates. “We got the last of a stock of these pieces and they were bloodstained, dirty and pretty scary looking,” McAlpine says. But one month after sending them to Kyoto, a box arrived in Munich. “I’ll remember opening that box for the rest of my days,” McAlpine says. “It was the most exhilarating experience to see how the process worked.”

Since getting its start, BLACKYOTO has begun to experiment a bit. “With the older pieces of clothing, everything, including the thread, is 100 percent cotton,” McAlpine says. “Vintage pieces that are more contemporary might have a nonnatural thread, which doesn’t fully take the dye, so you get this incredible contrast.” This fall, they’ll release a collection of classic British raincoats that have a small percentage of polyester, meaning they’ll be dark, but not as deeply black as other pieces.

BLACKYOTO has also started dyeing traditional Japanese work wear, which European and U.S. distributors eagerly snap up. Japanese distributors, by contrast, are particularly interested the Western vintage clothing and military gear. “Dyeing everything black is an expression of the ultimate minimalism. While that’s a major restraint, it’s an exciting one,” McAlpine says. “Plus, we collect a very diverse assortment of clothing. Just the other day I got a call about a lot of vintage butchers’ aprons. They’ll go to Kyoto soon.”


