


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking six days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good dawning to thee, friends. (That’s Oswald saying, “sup,” in Shakespeare’s “King Lear.” What’s your favorite greeting?) Grilled cheese sandwiches are on the lunch menu today, thanks to Jennifer Steinhauer down in the Washington bureau of The Times: grilled taleggio, augmented with apricots and capers. She makes them on raisin bread. You don’t have to.

And then it’ll be off to the store for supplies. Shopping today may be a full-contact affair, with everyone in the neighborhood flooding the aisles of the supermarket to stock larders for the week to come. But that doesn’t make it a bad idea. Put your helmet on and get in the game.

For Sunday dinner, try Mark Bittman’s recipe for chicken with vinegar. Serve with a pot of this soubise recipe I learned from the Los Angeles chef Suzanne Goin, and a platter of asparagus.

On Monday, perhaps you could cook Nigella Lawson’s recipe for penne alla vodka, then watch clips from “La Dolce Vita” on YouTube.

Tuesday’s feeling Turkish. You could thread some skewers with halibut or swordfish, and make David Tanis’s recipe for Turkish-spiced fish skewers with yogurt sauce.

On Wednesday, perhaps, you could try Mark’s recipe for pad kee mao, a Thai stir-fry of uncommon excellence. (If you can’t find the Thai soy sauce, simply mix regular soy into a tablespoon of molasses. If you can’t find holy or Thai basil, just use the Italian kind.)

Thursday: How about Melissa Clark’s recipe for sautéed salmon with brown butter cucumbers?

Slide a few egg yolks into soy sauce after dinner and, on Friday night, you can greet the weekend with soy-pickled eggs on a big bed of short-grained rice. Or make this bonus recipe from my recent trip to London to cook with Yotam Ottolenghi: for caramelized beets and saffron-orange yogurt.

Other recipes to cook this week can be found on the Cooking site and apps. Save them. Rate them. Leave notes on them. Share them with friends. And show us your cooking on the social media platform of your choice. We’re on Facebook. Also: Twitter. We’ve got a Pinterest page. We post on Instagram. We’re #NYTCooking for life.

Now, check out these kitchen appliances of the future, courtesy of those scamps at Bon Appetit. Read Robert Draper on the wild ride of Donald Trump, in The New York Times Magazine. And then maybe check out these upstate fly guys getting things done in the sweet water. It’s important to remember, even in newsletters: Life happens outside. If you get in trouble, holler: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Have a great week.


