


In the 1970s-set buddy comedy “The Nice Guys,” a private detective and a hired enforcer team up to solve a murder. Russell Crowe and Ryan Gosling star, and Shane Black (known for his “Lethal Weapon” screenplay) directs. In an interview in New York, Mr. Black discussed a scene involving the first meeting of the lead characters and also answered questions about his film. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.

What is the setup of this scene?

It’s the meet-cute, as it were. Russell Crowe’s character, Healy, has gone to visit a guy he’s never met, and his job is to warn him off, beat him, knock him down.

What were some of the technical goals of the scene?

The cinematographer, Philippe Rousselot, and I were fond of an unbalanced frame, the idea of breaking up the frame into compartmentalized units against which the characters are framed to the left, right or center. Also, the scene doesn’t really follow screen direction. We’re on the wrong side when we go back and forth between Ryan and Russell. I talked to the cinematographer and he said, it’s O.K. We know where they are, the screen is interesting. So it was O.K. to break screen direction.

The scene makes the power dynamic between these characters clear.

Yes, Russell is always on top, he’s always looming over. Ryan spends nearly the entire scene on a bench or on the ground. He gets up briefly, but Ryan insisted on his character getting knocked down instantly again. It’s this character who is unabashedly a coward. To Ryan’s credit, he didn’t want to be macho here.

Why did you decide to set the movie in the 1970s?

Look at the ’70s in L.A. and you’ll find a window into an era that is very cool for private eyes. The city was compromised. At that point it was sort of a faded prom queen tottering out senile in a ripped dress and still saying, “Don’t you want me?” L.A. was blanketed in smog. The Hollywood sign was falling apart. So this dime-store chic that replaced this once-brilliant glamour, that seemed perfect for a private eye story.

How did you work with these two actors on their scenes and achieving comedy in them?

The good thing is the movie is not just a comedy. So I needed not just to pluck two comedians from “S.N.L.” It benefits from the fact that these are guys with gravitas as actors. That said, they’re so good, as a director, it’s kind of daunting to be telling them what to do. What we did was get together in a hotel suite for a few nights before filming and arrive at a mutual mission statement.

Having written “Lethal Weapon” and seen so many buddy action films come after that, what kinds of things have you done to keep the genre interesting in your work?

Joel Silver, the producer, and I have worked together since “Lethal Weapon,” and gradually what we started to do was deconstruct the private eye. We decided to take conventions that exist already within the genre and stand them on their heads. These guys try things the mythic private eye would get away with. But it falls flat for them because they’re real people. So I wanted to inject that kind of awkwardness in reality into the private-eye story.


