


In a city full of fitness and wellness tribes, it can be seemingly impossible to break into a new one — but not when it comes to joining the growing group of meditators. Last week, a New York Times article explored the “mainstream business practice and a kind of industry in its own right” that meditation has become. And though inclusive — it’s hard not to feel welcome at a group meditation — the movement is quickly becoming associated with millennials and start-up companies.

Of course, mindfulness is not new in Manhattan. A certain set of New Yorkers has been meditating their whole lives — or, at least, careers. The Michelin starred TriBeCa chef Marc Forgione, for example, has a Native American spiritual guide, and has brought in the Buddhist author and meditation teacher Lodro Rinzler to teach his staff how to meditate — a handy tool, surely, in a bustling kitchen. And in L.A., where New Age gatherings are as commonplace as happy hour, a guy called Gabriel Heymann discovered a love for transcendental meditation — which led him to embrace a healthier lifestyle, and ultimately brought him to New York, where he recently launched Smart Beer, the city’s first organic brew. (He still practices meditation.) But meditation is no longer a behind-the-scenes part of a successful person’s lifestyle — it’s at the forefront of many new brands.

Chef Forgione’s friend Rinzler, for one, co-founded MNDFL, a boutique meditation studio that opened late last year in Greenwich Village. At MNDFL and a handful of similar new studios, like at any fitness class, visitors pay in advance and book a spot — a meditation cushion — online (for as little as $10). And because the world is small, one of the studio’s instructors, Eric Spiegel, officiated the wedding of Marissa Vosper — whose cult underwear line Negative Underwear is as minimal and uncluttered as the regularly meditated mind. When Vosper, who grew up meditating (her parents are practicing Buddhists), invited a small group of friends and editors to her SoHo office earlier this month to a meditation led by MNDFL, it would be safe to say that no one thought twice about the invitation. Gathering in groups to get quiet is just what we do these days.

At the time, Vosper’s event was one of very, very many mindful-oriented invitations in my inbox. There were too many to choose from — discuss Dharma with a Buddhist monk, find quietude in a sold-out sound bath, chill out with Waris Ahluwalia’s chai tea and an Indian mystic — so I did them all.

I first flexed my mind muscles at Medi Club. Founded by Jesse Israel, it’s a safe haven for like-minded “modern meditators” to gather monthly and meditate, discuss what’s new in their community and prepare for an event called the Big Quiet — mass meditations in Central Park and Lincoln Center. When I arrived at the Medi Club meeting at And & And Studios (the very chic owners of Calliope/Sub Rosa lend the space), I found what looked more like a frat party than a meditation event: 20- and 30-somethings were queued up outside the front door, and three young girls armed with iPhones (to check in guests) guarded the entrance. They had somehow lost my reservation but would accept a donation of $20 — “and can you please remove your shoes?” Inside, everyone seemed to know each other — or want to know each other. I felt like I was at a singles event and overheard one girl asking another what brought her to Medi Club for the first time. (She read about it in a New York Times article.) The meeting was ironically really loud for a club organized around quietude. (When Israel began playing Jeremih’s “Birthday Sex” to shout out birthdays, I knew I hadn’t quite found the right place to quiet and harness my thoughts.)

The next day, I sought the comfort of my favorite workday escape: OmFactory, a crunchy yoga studio (by New York standards) that offers an afternoon Flow & Meditate community class — at half the price of Medi Club’s suggested donation. The combination of yoga (to wring out the body’s toxins) and meditation (to flood the mind with stillness) felt infinitely more organic than Israel’s gathering — the focus was actually on the body. (If you’ve never meditated, the act of mindful meditation is very physical in nature: In order to clear your mind of other thoughts, you focus it on your breath, each inhale and exhale, and on your body.) The class calmed and prepared me for the adventure I’d embark on the next evening: a weekend meditation retreat in Rockaway Beach.

Free and open to the public, and led in part by a Buddhist monk called Bhante Suddhaso, the weekend was organized by the new nonprofit Buddhist Insights. Between rounds of meditation Suddhaso discouraged idle chatter. The resulting environment was drastically different from the clubby Medi Club, and our group — which consisted mostly of neighborhood locals ranging from teenagers to grandparents — ate most of the home-cooked organic meals together, gratefully and in silence, by an old wood-burning stove.

Even on the retreat, in the beachy neighborhood of Queens, it was impossible to ignore mindfulness’s enduring appeal to young entrepreneurs. Buddhist Insights was founded in January by Giovanna Maselli, a 30-something former fashion features editor at Elle in Milan, to connect enlightened monastics with jaded New Yorkers. The retreat’s location, the three-year-old Rockaway Retreat House, is owned and operated by another 30-something: Maselli’s neighbor across the street, Jaime Schultz, who cooked all our meals, led a guided meditation on the first night and separately has a full-time job in real estate. Maselli’s and Schultz’s community of like-minded and similarly aged friends and neighbors all pitched in for the weekend: Miriam Kwietniewska provided sweet treats from her one-year-old paleo desserts company M.U.D. (Mindfulness Using Desserts), and led a grounding workshop to help connect us to our bodies (and the Earth); Lena Roca came in from her donation-based yoga studio down the street to lead daily yoga classes; Michelle LaDue, the local doula, acupuncturist and herbalist behind Moonflower Healing Arts, was a steady presence, pitching in whenever needed during the retreat.

On the retreat, we all brought with us our biggest baggage — loneliness, loss, unrequited love — and left grappling with Suddhaso’s Buddhist belief that at the root of all of our unhappiness is desire. Because we want something to be different, we are unhappy. Because I’d always rather be catching a big fish in Virginia and drinking ice-cold micheladas, I am unhappy that I am actually sitting on a cold floor in Rockaway, not catching a fish. (Killing living things, I also learned from Suddhaso, isn’t great.) You can’t change the past (so it doesn’t matter, forget it), and you can’t control the future (it hasn’t happened yet, don’t sweat it).

At the Standard, East Village hotel a few days later, I sat in front of an Indian yogi and mystic Jaggi Vasudev, known as Sadhguru, for a talk called “High on Life.” The new sports and well-being eyewear label District Vision, hosted the event, where Sadhguru shared his wisdom. (This is also where Ahluwalia served his tea.) Some of Sadhguru’s most memorable quotes on mindfulness from the evening include:

“Everybody has their own drama going.” (You are not special. Stop acting like it.)

“We are trying to fix the world for our needs instead of trying to fix ourselves for this world.” (You can’t change what happens around you, so just focus on yourself.)

“People are just lost in the mud of their thought and emotion.” (If you can control your mind, and clear it, you will be less burdened by unnecessary worries and feelings.)

And, my favorite: “If you had a choice for yourself, is it to be blissful or miserable? Hello?” (Hello?)

But I learned that actively dispelling thoughts, especially notions of desire, is hard: It’s true what they say about achieving mindfulness, that the mind is a muscle you have to flex in order to train it. So my biggest disappointment in meditation was that it was not what I hoped: an endless savasana (the pose at the end of yoga where you lie on the ground in silence, and sometimes even doze off).

Except that is exactly what I stumbled onto the following weekend at Pure Yoga. Since it can be hard to focus on our own bodies, the use of lights and sound (even, a guide’s voice) are sometimes used to help lead us. And healing sound baths are the drug of choice these days to achieve both heightened awareness — and utter relaxation. (The notion has even gone mainstream, and sound baths are an integral element of treatments at luxury spas like the Mandarin Oriental in New York.) Each month, Jessica Caplan hosts Sonic Saturday at Pure Yoga, where she is also a yoga instructor. At her April class, she prefaced the meditative soundscape with a disclaimer about snoring: It’s fine to do it, even expected, but you may feel a tap on the shoulder and a nudge to move onto your side so that you don’t disrupt your neighbors. Finally, the hourlong savasana of my dreams — set to the beautiful melodies of Caplan and her guest sound healer on that day. As we lay around the room on yoga mats, the duo sang over and around us, to the tune of exotic instruments. They chanted and they chimed. They transported us from the outside world — and ultimately, in my case — into deep slumber. My mind melted. And I emerged from the experience as from a luxurious nap: renewed, and totally, as they say, in my body.


