


The name graces one of New York City’s engineering marvels. It stares out from scores of local road signs. It is all but synonymous with a steep toll.

And it might have been misspelled all along.

The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, which connects Brooklyn and Staten Island, was named after an Italian explorer. There is just one problem: The man is widely known as Giovanni da Verrazzano, with two z’s.

More than a half-century after the bridge opened, some New Yorkers are calling for the spelling error to be corrected. An online petition taking up the cause has brought renewed attention to the enduring discrepancy.

“By rectifying Verrazzano’s name, we’re really saying to all Italians and Italian-Americans that we respect them and appreciate them,” said Joseph V. Scelsa, the president of the Italian American Museum in Lower Manhattan.

The Metropolitan Transportation Authority does not appear eager to tackle the issue. A spokesman for the authority, Christopher McKniff, said adjusting the bridge’s name would be an expensive and labor-intensive undertaking.

“At this time, we are not considering any name change for the Verrazano Bridge,” Mr. McKniff said in a statement that hewed to the one-z spelling.

When the Triborough Bridge became the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge in 2008 to honor the former senator from New York, state officials said it could cost $4 million to change the name on road signs. The Queensboro Bridge has since been renamed the Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge after the former New York mayor, and the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel is now the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel, after the former governor.

The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, which opened to much fanfare in 1964, was named for the explorer who in 1524 became the first European to sail into New York Harbor and who anchored his ship in the Narrows. When it was built, it was the world’s longest suspension bridge.

Even before the first car traveled across the 6,690-foot bridge, officials fought publicly over the spelling. The name has appeared both ways in books, historical documents and newspaper archives.

A monument in Battery Park dedicated to the Italian has two z’s in his name. So does a bridge in Florence, Italy, that opened in 1967. The Mariners’ Museum and Park in Virginia uses two z’s, as does the Castle of Verrazzano in Italy, where he is said to have been born.

But in 1960, John N. LaCorte, the executive director of the Italian Historical Society of America who pushed for the bridge to be named after the Italian, insisted that one z was the proper spelling. Mr. LaCorte said he had consulted with authorities in Italy and photographed the explorer’s signature in the Latin form: Janus Verrazanus.

And so the bridge was christened with a single z. Gay Talese, the reporter who covered the opening for The New York Times and wrote a book about the bridge, said he now considered the spelling a “typo set in stone.”

“I don’t know what they’ll do,” Mr. Talese said of the transportation authority’s current predicament. “It’s a little damn late.”

The quandary recalls the fate of many European immigrants in the late 19th and early 20th centuries whose names ended up changed, sometimes by mistake, sometimes by choice, in the course of their entry into the United States.

When the transportation authority celebrated the bridge’s 50th anniversary in 2014, the complaints focused not on the name but on the toll. Cars crossing into Staten Island are charged $16, or $11.08 with an E-ZPass; trucks that cross the bridge, many en route to New Jersey, are charged more. (People who live on Staten Island and use E-ZPass pay as little as $6.24 per trip; no one pays to travel the other way, into Brooklyn.)

Allen P. Cappelli, an authority board member from Staten Island, supports changing the name. He visited the winery at the Verrazzano castle on a trip to Italy years ago and noticed the extra z.

“I haven’t hired an investigator to go back centuries to definitively prove it, but the family in Italy clearly spells it that way,” Mr. Cappelli said.

Asked about the petition last week, Mayor Bill de Blasio, who has celebrated his family’s ties to Italy, joked that he would create a task force to examine the issue.

“I need to look into that as a proud Italian,” Mr. de Blasio said. “I need to go back and do my research.”

In Lower Manhattan, near the northern edge of Battery Park, a tall bronze bust of the explorer displays the Verrazzano name in large gold letters. The city continues to use two z’s because that is how it was spelled when the statue was dedicated in 1909.

“We have not altered it, in keeping with historic preservation practices,” said Jonathan Kuhn, the director of art and antiquities for the city’s parks department.

The bridge’s name would not have to change overnight, said Mr. Scelsa, of the Italian American Museum. Workers could replace road signs over time as part of regular maintenance. But the misspelling should not persist just because the name is less familiar to New Yorkers.

“Whether it’s Kennedy or Verrazzano,” he said, “I think it should be spelled correctly.”


