


Before HBO canceled that show about the gay friends in San Francisco — it was called “Looking” — people complained. Gay people complained — sighed, really: It’s so — boring. Where was the sex? (The crazy sex.) Where were the social issues and politics? One guy works at a video-game company? Somebody else wants to open a restaurant? Snooze.

“Boring” was probably the reason that ratings weren’t great. And the ratings were obviously the reason the show was canceled. But its alleged dullness — its normalcy — was a kind of achievement. Here was often excellent television that wanted to recast gay life in a 21st-century light, in one of the world’s gayest cities.

“Looking” went away last year, and the reason to bring it up now is that the Film Society of Lincoln Center is mounting a major weeklong film series about the bad old days called “An Early Clue to the New Direction: Queer Cinema Before Stonewall.” It’s an unapologetic, unmitigated, mesmerizingly diverse assembly of 23 feature-length movies and 25 shorts that constitutes a kaleidoscopic portrait of self-discovery and shame.

This gamut covers a lot of ground, too: the winking mannerism of Alfred Hitchcock (“Rope”), the dimensional experimentalism of Gregory Markopoulos (“Twice a Man,” with a young Olympia Dukakis), the serene classicism of Vincente Minnelli (“Tea and Sympathy”), the icebox psycho-expressionism of Ingmar Bergman (“Persona”). There’s also the mere fact that the German-Hungarian theater director Leontine Sagan had a little film career and that her “Mädchen in Uniform,” from 1931, about girls at a boarding school, is the film that most moved me.

The series has camp, melodrama, Andy Warhol and the heart-attack-inducing fantasia of Jack Smith, whose “Flaming Creatures” is often the mountaintop of any series or festival that’s smart and bold enough to include this once-“indecent” avant-garde masterpiece. That’s still the case, even under these circumstances.

And the circumstances matter. When it comes to art, time and context are almost chemical properties. A good film series can change the way you watch a movie. This one does. You bring your ideas of, say, how transsexuality might have gone in 1953.

This series’ programmer, Thomas Beard, gives you Ed Wood’s “Glen or Glenda.” The film doesn’t quite know how to talk about being born into a body that isn’t yours (not by current standards, anyway). But the quest for its protagonist to live as Glenda — in 1953! — generates its own suspense. Will he tell his fiancée? And what do those creature-feature interludes with Bela Lugosi have to do with it? The movie delivers on Wood’s famous mediocrity, but astounds you with its sincerity, even when its clumsy, which, for most of its hour-plus running time, it is.

The movie opens with a title card that pleads for sympathy: “Many of the smaller parts are portrayed by persons who actually are, in real life, the character they portray on the screen. This is a picture of stark realism — taking no sides — but giving you the facts — All the facts — as they are today. … You are society — judge ye not.” Wood doesn’t get drawn into the same queer circles as Warhol and Mr. Markopoulos and Andrew Meyer, whose 1966 short gives the series its title. But Wood did himself believe he was what his movie calls a transvestite.

Mr. Beard’s series allows you to observe how identity played out. The least punishing, least cruel, most fun, fanciful, sensual, adventurous films — the queerest — tend to be the work of the practicing queers. Even something loosely coherent like Jean Genet’s “Un Chant d’Amour,” from 1950 and set, yes, in a men’s prison, opts for eroticism before tragedy.

Mr. Beard and his pre-Stonewall designation in the subtitle frames the way the films operate on their own, yes, but also as part of a family. This is work made before the 1969 riots that erupted after patrons of Greenwich Village’s Stonewall Inn had enough of the cops harassing them. The uprising marked a political watershed. The series reminds you of the struggles of sin and propriety afoot before things turned. Here, that turning point feels also like a breaking point.

Anthropology appears to be the primary lens of this series. Mr. Beard has collected the different ways in which filmmakers and the society saw both homosexuality as an orientation and queerness as a culture. This isn’t a series that judges. It’s one that takes in both judgment and the hunger to live beyond its shadow.

Western social culture has surpassed its popular cultures. “Queerness” is more normal than it was in, say, 1953. Things aren’t particularly robust for gay films and movies post-Stonewall. Quality and quantity have moved in blips, blocs and waves. But nothing feels permanent or arrived at. The appeal of “An Early Clue” comes from its presentation of worlds so different from ours. The ache in some of the films is real. Some of the men and women, the closeted lawyer Dirk Bogarde played in 1961’s “Victim,” say, would probably have killed for a show like “Looking.”

He would have killed to be “boring.”


