


Kunstenfestivaldesarts, Various venues, through May 28

Dance, theater, music and puppet shows will visit Brussels for this festival, an interdisciplinary lineup of international acts. Pieces include “Ottof,” a dance piece from Marrakesh; and “Cabaret Crusades: The Secrets of Karbala,” a movie that retells the story of the seventh-century Battle of Karbala with puppets. Above, “SIMPLEXITY. La Beauté du Geste,” a dance piece featuring Sara Tan Simin and Victor Hanna. kfda.be

Gnaoua World Music Festival Various venues, May 12-15

Musicians from Morocco, Mali and the United States will visit this festival, which centers on traditional music from the region. Performers include a troupe from Fez who will perform Issaoua, a form of sung folk tale that is practiced in different cities around Morocco; and several solo acts from Morocco, like Maâlem Seddik Bounhar. Some acts have a more contemporary flair, like the American trumpet player Christian Scott and Las Migas, a Spanish female quartet that blends classical music and jazz.festival-gnaoua.net/en

Scottish Artists 1750-1900 Buckingham Palace, through Oct. 9

Allan Ramsay, David Wilkie, James Giles and other Scottish painters are on view in this exhibition, which was first shown at the queen’s Scottish residence, Hollyroodhouse, before traveling to London. The show explores how Enlightenment ideas worked their way into their output, and compares and contrasts the work of artists who traveled abroad with those who stayed at home. royalcollection.org.uk

Eduardo Navarro. Octopia Museo Tamayo, through July 3

The Argentine artist Eduardo Navarro created a giant sculpture for his solo exhibition here — a mobile, octopus-shaped installation whose tendrils can be put on by 80 performers to make the octopus move. Performances take place on May 14 and June 11, though visitors can see the statue in stationary form on other dates. An exhibition dedicated to the installation artist Mario García Torres is also running at the museum through June 26. museotamayo.org

Cannes International Film Festival Various venues, May 11-22

The 69th edition of the international festival opens with the director of “Mad Max,” George Miller, heading the jury that will choose the film that will be awarded the top prize, the Palme d’Or. Movies competing for the award include Pedro Almodóvar’s “Julieta,” Sean Penn’s “The Last Face” and Park Chan-wook’s “The Handmaiden.” The festival opens with a screening of Woody Allen’s “Café Society,” set in 1930s Hollywood. Jesse Eisenberg, Steve Carell and Kristen Stewart star.festival-cannes.fr

Norfolk and Norwich Festival Various venues, May 13-29

The sultry R&B singer Lisa Fischer, the science fiction-themed band Sun Ra Arkestra and the Swiss sculptor Alberto Giacometti may not seem like immediately obvious pairings, but they’ll all appear in this interdisciplinary festival, set in a small town near England’s east coast (Ms. Fischer and the Arkestra will each perform; Giacometti has a solo show at the Sainsbury Center for Visual Arts). Other performances in the varied lineup include “The James Plays,” a stage epic about the kings who ran Scotland in the 15th century, staged by Scotland’s national theater. nnfestival.org.uk

Marvelous Creatures: Animals in Islamic Art Aga Khan Museum, through Sept. 11

This family-friendly show features a range of paintings and other artistic renderings of animals from Islamic myth. This recently opened museum, which is dedicated to Islamic art, was founded by the Aga Khan, a prominent businessman who has poured money into major philanthropic projects around the world. agakhanmuseum.org

Miyake Issey Exhibition: The Work of Miyake Issey The National Art Center, Tokyo, through June 13.

The Japanese fashion designer Issey Miyake’s eclectic output includes loose-fitting pret-a-porter pieces, and some more unusual designs, like a ringed, multicolored “flying saucer” dress, made in a material that looks like a paper lantern. The show looks at his output over the course of his career, from his years as a student in the 1970s to the present. nact.jp

Painted Encounters National Gallery of Modern Art, through May 29

This exhibition focuses on the art produced for and by Parsi communities in the 18th and 19th centuries. The Parsis, a well-to-do Indian community, built close ties with China and the West in this period. The exhibition includes a swath of the furniture, textiles and portraits produced for them. ngmaindia.gov.in

Heavy Artillery White Rabbit, through Aug. 7

Major works by China’s leading artists are on view in this group show, which centers on gigantic installations. Pieces include “Tank Project,” by He Xiangyu, a replica of an army tank built entirely from leather; Xu Zhen’s “European Thousand-Armed Sculpture,” a statue piece that combines European classical styles with Asian ones; and Polit-Sheer-Form Office group’s “Library,” a giant installation made of blue books. whiterabbitcollection.org

Carl Andre: Sculpture as Place, 1958-2010 Hamburger Bahnhof, through Sept. 18

American artist Carl Andre had an unusual practice that included both minimal sculptures and a large poetry output. This exhibition includes around 50 of his sculptures and 200 of his poems. It takes place in the Hamburger Bahnhof, a former train station that now serves as a contemporary art museum. smb.museum/en


