


FLORENCE, Italy — “More” is the order of the day at Pitti Uomo, the Italian men’s wear trade fair where exhibitors cram the Fortezza da Basso in the center of the city in hopes of catching a buyer’s eye. Once upon a time, suits ruled here, but that was long ago.

The bustling fair still has plenty of Italian tailoring, but new pavilions have sprung up like mushrooms to cater to any and all variegated tastes. The area labeled “Born in the U.S.A. by Liberty Fairs” spotlights brands that are just that. “I Play” is inflected by athletic wear; “Unconventional” has a faintly gothic bent (officially, “Luxury Underground Style”). Throughout, you can find T-shirts and track pants along with jackets and vests.

At the fashion shows and presentations given by the fair’s invited and sponsored guests, there is similar breadth. On Wednesday evening, those who wanted to sample the full menu of Pitti options made their way to a presentation by the Sicilian designer Fausto Puglisi before moving on to catch a show by the Russian designer Gosha Rubchinskiy.

Two designers at greater aesthetic odds would be hard to imagine. Mr. Puglisi works in a molto-maximalist style, a cheerful open-arm embrace of Italianate kitsch. Invited by Pitti, he took the opportunity to show his first men’s collection, and his women’s pre-collection beside it.

“So many buyers ask for it from me,” Mr. Puglisi said, and some of his stores that carry his clothes report men buying oversize garb from the women’s department for themselves. “When Pitti invited me to show the collection here, I said, let’s do it.”

He cast a rough crew to model it, including local prison inmates, according to his press team, making a one-night-only appearance, and players of the ultraviolent Florentine sport calcio storico fiorentino, essentially a mix of rugby and football with a bit of bare-knuckle brawling for good measure. Heavily tattooed and barely attired, the models wore leather Bermuda shorts decked with gold charms, tattered jeans and floral-printed robes.

“I can’t stand the hipster look,” Mr. Puglisi said, sipping from a glass of vodka. “I wanted it to be strong. This is my vision of humanity.”

By coincidence or kismet, Mr. Puglisi’s name is a near anagram for “pugilist.”

As an inspiration, he cited Pier Paolo Pasolini, the Italian poet and filmmaker who died in 1975. Pasolini is an unexpected muse for a fashion designer; as a committed Marxist, he would likely have bristled at the connection. In an infamous interview before his death, he compared consumerism to Nazism and said that he considered it “to be a Fascism worse than the classical one.”

Nevertheless, Mr. Puglisi said, Pasolini, whose adaptations of “Oedipus Rex,” “The Decameron” and the Marquis de Sade’s “120 Days of Sodom” are grisly, lusty classics of Italian cinema, is “my obsession. For me, this is what I want to do as a designer.”

Like the filmmaker, who often used nonprofessional actors and appreciated the rough and the rustic, Mr. Puglisi proclaimed his allegiance to outsiders. “Many times when I go to the south and talk to the simple people — someone who’s selling fish in the middle of the street — we’re talking and talking, and it gives you more than any celebrity or stylist,” he said.

Nearby, Mr. Rubchinskiy’s show was about to begin, in the sun-dappled courtyard of a former tobacco factory. Mr. Rubchinskiy offers a reclaimed Soviet chic, his logo an imposing block of Cyrillic and his models a gawky lot of pale teenagers, found via an Instagram search. He has been feverishly embraced by both young buyers and fashion editors, teenagers like those in his shows and “a wide following of adult men who still think of themselves as teenagers,” The Financial Times wrote.

And such is the elasticity of inspiration that Mr. Rubchinskiy, too, said he was most inspired by Pasolini.

After the show, which mixed his usual collection with collaborations (in re-reappropriated, black-market-gone-real-market style) with Fila, Kappa and Levi’s, Mr. Rubchinskiy screened “The Day of My Death,” a 17-minute film created for the occasion. It starred the designer; his stylist, Lotta Volkova; a handful of models; and Renata Litvinova, the Russian filmmaker who directed it.

“We were inspired by Pier Paolo Pasolini, his story, his poems, his films and finally his murder, which has been sealed for 10 years,” Ms. Litvinova told Vogue. “His reputation was being blackened, and we decided to bring the justice back: Pier Paolo is a genius, an artist, who suffered for his principles.”

(Pasolini was found dead in Ostia, a short distance from Rome; the circumstances of his murder, originally believed to be at the hands of Giuseppe Pelosi, a 17-year-old whom Pasolini picked up, are now clouded by conspiracy theories and Mr. Pelosi’s recanted confession.)

By sundown, copies of a paperbound book of black-and-white photos were appearing in possession of certain key fashion editors, packaged in a plain brown sleeve. Chilly and elegant, the photographs were shot by Mr. Rubchinskiy during the film shoot. The book is the designer’s third with the London-based publisher Idea Books, made in an edition of 1,000 and certain to be a collector’s item among his most rabid fans.

The book’s only text, apart from its end credits, is this: “To Pier Paolo.”


