


OTTAWA — A large section of a major street in downtown Ottawa collapsed into a sinkhole on Wednesday, bursting water and gas lines and swallowing a minivan.

Officials said that there was no immediate indication of any injuries or deaths. Still, a major shopping center, hotel, convention center, retail stores and offices near the site were evacuated.

The sinkhole began to form just east of Canada’s Parliament buildings around 10:30 a.m. and eventually grew to the full width of Rideau Street. A tunnel for a new rail transit system is being constructed under the street, but Jim Watson, the city’s mayor, told reporters on Wednesday that it was not clear whether the sinkhole was connected to the project.

Much of Ottawa is built on Leda clay, also known as quick clay, a type of soil that can become unstable and is prone to sudden collapse. Leda clay was blamed for a sinkhole that swallowed a house northeast of Montreal six years ago, killing four people.

Because of the tunneling and the renovation work in progress at the Rideau Centre shopping mall, Rideau Street had been open only to buses, taxis and pedestrians on Wednesday when the sinkhole appeared. Gas, electrical and water services were cut off to a section of downtown Ottawa, and roadblocks closed off several major routes through the city, snarling traffic and bus service.

Officials scrambled to determine how to handle the gaping hole and the disruption it was causing in the heart of the national capital. “All hands are on deck to make sure the site is secured and no harm is done to any individual,” Mr. Watson said.

A water main failure was said to be responsible for a much smaller sinkhole that formed several blocks to the east in 2014. That hole was also along the transit tunneling route.

At a news conference on Wednesday, officials said it was not yet safe to inspect the hole or to assess potential damage to adjacent buildings.

Mr. Watson said that a special concrete would probably be blown into the hole to stabilize it. “Be prepared for delays,” he said. “This could take some time.”

The mayor rejected suggestions that the collapse was a sign that the city’s infrastructure was inadequate and poorly maintained. “There’s probably a major sinkhole in some city once a week,” Mr. Watson said. “And we’re one more.”


