


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

I saw so many people in shorts and sandals in New York City this week — it’s warmer, friends, but it’s not sandals warm just yet. But I get the impulse: Can’t it just be summer already? I want fewer responsibilities, more hours of daylight and whoever’s going to die on the season finale of “Grey’s Anatomy” to get busy dying. I’m in the mood for bold, interesting shows that still feel fun — the TV equivalent of getting tipsy with a funky philosophy professor.

If you like this email, or if you think there are things we can do to improve it, please take our brief survey and let us know how you feel. It should take you less than five minutes. Have a terrific weekend, even if you have to keep those Birkenstocks in the closet a little longer. See you on Monday.

For this weekend, I’m recommending two series that hit that sweet spot of being thoughtful and focused while also being juicy and delightfully addictive.

“UnReal” burst on the scene last summer as a salty workplace drama set within a “Bachelor”-esque reality show. But this Lifetime series turned into much more — anyone can call “The Bachelor” contrived, but it takes a gutsy kind of cynicism to turn that same skepticism on romantic love in general. Shiri Appleby stars as Rachel, a reality TV producer fresh off a mental health breakdown who reluctantly slinks back to the job that destroyed her sense of self in the first place.

BET’s “Being Mary Jane,” starring Gabrielle Union as a cable news anchor, had a slightly bumpier start. But over the course of its first season, the show settled into itself — and then in Seasons 2 and 3, it blossomed into a vampy drama with more to say about race, politics, sex, loyalty and family than just about anything else on TV.

Both shows use their behind-the-scenes settings to tease out ideas of authenticity and artificiality, particularly the ways women are asked to perform certain versions of themselves. Storylines involve stolen sperm, illicit affairs, slapping, suicides, various scams and some substantial bed-hopping. But unlike the prime-time soaps of yore, “UnReal” and “Being Mary Jane” use these extreme stories to illuminate real ideas, rather than just to scandalize or titillate.

“UnReal” returns June 6; “Being Mary Jane” later this year (no firm date yet). In the meantime, watch all of “UnReal” on Hulu; and watch Seasons 1 and 2 of “Being Mary Jane” on Netflix and buy Season 3 on iTunes. If you’ve already watched “UnReal,” Lifetime just released a web series called “The Faith Diaries,” starring the show’s farm girl Faith, who moves to Los Angeles. It’s incredibly scanty — 10 episodes, most around three minutes long — but still a lot of fun.

For the past few years, I’ve taken on a long show in the summer. Last summer I consumed “Lost,” and “Scrubs” the summer before that. Summer is now fast approaching. I was considering “The X-Files,” but I’ve heard mixed opinions. Do you have any suggestions for a show to fill my summer that is worth the hefty time commitment? — Josh

If you found that “Lost” was worth the commitment, then “The X-Files” is as well. Are there crummy, disappointing parts to “The X-Files”? Of course. I loathe the show’s final arcs, but that does not at all negate how much elation earlier seasons brought me. This isn’t the kind of pain that makes us bitter. It’s the kind of pain that makes us wise.

But if you want a show that will never let you down, you seek “Cheers.” And if you want to just drown yourself in TV this summer, you seek “Cheers” followed by “Frasier.” “Frasier” dips a tiny bit toward the end, but you only notice that if you’ve been gobbling up the previous 10 seasons the way an evil witch sucks the joy out of a peaceful kingdom (see: Margaret of Two Years Ago). Watch it like a human being, and you’ll be fine.

There are 275 episodes of “Cheers” (or 271, depending on how you want to count hourlong episodes and specials). These episodes clock in around 24 minutes, unlike today’s half-hour comedies, which are much closer to 20. That is so much “Cheers.” Then there are 264 episodes of “Frasier,” which is technically a spinoff though the shows are utterly different. That’s more than 200 glorious hours of TV for you, Josh — probably enough to carry you through until the fall. (Watch “Cheers” on Netflix or Hulu; Watch “Frasier” on Netflix or Hulu)

Election High school political campaign. Smart, acerbic satire. Starring Reese Witherspoon and directed by Alexander Payne. (Expires from Netflix on Sunday)

Blow Out Movie sound-effects man and murder. Tough, effective but contrived thriller. Starring John Travolta and directed by Brian De Palma. (Expires from Amazon Prime on Saturday)

In the Heat of the Night Black Yankee sleuth on Southern murder case. Strong, stinging psychological tug of war. Starring Sidney Poitier and Rod Steiger, directed by Norman Jewison. (Expires from HBO on Saturday)

Annie Hall Manhattan comedy writer in and out of love. A best picture Oscar winner, buoyant and probing. Starring Woody Allen and Diane Keaton, directed by Allen. (Expires from HBO on Saturday)

Blood Simple Texas adultery and murder. The Coen brothers’ overtouted first, but catch it once. Starring Frances McDormand. (Expires from Amazon Prime on Saturday)

Showtime’s campy Victorian Era-set thriller “Penny Dreadful” returns for its third season Sunday. Give it a go if you like …

• Horror that takes itself just seriously enough

• Eva Green

• Eva Green out-acting everyone and everything, especially Josh Hartnett (Sorry, Josh)

(Buy episodes on Amazon or iTunes for $2.99 each; Watch on Hulu or Amazon with a supplemental Showtime subscription)


