


On Twitter, Facebook and nytimes.com, readers shared passionate reactions to an article about how Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, behaved toward women in private interactions.

They debated and disagreed as they grappled with questions of workplace ethics, claims of sexism and when, exactly, a man crosses a line with a woman.

But what would you expect?

Did Mr. Trump’s conduct amount to sexual harassment or was it benign? Readers differed.

“A significant amount of this behavior would be actionable under the sexual harassment policies of almost any for profit or non-profit organization in America. If he worked in my institution he would be fired for cause.” — Steve, NYC

“I need a shower after reading this. But there is nothing here to surprise any woman who was in the workplace in the 1970s to ’90s.” — Patricia Sears, Ottawa, Canada

“It would be hard to find a man in the world that hasn’t slipped and called a women ‘hon’ or ‘sweetie.’ ”— Tony, New York

“I found this article very painful to read. It brought back some very upsetting and not easy to erase memories in what was a generally enjoyable professional career.” — Susan, Paris

Readers clashed over whether women who participated in the beauty pageants overseen by Mr. Trump should have expected him to comment on their appearance.

“It’s hard to feel sorry for someone who voluntarily chose to enter the pageant then feels slighted because someone was critical of her appearance.” — Susan, Wisconsin

“Don’t go after the fact that we have pageants with women paraded in swimsuits, go after the guy who owns the pageant.” — SP, L.A.

Readers expressed fascination, but not consensus, on Mr. Trump’s behavior toward women, which the women in the article described as nurturing and degrading.

“I worked with Ivana on Trump Castle back in the 1980s. I will not defend his degrading treatment of women concerning the gross comments he makes, but he is a contradiction; he is rude and crude, but he does openly allow women to take on huge responsibility in his organization. If he were a total male chauvinist pig he would never allow that.” — Janet Herzog, New York

“Despite stories of genuinely doing good things for women (e.g. head of construction being a woman), he simply doesn’t know how to handle rejection; and has to have an element of control which, even at nearly 70 years old, he still exhibits.” — Oliver Norgate, on The Times’s Facebook page


