


Forget the necktie.

To make Father’s Day more memorable this year, consider giving Dad something providing a little more fun — like a beer or two.

“It’s really cool to go out and have a beer with your dad,” said Michael McManus, the owner of Powder Hollow Brewery in Enfield. “It’s one of those things you can do some serious bonding over.”

With 40-some breweries now operating in Connecticut, and many of them open this Sunday for Father’s Day, the options for obtaining a fresh, locally made mugful have never been greater. And at a cost of about $2 per sample or $5 to $7 per pint, it’s probably cheaper than a tie.

Like most of the state’s newest craft breweries, Powder Hollow, which opened in 2014, operates a small taproom adjacent to its 10-barrel brewing system.

Despite the limited capacity of its production plant, its tasting area, handsomely paneled in knotty pine, with seating for about 40, maintains about 13 beers on tap. Mr. McManus often tends the bar, serving up I.P.A., porter, stout and occasionally a basil-lime flavored ale.

“Every day, more and more people are converting from Bud Light to craft beer,” Mr. McManus said.

To entice those raised on American-style pale lagers, DuVig Brewing Company, which opened in Branford in 2014, included in a recent product line five easy-drinking ales, none of which exceeded 5 percent alcohol.

“We do an occasional I.P.A., but our focus is on session beers for people who are not that adventurous,” said Kim Vigliotti, a co-owner, referring to a kind of everyday, low-alcohol brew.

With a best-selling grainy, light Cream Ale, DuVig may one day grow beyond its three-barrel batch size. Whether that would mean leaving its current quarters in a nondescript industrial park, however, remains to be seen.

“We’re very cognizant of keeping the ‘mom-and-pop’ feel to our brewery,” Ms. Vigliotti said.

Across town from DuVig’s 300-square-foot tasting room is the colossal Stony Creek Brewery. With a bocce court, an abundance of outdoor seating overlooking a tidal inlet off Branford Harbor and a 2,500-square-foot taproom (complete with a granite-faced fireplace), Stony Creek has become one of the area’s most popular destinations since its opening in March 2015.

“We didn’t realize how thirsty Connecticut was,” said Ed Crowley Jr., company president.

Stony Creek is doing its best to quench that thirst with 14 draft lines. Of its various ales and lagers, Belgian Big and Big Cranky weigh in at just under 10 percent alcohol.

“You’ve got to make a few beers that are off-the-wall for a small but influential group of drinkers,” said Mr. Crowley, who estimated that the brewery cost around $20 million to build.

Stony Creek relies on the expertise of an in-house microbiologist to ensure its beers’ consistency.

Veracious Brewing, in Monroe, takes a different approach with the dozen-plus beers it serves in an oak-paneled beer hall-like setting that abuts its brew house.

“We haven’t done one of those the same twice,” Mark Szamatulski, the company’s brewer and co-owner, said of his brews. “We’ll keep tweaking them until they’re the best I can make.”

Such experimentation is to be expected from a man who, with his wife, has operated Maltose Express, a home brewing and winemaking store, for the last 25 years. Among the 22 different beers Mr. Szamatulski has made since the brewery opened a year ago are a Bohemian Pilsner, an imperial-style stout and a watermelon beer made from freshly crushed juice.

“The best thing about the tasting room is hearing what people think and working on my craft,” he said. “We’re trying to make beers that, when you finish them, you’ll want to drink a second.”

That palate-pleasing effect is likewise the aim of Black Hog Brewing, which opened in August 2014 in Oxford. Its brewer, Tyler Jones, said he was making beers that paired well with food. Four recent offerings were variously brewed and seasoned with kumquats, ginger, grapefruit peel, sage and oats.

Racks of barrels and sacks of grain are adjacent to furniture made from pallets, providing Black Hog with a cozy ambience that belies its setting deep within a sprawling industrial park. “The tasting room is certainly part of the brewery experience,” Mr. Jones said.

If the basement-like tasting room of Overshores Brewing in East Haven is slightly claustrophobic, its several Belgian-inspired brews, including Quad, with a potent 10 percent alcohol, may well transport your spirit across the Atlantic.

Overshores, which opened in May 2014, appeals to a niche market. But its founder, Christian Amport, believes Connecticut can support its increasingly wide array of small breweries. “If the culture of locally made products continues, we’ll not have any trouble at all,” he said.

Kyle Ondrush, a co-owner and vice president of Brass Works Brewing in Waterbury, agreed. “We all do different takes on different styles, so hopefully we can all be successful in sharing the market,” he said.

So far, that appears to be the case for Brass Works. Although it opened just six months ago with a seven-barrel system, the brewery intends to double that capacity soon.

Mr. Ondrush noted that not all the fathers who visit his tasting room have the patience to wait for their children to be of age and invite them.

“We have one guy whose young son loves the sodas we make,” he said, “so that father always has an excuse to bring his kid on down and have a beer.”


