


Bulgari

After 35 years at Bulgari, Lucia Silvestri still feels joy when she is picking out gems for a new high jewelry collection. “I feel like Cinderella going to the ball,” she said during a phone interview from her studio overlooking St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome.

This year’s collection, her third since becoming creative director in 2013, again will be previewed at the Cannes Film Festival. Ms. Silvestri said women often make more daring choices for the festival than for the Academy Awards. “Cannes is more European, more Italian in style,” she said.

Daring like Sienna Miller, who got the cameras flashing last year when she wore a dramatic choker from the 2015 Giardini Italiani collection with a Sonia Rykiel black cape and braided updo.

This year Naomi Watts is among those confirmed to wear Bulgari on the Cannes red carpet May 11 and 12. One of the pieces she may wear is the new Diva’s Dream necklace. As always, Ms. Silvestri began the necklace’s design by laying out the pear-shaped rubies on her specially made gem table. “They were so brilliant and so amazing in color,” she said. “I felt they were just the right layout for the Diva collection.”

De Grisogono

On May 17 more than 20 television crews from around the world will gather among the pine trees at the exclusive Hôtel du Cap-Eden-Roc in Antibes to catch a glimpse of the guests arriving at De Grisogono’s star-studded annual Cannes party.

More than 600 people, including actors, top models and the luxury jeweler’s most important clients, will sit down to a dinner overlooking the Mediterranean at the “Folies in Cannes” event. Its guests of honor are scheduled to include Milla Jovovich and the model Bella Hadid.

Fawaz Gruosi, the company’s founder and chief executive, said the event has grown substantially since it began in 2000 with only 50 guests (and Ms. Jovovich as guest of honor then, too). “It is now by far the biggest event we do,” he said in a phone interview. “Cannes is an amazing tool to expose the brand worldwide.”

He plans to spend nine days at the festival, entertaining clients and presenting the new collection, which will feature the largest number of pieces De Grisogono has ever brought to Cannes. It will include a cocktail ring valued at more than $500,000 with an exceptional pear-shaped yellow diamond of almost 10 carats, surrounded by black diamonds. “We are working like crazy,” Mr. Gruosi said. “The demand for high jewelry among our clients is huge at the moment.”

He also plans to present a rough diamond of more than 400 carats. Testing shows that the stone, once cut, “will be among the biggest diamonds ever created,” he said.

Chopard

The Cannes Film Festival this year will mark another milestone in Chopard’s commitment to sustainable luxury, Caroline Scheufele, the Swiss jeweler’s co-president, wrote in an email interview.

Julianne Moore is scheduled to wear pieces from the house’s Green Carpet Collection, which uses Fairmined gold and diamonds from a supplier certified by the Responsible Jewellery Council and, for the first time, will incorporate emeralds from Gemfields, the London-based mining company specializing in colored precious gems that are ethically sourced. The set, whose design was selected by Ms. Moore, will be “the most ethical emerald jewelry ever produced,” Ms. Scheufele said.

2016 is Chopard’s 18th year as an official partner of Cannes — and to mark the festival’s 69th year, Ms. Scheufele said its Red Carpet Collection 2016, to be unveiled during the event, will feature 69 pieces.

With stars and their stylists still making their clothing and jewelry selections, Ms. Scheufele said she was unable to confirm who else would be wearing Chopard, although she did say that Marion Cotillard and Juliette Binoche, godmother of the 2016 Trophée Chopard, a special award given each year to emerging actors, were among those previewing pieces.

Cannes has proven a good showcase for Chopard. Ms. Scheufele said a client bought a diamond necklace after seeing Ms. Cotillard wearing it on the steps of the Palais des Festivals in 2014, and another client bought the emerald earrings that Uma Thurman wore while she was a jury member in 2011.

“Some of our clients do fall in love with a piece and buy it straight away,” Ms. Scheufele said. “Others need more time to think about it.”


