


MADRID — Two years ago, a tiny Spanish village gained fame for deciding, finally, to break any possible link to the persecution of Jews during the Spanish Inquisition.

It held a referendum in which the village’s 56 registered inhabitants agreed to shed its medieval name — Castrillo Matajudíos, which roughly translates as Little Hill Fort of Jew Killers. Instead, it is now called Castrillo Mota de Judíos, or something like Little Hill Fort of Jews.

Since then, however, the village has become a victim of repeated acts of vandalism, mostly anti-Semitic graffiti, that the mayor attributes to unknown far-right extremist groups that, he believes, have no direct connection to his village.

The mayor, Lorenzo Rodríguez Pérez, filed a police complaint on Tuesday after the latest aggression, in which the village’s brand-new road signposts were sprayed over the weekend with anti-Semitic and fascist graffiti, he said.

The signposts will need replacing, the mayor said. They had been erected last October, when his village officially completed its name change after the May 2014 referendum.

In a handful of recent incidents, he said, extremists painted offensive graffiti onto the facade of the town hall, and damaged public benches and other parts of the village.

“A name change, sadly, doesn’t only bring about positive consequences and the respect it deserves,” Mr. Rodríguez Pérez said. “There are some people who want us to forget the Jews — and certainly not get closer to Israel — but we will not bow to any attempt to create a threatening environment here.”

As part of the overhaul, the village’s authorities have also been promoting its Jewish roots. There is an archaeological project to dig up the remains of a synagogue and other buried evidence of the historic settlement.

And in June, Castrillo’s mayor will lead a delegation of seven officials from the village on a weeklong visit to Israel, during which Castrillo is to be named the twin village of an Israeli community, Kfar Vradim.

Since the village announced its name change, the Israeli ambassador to Spain, as well as representatives of the Jewish community in Spain, have visited Castrillo. The rapprochement and official visits have generated some protests by pro-Palestinian activists, the mayor said.

“We have respected such protests and expect others to respect the choice of people here to change our name,” the mayor said. “But there is always a portion of people who are too intransigent to understand such basic rights, even in a democratic country like Spain.”


