


An internationally renowned soprano is about to make her operatic debut at Lincoln Center. But a determined enemy of artistic excellence wants to destroy her voice. He would render her singing so awful that you’d probably rather listen to Gilbert Gottfried.

Is this a problem for the New York Police Department? No, but it’s definitely a case for the Eyes of the Fountain.

Dozens of children will join this detective agency on Saturday when Lincoln Center presents the first installment of Meet Me at the Fountain, a series of immersive theatrical experiences for families.

“We came up with this concept of what if there were this underground organization that protects Lincoln Center,” said Jonathan Shmidt Chapman, the associate director of programming and production for Lincoln Center Education, a branch that develops school and community events. Engaging children would be perfect, he explained, because “no one would suspect that kids on our campus would be helping us foil a diabolical plot.”

No one, that is, who hasn’t seen one of the various Scooby-Doo TV series. Scooby-Doo, the Hardy Boys, film noir and old radio serials all influenced the conceit, which Mr. Chapman developed with Drew Petersen, associate artistic director of Trusty Sidekick Theater Company. (Mr. Chapman is its artistic director.)

In “Episode 1: The Canary Flies at Midnight,” the villain, Oscar Quinnsworth, plans to introduce his Flattener into the hall’s sound system. This dastardly invention will make the diva — code name, the Canary — sound flat. Intending the experience for ages 7 through 11, the men deliberately focused on silly sabotage rather than terrorism.

The half-hour adventure will be offered 10 times daily, on Saturday and in May, for up to 14 people per session. Five actors take part, including Mr. Petersen, the show’s director. While the action follows his script, improvisation inevitably occurs. “You’re not sure where the play world stops and the real world begins,” he said.

The agents use a detector, the Triller — actually a light-sensitive theremin — with which the children chase the Flattener all over, including underground. The center’s tunnel network “has a noir, kind of dark detective-story feel, and we just loved it,” Mr. Petersen said.

Lincoln Center, of course, is also plotting: The series is part of LC Kids, a year-old initiative to lure more families. “Dropped in throughout are these sprinkles of cultural literacy,” Mr. Petersen said, like references to Balanchine, Martha Graham and opera. “The idea is that the Eyes of the Fountain Agency is really passionate about art.” If the program succeeds, its young detectives will become passionate, too.

(Saturday and May 21 and 22, the Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street. Schedule and tickets: 212-721-6500, kids.lincolncenter.org.)


