


Lin-Manuel Miranda confirmed on Thursday morning that he would leave the cast of “Hamilton” on July 9 and be succeeded by his longtime alternate, Javier Muñoz.

Mr. Miranda said he would turn his attention to other projects, including finishing work on the score and songs for “Moana,” an animated Disney film; completing an album of “Hamilton” covers and “Hamilton”-inspired songs called “The Hamilton Mixtape”; and preparing to begin rehearsals for a live-action sequel to “Mary Poppins,” which he will star in alongside Emily Blunt.

“I’m leaving because I have other opportunities that are going to need my mental real estate,” he said.

He said he expected to spend much of next year in London, where the movie will be filmed. And he said he planned to cut his hair, which he had grown out for the role of Alexander Hamilton.

He said that before he leaves the cast the current production of “Hamilton” would be filmed for preservation purposes but that he was not sure when or how the film might be available to the public. He also confirmed that a documentary about “Hamilton” would air on PBS this fall.

He said he expected to rejoin the cast of “Hamilton” at times, either in New York or elsewhere — the show has announced productions in Chicago and London and two North American tours — but that he is not sure when, where or for how long he would do that.

“This is a role I am going to be going back to again and again,” he said. “I plan to revisit this role a lot.”

In a conversation with reporters at Coogan’s Irish pub in Washington Heights, Mr. Miranda said he would spend some time this summer encouraging Hispanics to vote in the presidential election; he said he had already appeared in a video for the Hispanic Federation encouraging voter participation.

“Our issues are on the table, from Puerto Rico to a wall to keep half of us out being a party platform,” he said. “It’s important that we get out and vote.”

He defended the decision by “Hamilton” producers to raise the price for premium tickets on Broadway to $849, saying that price was still lower than what many people were paying on the secondary market and that the increase would allow the show to more than double the number of tickets available for $10 by lottery. He also said that he hoped that the addition of new productions of “Hamilton” would make the show more accessible to more people.

This is the second time that Mr. Miranda has turned over a role to Mr. Muñoz, who also succeeded Mr. Miranda as the lead actor in “In the Heights.” Last year, Mr. Muñoz learned he had cancer and took some time off from “Hamilton” for treatment, but he has been back for months, and he said on Thursday that he was “fit and ready.”

“My last treatment was January,” he said, “and I’m back in the game and ready to go.”


