


Beasts & Bottles The beasts in question are mostly pedigreed chickens from various farms, spinning on the rotisserie in full view. They come truffled, dressed with herbs Provençal style, or seasoned with chile and hoisin sauce. The chef, Laurent Kalkotour, is an owner, along with the manager, Leslie Affre, and the sommelier, Alexander LaPratt, all of them partners in the Brooklyn restaurant Atrium Dumbo. Mr. LaPratt’s wine choices emphasize magnums and other big bottles, often poured by the glass and favoring Beaujolais, Champagnes and selections from the Rhône. There’s a duck feast for two to four, lots of terrines and charcuterie, and even a vegetarian dish from the rotisserie. As at Atrium Dumbo, this dining room has a wall of plants: 151 Atlantic Avenue (Clinton Street), Brooklyn Heights, 718-855-3158, beastsandbottles.com.

Metrograph Commissary The food at screenings of golden oldies and other films at this plush new cinema is not everyday popcorn and soda. A 45-seat skylit restaurant run by Henry Rich, an owner of Rucola and June, serves new American food prepared by Dennis Spina, who was at Roebling Tea Room. Norberto Piattoni, who was Francis Mallmann’s chef de cuisine, is the consultant. There’s also a lounge, bars and a private dining room. (Opens Thursday): 7 Ludlow Street (Canal Street), 212-660-0312, metrograph.com.

Don Muang Airport Zachary Mexico and Billy Jones, who own Baby’s All Right, a showcase for bands and entertainment, have carved out an area in the space for this Thai restaurant. The consulting chef, Jarrett Wrisley, owns Soul Food Mahanakorn in Bangkok. The chef, Michael Sablan, who was at Mission Chinese Food, will run the operation day to day. There will be serious Thai dishes like green curry fried rice, spicy larb and pulled pork in khao soi coconut curry, along with a burger. (Monday): 146 Broadway (Bedford Avenue), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-599-5800, donmuangairportbk.com.

Izi The renovation of the Blue Fin space in the W New York Times Square hotel has given the ground floor over to an izakaya-style Japanese restaurant with sushi and sashimi, bar snacks, poké bowls and Korean double-fried chicken. Blue Fin is on the second floor. (Thursday): 1567 Broadway (47th Street), 212-918-1405, izinewyork.com.

The Landing The spacious restaurant, lounge and private dining areas offer bruschettas, salads, pasta and sandwiches. The chef is Adam Shepard, who was at Lunetta in Boerum Hill: Industry City, Building 2, 220 36th Street (Second Avenue), Sunset Park, Brooklyn, 347-417-8483.

Bear Restaurant Natasha Pogrebinsky has closed her Eastern European spot in Astoria, Queens, and is cooking at Starlight, 596 Grand Avenue (Lorimer Street), in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. She said she may look for a new, permanent location for Bear.

Kitchit Brendan Marshall and Ian Ferguson have shut down their Internet-based dinner service after five years, saying the reason was a “lack of funding.”

Red Stixs The Chinese restaurant that replaced Chin Chin in Midtown has closed; the original in the Hamptons will not open this season either.

Atla Enrique Olvera, the much-lauded Mexican chef, will open a second New York restaurant, with about 60 seats and more informal than Cosme, in early fall: 372 Lafayette Street (Great Jones Street).

Gjelina and Gjusta This restaurant and bakery cafe from Travis Lett, Fran Camaj and Shelley Armistead, who run the popular places by the same names in Venice, Calif., will move into in a two-story space around the end of the year. Ken Friedman and April Bloomfield are helping the owners navigate the complexities of opening in New York: 45 Bond Street (Bowery).

Sugarfish by Sushi Nozawa The Southern California sushi chain owned by Kazunori Nozawa and Jerry A. Greenberg is to open in New York around the end of the year in the space that is currently the Moore Brothers Wine Company. The shop lost its lease and is moving this summer to the Industry City complex in Sunset Park, Brooklyn: 33 East 20th Street.


