


OTTAWA — A court-ordered deadline and a parliamentary showdown have combined to leave most of Canada without any law governing physician-assisted suicide as of Tuesday.

The Liberal government led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau introduced a bill in mid-April that would add Canada to a list of countries that allow people to end their lives with the help of physicians under some circumstances.

Canada’s Supreme Court prompted the new legislation by overturning criminal laws banning assisted suicide last year before Mr. Trudeau took office.

The court originally gave Mr. Trudeau’s Conservative predecessor, Stephen Harper, a deadline of Feb. 6 to replace the old law. Mr. Trudeau asked for more time, and the court gave him another four months, or until midnight Monday. But the government’s efforts to meet that deadline were stymied by resistance in the House of Commons and, now, in the country’s unelected Senate, creating a legal void.

Several doctors have announced that they will proceed with offering assisted suicide to patients despite the absence of any formal system beyond a mix of various guidelines from provincial regulatory bodies. (Quebec has already passed its own assisted dying law.)

Jane Philpott, the health minister who is also a doctor, said on Monday that the legal limbo leaves doctors with insufficient guidance and support, and potentially at legal risk.

“Doctors may have inadequate protection, and I expect in these early days many physicians will be extremely reluctant to provide assistance to patients wanting medical assistance in dying,” she said in a speech at a health care conference in Ottawa. “We will have a patchwork approach to protection of the vulnerable, as safeguards vary across the country.”

Though there are lawmakers in the House of Commons and the Senate who strongly oppose assisted suicide, the greatest resistance to the bill has come from lawmakers who argue that it does not go far enough to fulfill the court’s requirements. It would allow assisted suicide only for adults with a “serious and incurable illness,” which has brought them “enduring physical or psychological suffering,” and whose natural death is “reasonably foreseeable.”

Among other things, many of the bill’s opponents want assisted suicide to be available to anyone with an illness or handicap that causes intolerable suffering, even if it is not likely to kill the person in the near future.

Dr. Philpott has said that the bill was the best that the government could do within the court’s deadline and she has promised a public review to consider additional measures later.

The Liberals’ attempts to push the bill through the House of Commons led, in part, to a tussle that saw Mr. Trudeau grabbing a member of the Conservative opposition by the arm and accidentally elbowing a female legislator.

The Senate may vote on the bill by the end of the week. But if it adds amendments, which appears likely, the legislation would be further delayed. However, the Senate, which enjoys little public popularity, cannot overrule the elected House of Commons.

Carissima Mathen, who teaches constitutional and criminal law at the University of Ottawa, said that a great deal of ambiguity will surround the status of assisted suicide with the disappearance of the old law. But she added that the court’s decision did not appear to allow anyone, aside from physicians, to help people end their lives.

“I find it very hard to believe that the court would have allowed that without clarity,” she said.


