


The special elections on Tuesday for the seats formerly held by Dean G. Skelos and Sheldon Silver, the two state legislative leaders who were forced to depart Albany after being convicted on corruption charges last year, were supposed to be a test of how long a shadow corruption could cast on a race.

In the end, voters seemed to return a mixed verdict. Todd D. Kaminsky, a Democratic Assemblyman and former federal corruption prosecutor who billed his campaign as a mission to clean up Albany from the inside, had a slight edge in the race for Mr. Skelos’s former State Senate seat on the South Shore of Long Island; his win could help Democrats wrest control of the Senate from Republicans.

But in Mr. Silver’s old Assembly district in Lower Manhattan, voters chose Alice Cancel, a Democrat, who eked out a win over Yuh-Line Niou, a Working Families Party candidate who had pegged Ms. Cancel as a creature of Mr. Silver’s machine.

If Mr. Kaminsky’s small lead over Christopher T. McGrath, the Republican, holds up, the Democrats would take a numerical majority in the State Senate, which Republicans currently hold by the leanest of margins. But true Democratic control of the chamber depends on several other factors, including whether a group of five breakaway Democrats, who have often aligned with Republicans in recent years, will agree to rejoin the fold.

Mr. Kaminsky’s campaign weapons included robocalls on Election Day from President Obama and, earlier, from Mel Brooks, a great-uncle. But he seemed to be faltering, with the most recent poll showing him eight points behind.

And while Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat who has at times seemed to prefer working with a Republican Senate, said he supported Mr. Kaminsky, following up with the maximum $11,000 donation from his re-election coffers, he did not campaign for him.

Saying little about ethics reforms or Mr. Skelos, Mr. McGrath focused instead on local issues and gained a long list of union endorsements. He announced that he planned to keep his job as a lawyer after taking office, drawing a contrast with Mr. Kaminsky, who said banning outside income for legislators was crucial to stamping out corruption.

Mr. McGrath’s campaign said late Tuesday night that the race was too close to call, but Mr. Kaminsky declared victory; he had 50 percent to Mr. McGrath’s 49 percent, with all precincts reporting. Only 780 votes separated the two.

“This election was about bringing new leadership to Albany,” Mr. Kaminsky said in a statement. “I promise to work nonstop to reform Albany and finally end the corrupt status quo.”

In the deep-blue district Mr. Silver ruled for decades, spanning a shrinking Jewish domain on the Lower East Side, the growing sprawl of Chinatown, a burgeoning Hispanic constituency and the educated-professional precincts of Battery Park City, Ms. Cancel’s victory seemed assured after a group of local Democrats chose her as their nominee. Yet she was under pressure from the start, refusing to disavow Mr. Silver even as observers of the nominating process noted that several of the ex-Assembly speaker’s allies had helped her win the nomination.

Against that backdrop, Ms. Niou gained attention by dropping out of contention for the Democratic nomination to protest the process, though some local Democrats accused her of withdrawing only after it became clear she could not win. Running instead as the candidate of the left-leaning Working Families Party, Ms. Niou positioned herself as a reformer who would break with Mr. Silver’s brand of politics, earning the bulk of the endorsements and donations in the race.

But it was not enough to overtake Ms. Cancel, a longtime resident of the area who has been active in tenant issues, who won 39 percent to 34 percent, with the rest of the vote split among other candidates.

“All the mailings, all the negative things that went out, I think that none of that worked, because the community knew who I was,” Ms. Cancel said in an interview on Tuesday evening. “The community spoke. Their voices were heard today.”

Both seats — along with every other seat in the State Legislature — will be up for grabs again in the fall, granting Democrats a shot at more Senate seats. (The Assembly, which is dominated by Democrats, has little chance of flipping to Republicans.) Ms. Niou and several of the other hopefuls for the Democratic nomination in the Lower Manhattan seat have said that they will run again in the fall.

Two other Assembly contests were also decided Tuesday evening, with Jaime Williams, a Democrat, prevailing over Jeffrey Ferretti, a Republican, in South Brooklyn. Ronald Castorina, Jr., a Republican, ran unopposed for a Staten Island Assembly seat.


