


LAWRENCE TOWNSHIP, N.J. — Donald J. Trump spoke beneath nine chandeliers on Thursday, exulting in the company of “so many wiseguys.”

Trump headwear topped visitors’ well-moussed hair. One admirer boasted of fashioning a lamp out of an empty bottle of Trump Vodka.

Mr. Trump was in New Jersey. But Hillary Clinton was on his mind.

“You talk about bad judgment. How bad a judgment is the email scandal?” he told hundreds of attendees inside an armory here, where Gov. Chris Christie, a top Trump supporter, helped convene a fund-raiser Thursday night to retire his own campaign debt.

“It’s always the same with her and it’s always the same with them,” Mr. Trump said of the Clinton family. “For her to be able to continue to run is an absolute disgrace, in my opinion, to this country.”

Mr. Trump’s escalation of hostilities with the Clintons has moved apace for weeks since he wrapped up the Republican nomination, zipping gleefully from Mrs. Clinton’s résumé to her husband’s sexual indiscretions and back again.

Yet as the presumptive Republican nominee continued his offensive, Mrs. Clinton was left on Thursday to scrap on two fronts, sitting for an unusually forceful interview to address the boiling anger in her own party among supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.

Despite recent primary wins by Mr. Sanders, his path to the party’s nomination appears mathematically impossible, a fact Mrs. Clinton sought to make clear in an interview with CNN.

“I will be the nominee of our party,” she said. “There is no way I won’t be.”

The Sanders campaign quickly seized on the remarks.

“In the past three weeks voters in Indiana, West Virginia and Oregon respectfully disagreed with Secretary Clinton,” a Sanders spokesman, Michael Briggs, said in a statement. “We expect voters in the remaining eight contests also will disagree.”

Mr. Briggs alluded to polls showing Mr. Sanders faring better than Mrs. Clinton against Mr. Trump, which he said made clear that “millions of Americans have growing doubts about the Clinton campaign.”

In her interview, Mrs. Clinton also took aim at Mr. Trump, calling him unqualified for the presidency and “unmoored” on matters of foreign policy.

She declined to respond to Mr. Trump’s attacks on her husband, Bill Clinton, including in an interview with Fox News this week in which Mr. Trump reminded viewers of a decades-old rape allegation against the former president.

“I think people can judge his campaign for what it is,” Mrs. Clinton said. “I’m going to run my campaign.”

In his remarks Thursday night, Mr. Trump largely steered clear of Mr. Clinton, limiting his ribbing to the news media, President Obama, long-departed competitors Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio and — it seemed — the weight of Mr. Christie, to name a few targets.

“I’m not eating Oreos anymore,” Mr. Trump said, repeating an oft-used attack against the cookie’s parent company over plans to move some production to Mexico. “Neither is Chris!”

As supporters requested some greatest hits — “Build the wall!” they shouted at one point, before he came out — Mr. Trump returned to another familiar theme: antagonizing the Chinese government and existing trade policies.

“Who the hell cares if there’s a trade war?” he asked, arguing that current arrangements had harmed the United States anyway. Cheers soon filled the space, where a model cannon in back was pointed at the stage as he spoke.

The event, along with a fund-raiser for Long Island Republicans a week earlier, forced Mr. Trump to flex muscles he has used sparingly over the years, and never for himself.

He has hosted fund-raisers for party committees and has written checks, but he has never been forced to entertain and dazzle donors whose support he badly needs.

Regular admission to the armory event was $200, intended to help Mr. Christie retire hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign obligations. News media credentials did not bear familiar Trump campaign logos or slogans. “Paid for by Chris Christie for President,” they read instead.

The gathering also came amid internal shuffling in Mr. Trump’s campaign organization. Earlier in the day, the campaign said that Paul Manafort, the veteran Republican operative he hired in March, would be the campaign chairman and chief strategist, lending a measure of clarity to the chain of command.

Corey Lewandowski, who has been the campaign manager since Mr. Trump entered the race, will retain the title, according to Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump. She added that Mr. Manafort and Mr. Lewandowski would continue to work together on many aspects of the campaign.

On Thursday night, Mr. Christie assumed the role of chief Trump deputy, earning a warm reception amid recent polls suggesting New Jerseyans have an ever-dimming view of him.

“We’ve been friends with Donald Trump for 14 years. We know him well,” he said, recalling a conversation with his wife about whether to endorse. “And I said to Mary Pat, ‘We never, ever make a mistake by standing with your friend.’”

Moments later, Mr. Trump took the stage with an announcement: Mr. Christie, he said, had paid off his entire campaign debt.


