


The choreographer Mark Morris, who has long been drawn to the arts and culture of India, has programmed a 10-part series exploring the music and dance of South India that will form the centerpiece of this fall’s White Light Festival, Lincoln Center announced Thursday.

The series will include performances by Bombay Jayashri, who trained as a Carnatic vocalist and became internationally known for the lullaby she sang in Ang Lee’s 2012 film, “Life of Pi”; and the all-male Kerala Kalamandalam Kathakali Troupe performing an elaborately costumed dance drama.

There will also be a concert by the percussionist V. Selvaganesh, and the Mark Morris Dance Group will perform two works inspired by India, “O Rangasayee” from 1984 and “Serenade” from 2003, as well as the premiere of a new work set to music by Terry Riley.

The festival, which was announced by Jane Moss, Lincoln Center’s artistic director, will include 41 performances in 10 venues over the course of a month.

It will open Oct. 16 with Simon Halsey conducting the Rundfunkchor Berlin in the United States premiere of “Human Requiem,” an interpretation of Brahms’s “Ein deutsches Requiem” conceived and staged by Jochen Sandig and arranged by Phillip Moll for two pianists. The intimate choral work will be performed at Synod House at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, with the soprano Marlis Petersen and the baritone Konrad Jarnot as the soloists.

It will also include the return of an innovative production of Monteverdi’s opera “Il ritorno d’Ulisse” (“The Return of Ulysses”) by the South African artist William Kentridge and with puppetry from the Handspring Puppet Company, which appeared in the play “War Horse.” The festival will also have Gianandrea Noseda leading the London Symphony Orchestra in Verdi’s Requiem, which has already been announced; a new work by the Liz Gerring Dance Company; and a performance of Samuel Beckett’s radio play “All That Fall” by Ireland’s Pan Pan Theater.

The festival will close Nov. 16 with the pianist Jeremy Denk playing music from medieval times through the present day.


