


In a year when the Academy Awards were battered by #OscarsSoWhite, Broadway touted its most diverse season in history, which culminated with nonwhite actors winning all four awards for performances in musicals at the Tony Awards on June 12.

But for female playwrights, the season seemed like business as usual: Of the nine new plays produced on Broadway this year, two were written by women — the same as in 2015. One of those, Danai Gurira’s “Eclipsed,” was originally produced Off Broadway at the Public Theater.

Enter the Los Angeles-based collective the Kilroys, which is back with its third annual list of plays by female and transgender writers that are worthy of production — its own way of answering the perennial complaint about a group of writers underrepresented in theater.

Carla Ching, a playwright and one of the 13 members of the Kilroys, said in an interview that she has been keeping an eye on theater companies’ season announcements recently, and “there are plenty of theaters that have predominantly male seasons.”

“We are far from parity,” she added.

The list, which was released on Tuesday, includes 32 plays that were selected from a survey of 230 theater professionals, such as artistic directors, producers, directors and dramaturges. Only plays that have never been produced were eligible for inclusion. (In previous years, plays were allowed to have been mounted either once or an unrestricted amount of times.)

Several of the playwrights, however, have been given prominent New York showings, including Sarah Burgess, whose “Dry Powder” ran at the Public Theater, and Martyna Majok, whose “Ironbound” was produced by the Women’s Project Theater and Rattlestick Playwrights Theater. Her play on the Kilroys list, “Cost of Living,’’ will be presented at the Williamstown Theater Festival this summer, and then Off Broadway.

Like “Eclipsed,” several plays on the list look at women in, or from, Africa, including “Good Grief” by Ngozi Anyanwu and “School Girls; or the African Mean Girls Play” by Jocelyn Bioh. And two playwrights, Rachel Bonds and Jen Silverman, each have two of plays on the list.

Ms. Ching said the list gives a noticeable boost to playwrights — herself included. Last year she was named among the Kilroys’ honorable mentions, which she said helped get her work read by Playwrights Horizons, a nonprofit theater company in New York.

The 2014 and 2015 lists included a total of 99 plays; more than 100 productions of those titles have either been mounted or planned since the first list came out. (Some plays have received multiple productions.) It is unclear how many resulted from promotion by the Kilroys, Ms. Ching said.


