


BEIJING — A court in eastern China has sided with the prosecutors suing a local environmental agency for failing to adequately punish an industrial polluter, according to the country’s top prosecuting agency.

Last year, when the case was filed under a national pilot program, the agency, the Supreme People’s Procuratorate, described it as China’s first “administrative public interest litigation case.” Administrative law encompasses lawsuits filed against officials accused of not doing their job properly.

Rampant environmental degradation and the corruption of local officials are of great concern to ordinary people across China. Many are aware that safeguards against pollution of the air, water and soil have been failing for decades, and that their health is suffering as a result.

The pilot program was set up so that prosecutors could help ensure that local environmental protection bureaus aggressively punished polluters.

The case in eastern China, whose verdict was announced on Monday, was filed in December by prosecutors in Qingyun County in Shandong Province. They accused the local environmental protection bureau of not acting forcefully enough against the Qingshun Chemical Technology Company, which in 2014 was found to have produced dyes without proper environmental safety measures. The announcement did not specify how the chemical company was punished.

Also in December, the Supreme People’s Procuratorate announced that local prosecutors had the power to sue any entity, apparently including government agencies, that engaged in behavior tied to environmental pollution or unsafe food.

“This is part of an expansion in recent years of the authority for regulators, courts, citizens, police and prosecutors to take on the country’s severe environmental problems,” said Alex L. Wang, a law professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, who studies Chinese environmental law and regulation.

However, he said, “we can’t be sure that this newfound supervisory power will become an effective regulatory tool in the long term.”

“We have too many past examples of local authorities clamoring to be the first example of this or that new innovation only to never see a second case,” he added.

“Procuratorates need to build internal expertise in environmental cases,” he said. “State attorney general offices and the Department of Justice, for example, have special environmental divisions.”

The announcement on Monday did not indicate how the local environmental bureau would be punished. It said the bureau had carried out “corrective measures” during the litigation period.

A state news media report in April said that the Supreme People’s Court had accepted 12 such cases. In January, a court in Guizhou Province ruled in favor of local prosecutors who had sued a county environmental protection bureau over claims of a lack of proper oversight over seven companies discharging untreated wastewater into rivers. The court ordered the bureau to “carry out its supervisory duties,” according to one report.

Rachel Stern, a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley, said the case in Shandong showed prosecutors “tiptoeing into more sensitive territory by suing the local government.”

“The question for the future is whether prosecutors begin routinely suing local E.P.B.s,” she said, referring to environmental protection bureaus. “It is also worth watching to see if prosecutors ever dare sue E.P.B.s above the county level. The lowest rungs of government are always the easiest to criticize, and it will be noteworthy if prosecutors start holding higher-level officials accountable for environmental protection.”


