


Cowboys: Don DeLillo’s 16th novel, “Zero K,” enters the hardcover fiction list at No. 13. In a recent Q. and A. with The Los Angeles Times, DeLillo counted the book among the three most significant of his career. (The others were also best sellers: “Libra” spent five weeks on the list in 1988, and “Underworld” had a 10-week run in 1997-98.) DeLillo is well known for his attention to the music and even the visual appearance of his sentences: “The words typed on the white page have a sculptural quality,” he told The Paris Review in 1993. But to judge from his interview with The Los Angeles Times, this devotion to craft doesn’t extend to shoptalk with writer friends. “When I talk to novelists, we tend to talk about movies,” he said. “It’s true. It’s much easier to talk about. I just don’t talk much about my work with other writers, and I don’t talk much about their work. A few sentences. We’re like two characters in an old western movie in which the main element, the main audio element is to be very laconic. That’s what happens when I talk about writing with other writers.”

Fast Food: Money may not buy love, but it does come in handy for humbler cravings. Pizza, for instance. According to Philip Norman’s biography “Paul McCartney: The Life,” new at No. 14 on the hardcover nonfiction list, McCartney once used some of his Beatles fortune to order a particular New York pizza he wanted delivered. To England. On the Concorde. McCartney’s representatives did not respond to a request for comment on how much he tipped the pilot.

Huttslayer: The latest novel from the “Star Wars” universe — Claudia Gray’s “Bloodline,” No. 5 in its first week on the hardcover fiction list — puts Princess Leia front and center, tracking her life in the decades between “Return of the Jedi” and “The Force Awakens.” Among other things, it reveals that Leia is known in some quarters as “The Huttslayer,” revered for killing the enormous sluglike villain Jabba the Hutt. “Think about it,” Gray told Entertainment Weekly. “For a human being to kill a Hutt with her bare hands? That’s unbelievable. Anybody who would be able to pull that off would be remembered for it. That would be legend.”

The President and the King: The former Secret Service agent Clint Hill is best known for his presence at John F. Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas. But Hill remained in the service for years after that, and — as he recounts in “Five Presidents,” written with Lisa McCubbin and new on the hardcover nonfiction list at No. 9 — he was on hand for another indelible moment, when Elvis Presley offered his services to President Nixon. “He thought he could do a good job helping the United States government deal with the drug problem,” Hill told People magazine. “So he thought it would be a good idea if they would make him a special agent.” Nixon demurred but gave him a souvenir badge. “He went away happy,” Hill said.


