


A new deal between Yogi Berra’s estate and Steiner Sports Marketing raises a question often asked after a celebrity dies: How potent will his name continue to be?

“That’s a good question,” Tim Berra, one of Yogi’s three sons, said by telephone Tuesday. “We’re trying to see what’s still there. But he has some advantages: He’s a great Yankee, he’s well known outside the athletic genre, and he’s beloved by everybody.”

Berra, who died last September at 90, was a 10-time World Series champion with the Yankees and a Baseball Hall of Famer. He endorsed products as varied as Yoo-hoo chocolate drink and Aflac insurance and dispensed quotations imbued with a cockeyed sort of wisdom. One of the last major links to the dynastic Yankees era that stretched from the late 1940s to the mid-1960s, he also assumed heroic stature for avoiding Yankee Stadium for 14 years after the team owner George Steinbrenner sent an underling to fire him as manager in 1985.

Berra’s commercial appeal led his sons to form LTD Enterprises about 20 years ago to oversee his autographing and sponsorship efforts.

“Dad was naïve and humble, and he was taken advantage of by agents and people in his life, signing baseballs for $15 each when guys like Mantle and Mays got $100,” Dale Berra said.

He added, “We created the company to protect him.”

In assessing the Yogi business, the Berra sons looked to Steiner to perpetuate the legacy of a man who could no longer appear at Old-Timers’ Day or write another book of sayings to maintain his profile.

“Our main goal is to keep my dad’s name around,” Tim Berra said.

The agreement announced Monday gives Steiner the exclusive rights to market Berra’s name and likeness and the rights to sell remaining pieces of his collection of memorabilia, including his 1953 World Series championship ring and several of his player contracts.

None of the personal memorabilia on display at the Yogi Berra Museum and Learning Center in Little Falls, N.J. — which, as much as anything, is part of his legacy — will be sold by Steiner.

Steiner’s focus will be on licensing the Berra’s name to products like apparel, food, posters and trading cards. Tim Berra said the plan was to create events that would promote the Berra name.

Extending a celebrity’s reputation and brand after his or her death is well-worn ground. A company like CMG Worldwide represents and markets dozens of deceased stars in advertising and marketing deals, including Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Ella Fitzgerald and Ingrid Bergman. And Berra still registers well on the Davie-Brown Index, which measures a celebrity’s influence on consumers. His consumer awareness is equal to Mia Hamm’s and Usain Bolt’s.

“He’s popular with Yankee fans and nonsports fans, and we’re going to match his name to the companies that make sense,” Steiner said.


