


As you read this episode, dear readers, keep in mind: The Haggler does not set out to annoy anyone. He does not hope that people will shout at him. Honest.

Q. My husband ordered a pet door from a company in California called SureGuard. He paid $419 plus $45 for UPS shipping. The door arrived damaged in a damaged box. We called SureGuard, and a representative there told us to call UPS. The box was picked up and presumably sent back to SureGuard.

SureGuard said it never arrived. UPS said it had reached a “resolution” with the company, which it would not discuss. At one point, a guy at SureGuard said he would just take the loss and credit our PayPal account, but that was months ago and he never did. Now he won’t return calls or emails. I have been trying to get my money back, or a pet door, for more than a year.

Can you help?

JOY COHEN, NEW ORLEANS

A. The Haggler left a few messages for SureGuard, which is in Rancho Dominguez, Calif. Three days later, a man named Jason said he would be happy to take care of Ms. Cohen’s issue, though he hastened to add that SureGuard was not the company that manufactured the door.

Hmm. Maybe the Haggler should talk to the owners of the doggy door factory.

“We know the people who run the company,” Jason said, amiably. “They’re actually friends of ours.”

The Haggler has never obtained a refund for a consumer from a company other than the one that made the product. So he asked for clarifications.

“We’re SureGuard,” Jason explained. “They’re a doggy door factory.”

O.K. What is the name of this company?

There was a brief pause.

“Doggy Door Factory.”

Perfect name. And where is the company located?

“Whittier,” he said. “We work hand in hand with them. They work right by our factory. Next door.”

Got it. So who owns Doggy Door Factory?

There was a rustling sound, as though someone had grabbed the phone. A different voice came on. By “different” the Haggler means “angry.” Very angry, actually.

“Do you want a doggy door or not?” the man yelled.

The Haggler was momentarily taken aback by the change of tone. He explained that he was calling on someone else’s behalf and didn’t have a dog, let alone the need for a dog-size door. He then explained that he was simply trying to figure out the relationship between SureGuard and Doggy Door Factory.

“Doesn’t matter, the relationship!” the yelling man yelled. “Does this woman want a doggy door or not?”

The Haggler said he would inquire. He wanted to ask this man’s name, but didn’t get the chance.

“Why didn’t she do a chargeback a year ago?” Angry Guy said. “Makes no sense. If she wants to go down this road, she doesn’t have a leg to stand on.”

The Haggler was still trying to make sense of the conversation. (What road?) As he did, he suggested that the Angry Guy’s tone was surprisingly truculent.

“Well, you’re asking questions that are stupid!” he retorted. “You bought a doggy door from Doggy Door Factory. It’s like you calling me and asking me about Baskin-Robbins. Do you want a doggy door or do you want to buy ice cream?”

This analogy surely made perfect sense in the mind of Angry Man. To hazard a guess, it has something to do with SureGuard being a maker of windows, not doggy doors. As such, questions about doors are necessarily inane. Or something like that.

As it happens, there is a company in California called Doggy Door Factory. But Ms. Cohen’s husband ordered from a company called the Pet Door Factory through a website that is no longer active. The site, petdoorfactory.com, was registered by Richard Crouley in 2012, according to domain records. When Mr. Cohen paid for the door, he sent money via PayPal to the account of Rick Crouley, who is listed on SureGuard’s website as the company’s president.

The Haggler was still curious as to why the person on the phone was so irate.

Here, a clear answer was given.

“We think the customer has the doggy door and just wants the money, too,” the angry voice said.

Now we were getting somewhere. The people at SureGuard were suggesting that they had never received the damaged pet door when it was picked up in New Orleans for return by UPS. So the company is under the impression that it is the victim of a flimflammer — in particular, a woman who has a doggy door and now wants her money, too.

The Haggler promised to investigate. The point of this column isn’t to help anyone perpetrate fraud.

A UPS spokeswoman, Susan Rosenberg, said that UPS never picked up the damaged box, let alone returned it to SureGuard. But an employee at UPS contacted Ms. Cohen this week — prompted perhaps by the Haggler’s inquiries — and told her the damaged box had indeed been picked up from Ms. Cohen’s home, inspected, and then returned to Ms. Cohen.

Why would UPS return the damaged box? As a souvenir? Superb questions. Ms. Cohen, however, says she never saw the box again. Whatever happened, UPS has decided as a good will gesture to send Ms. Cohen a check for $100 plus the $45 spent on shipping.

But to SureGuard’s perfectly valid question: Why didn’t Ms. Cohen seek a chargeback through PayPal?

In emails, Ms. Cohen said that Rick Crouley gave her a number of assurances, over the course of months, that this issue would be resolved. At one point, he offered to refund her money. At a later point, she said, he stopped returning calls. By the time she realized that she was getting neither a doggy door nor $419, it was too late to get a PayPal refund.

Asked by the Haggler last week if she preferred a refund or a doggy door, Ms. Cohen opted for the latter. In an email, Mr. Crouley said he would send one in a matter of days.

Updates to come.


