


WHEN the Kia brand hit American shores in the 1990s, among its first offerings was the Sportage sport utility vehicle. My brother-in-law Bob bought one then and drove 80,000 miles in three years, an admirable feat of endurance for both car and owner considering the model’s small, Spartan demeanor back then.

Now Kia’s oldest nameplate, the-fourth-generation Sportage, is far more pleasant, holding its own in a wickedly fierce segment that includes the Ford Escape, Honda CR-V and Toyota RAV4. Fans of lucha libre will especially love the Sportage’s front fascia, though others might wrestle with the face.

The third-generation Sportage was the first Kia to get the former Audi designer Peter Schreyer’s deft touch. Closely guiding this one as well, Mr. Schreyer wisely kept much of the attitude. The expensive look must have inspired the chassis engineers.

Sportage gets the improvements it needs to keep pace with the pack. Shouting is no longer needed when talking with passengers at highway velocity. The steering wheel provides feedback where there once was none. At all. A slimmer A-pillar offers improved visibility. The suspension goes from stiff and brittle to compliant and refined. Sportage is not overtly sporty, but it is quite comfortable. The suspension team deserves a raise.

The interior group merits one, too. Granted, I’m driving the top-shelf SX Turbo model that adds a cut-and-sewn dashboard with satin finish to metallic trim bits. Its retail price of $33,395 (add $1,500 for all-wheel drive) will cause those stuck in Kia’s past to choke. Understand that it’s stuffed with features and technology like heated and vented seats, heated steering wheel, a panoramic glass roof and auto braking with pedestrian detection. The vibe is near-luxury.

The same basic style and functionality can be had in base models for $24,985, albeit with less power. Most Sportages run with a 2.4-liter 4-cyliner engine turning out 181 horsepower. Truth in advertising, SX Turbo’s 2-liter engine is turbocharged, churning out 240 horses (237 in AWD trim) and 260 pound-feet of torque early in the power band. Wheel spin is eager and often launching front-wheel drive models. I suggest AWD with the turbo motor.

Gear changes are elegantly made with a six-speed automatic no matter the engine. The SX adds steering wheel paddle shifters. Getting from 0 to 60 miles an hour takes about 7.5 seconds in the turbo if you’re drag racing Nissan Rogue, Subaru Forester and sibling Hyundai Tucson.

On standard-grade gas I saw 27 miles a gallon during a 200-mile road trip. This beat the government rating of 21 city, 26 highway, a figure lower than most competitors’. The Mazda CX-5 beats the Sportage with an E.P.A. highway rating of 33 miles per gallon.

The fairly capable all-wheel-drive system adds traction, a different front fascia to improve the approach angle, and a slight bump in ground clearance to nearly 7 inches. It subtracts a couple of m.p.g.

The back seat is quite roomy for two adults, three in a pinch. Curiously, it lacks seat warmers that the Soul has. The roomier trunk has a load floor that adjusts for height. The SX gets an automatic liftgate that opens when you stand close by with the proximity key. Slick.

My brother-in-law Bob would be impressed with the 2017 Sportage. Kia has come a long way in two decades. Fuel-efficiency aside, it’s a comfortable and stylish package that can tussle in the most competitive segment the automotive arena has.


