


LONDON — Collecting fields don’t get much more rarefied than illuminated manuscripts. Once prized by the likes of the Rothschilds and America’s robber barons, these exquisite products of medieval monastic life now sell for fractions of the telephone-number prices paid for contemporary art stars like Twombly and Basquiat.

But Christie’s, at least, is hoping to revive the appeal of these historic objects. On Wednesday in London, the auction house held a sale of more than 30 medieval manuscripts from the family collection of Maurice Burrus, a French-Swiss tobacco and railroad magnate and renowned stamp collector, who died in 1959.

The pick of the Burrus manuscripts was a late 15th-century compilation of French verse that included Alain Chartier’s contributions to the cycle “La Belle Dame sans Mercy,” which inspired Keats’s 1819 poem of the same title. It had a presale estimate of 1.5 million to 2.5 million pounds, or about $2.2 million to $3.5 million.

Chartier’s poem “L’Excusation,” the literary gem of the manuscript, put a new spin on the culture of so-called courtly love, from which so many of the romantic conventions of Western society have derived. Chartier’s Belle Dame, unlike other medieval heroines, rejects the overtures of her knightly suitor, protesting: “Je suis france et france vueil estre” (I am free and free I want to be).

Lest anyone admire her proto-feminist independence, another poet, Achille Caulier, ends the manuscript’s cycle by condemning “La Belle Dame” to death. One of eight large illuminations by the Dunois Master shows her leaving court, demoted, as the poem recounts, to Cruel Woman from Beautiful Lady.

“Chartier is the Dante of France,” said Eugenio Donadoni, a specialist in medieval and renaissance manuscripts at Christie’s book department. “Secular texts in the vernacular that are so wonderfully illustrated are very rare.”

Christie’s, like a lot of companies in the art world, is trying to come up with new ways to sell old things. The 39 Burrus manuscripts were combined with examples of the first four collected editions of Shakespeare’s works to be printed, capitalizing on the 400th anniversary of his death.

A temporary salesroom was created with theatrically lit display cases and Armani-black walls that could make a contemporary art collector feel at ease. “Modernism meets medieval — that’s the way to do it,” Mr. Donadoni said before the sale. “We want to dispel the myth that illuminated manuscripts are attractive just to book types. We want people to appreciate them as objects.”

At the sale, once a newly unearthed 1623 Shakespeare First Folio had sold for £1.9 million and the three later folio editions had sold for a total of £605,000, the audience thinned to about 50 hard-core medieval manuscript enthusiasts.

Unfortunately for Burrus’s heirs, the Chartier manuscript failed to sell. The well-thumbed state of the pages had been noted by specialist buyers, for whom condition is crucial.

The Burrus collection raised £2.2 million with fees, considerably below the presale estimate of £3.1 million, but all but three of the manuscripts found buyers. An agent in the room gave a top price of £470,500 for a late 15th-century history of France with a Burgundian royal provenance and illustrations by the so-called Master of the Chronique Scandaleuse. It had been estimated at £200,000 to £300,000.

Half a dozen less exceptional late 15th-century French and Flemish manuscripts sold for between £20,000 and £35,000 each.

“The sale had its ups and downs, but the market loves fresh material,” said Richard A. Linenthal, a London dealer who paid what he described as a “bargain” price of £92,500 for a 12th-century book of Gospels from southern France. “This is a specialized field. It’s not a huge market.”

The current auction high for an illuminated manuscript is $13.6 million, paid at Christie’s in New York in January 2014 for a circa 1510 Flemish Book of Hours formerly owned by the Rothschild family. That was slightly less than the $13.9 million paid this month in New York for a middling quality 1990 Christopher Wool word painting.

But most art buyers now are looking for “wall power” rather than rarity and refinement, so contemporary art continues to dominate most price and quality levels, even though demand is not what it was in 2014.

Sales at the Art16 fair at Olympia in west London, which closed on May 22, pointed to that dominance — and also the extent to which the market has cooled.

Aimed primarily at London’s wealthy international population, the contemporary fair included 91 galleries from more than 30 countries, down from the 134 who exhibited last year.

Most works tended to be priced at under £50,000. Business was sluggish at the Thursday night preview — as it has been at contemporary art fairs this year — but the London gallery Rook & Raven did sell out their booth of new works by the South African artist Lionel Smit, who was born in 1982.

A favorite of London financiers, Mr. Smit paints characterful African faces with expressionist flourishes, and he has a relatively modest resale auction high of $31,000, according to the database Artnet. At the preview, Rook & Raven sold two large and two medium-sized paintings, respectively priced at £35,000 and £23,000 each, to buyers from India, South Africa and Britain, according to Aretha Campbell, director of the gallery.

That also happens to be the price range of quite a few of the Burrus lots sold at Christie’s. An entire 15th-century illuminated book selling for the same price as a new painting by a mid-caliber contemporary artist might seem to show the skewed values of today’s art market.

But, as Mr. Donadoni, the auction house specialist, said, potential buyers of something as old and rarefied — and as small — as a medieval manuscript are often stalled by one simple question.

“What do I do with it?”


