


On Saturday night, Beyoncé released her new album, “Lemonade,” and in an HBO special gave the premiere of an hourlong conceptual short film based on its music. In our Popcast, Jon Caramanica, a pop music critic for The New York Times; Wesley Morris, The Times’s critic at large; and Jenna Wortham and Nikole Hannah-Jones, both staff writers for The New York Times Magazine, discussed the album’s sound. They also talked about the personal nature of the film and the tracks (which focus on marital strife and, eventually, reconciliation) and the ways Beyoncé is developing into an increasingly political artist. Here are edited excerpts from their conversation:

JON CARAMANICA I think from a musical perspective, the most interesting transition on this album is that Beyoncé is no longer a genre artist. When she was at her conventional pop peak — not her fame peak, which I would say is probably now — but her pop peak in terms of chart success, which is five years ago maybe, you could say she’s a pop-leaning R&B artist; she’s a genre artist. But this is a Beyoncé album. This is its own stand-alone thing. It has country, it has funk, it has New Orleans jazz. She has elevated beyond genre boxes and I think that’s part of why the narrative feels so much more specific this time around. Even if you were trying to dig out clues on the last album, you would say these are stories within a genre framework. And now I feel like this arrives number one, without a genre framework and number two, with the receipts.

WESLEY MORRIS For me, the thing that’s fascinating about this project is that she is thinking beyond herself. She is connecting her pain to the pain of millions of other women.

NIKOLE HANNAH-JONES Now let’s be specific: black women. This was a very specific, particular type of femininity and type of struggle with love and she makes it very clear. You look at every woman who is in the video, you look at the African influences, when she shows the mothers of young black men who have been killed by police — they’re all wearing African adornment, every last one of them. The Malcolm X quote she includes talks about black women being the most disrespected, unprotected women. This is a very particular type of womanhood and a very particular experience. It makes me think of when Zora Neale Hurston said black women are the mules of the world. She’s showing that the very backbone of the community is the one that is being most hurt and disrespected, which I thought was amazing. And that the expectation of loss, that you will find loss and betrayal at the hands of your father, at the hands of your husband, at the hands of the police — everywhere that you look as a black woman that there is going to be that loss. And that the redemption does come from love, but it really comes from the sisterhood of other women — of all classes, because class is also a huge dynamic in the video — that that is where your sisterhood and your redemption will come from.

MORRIS People are asking what is the thing that has brought her to this point, like what’s her turning point? I mean, the same thing that’s got everybody else turned. Injustice and badness and the things that have been with us for all of these centuries. The conflation that she makes in this video of 300 years ago and right now and the close-up of that woman who’s got the scar on her forehead and the tattoo that says “Big Dreams” and that dress, oh! My eyes just welled up looking at that one face. That face and that dress with that scar and that tattoo: America.

JENNA WORTHAM I think that awakening and the vocalization of that awareness of what it means to be black in America is something we’re seeing across the board. Will you get to the point where you can no longer not say something? And I think that’s what’s happened for her, I know that’s happened for me, I feel like that’s happened for a lot of people. I think collectively she’s reflecting what everyone else is already talking about and she knows there’s an audience for it.

HANNAH-JONES Beyoncé got into this business very young and she’s also developed politically — I mean, I didn’t understand race and activism the way that I do now when I was 20 years old. I think part of it has been her maturity and part of it is where we are now. We do have a new civil rights movement. We do have people who are really examining race in a serious way that we never had in our generation, if we’re honest.

CARAMANICA When you think of what makes for the vitality of a contemporary pop star, I think what it really involves is not just putting out great records or having a great show but it’s really how aware are you of the multiple narratives that are happening around you at the same time. Are you aware of your role in American race relations? American gender relations? Are you aware of how you’re looked at on the Internet? Are you the author and the subject? Beyoncé is as good as anybody if not better than everybody in balancing all of those things and using one to feed another — understanding her role as sort of the queen of the Internet but then saying well, O.K., if that’s where I’m at I’m going to feed this nourishing information into that system and use it as my distribution system.

WORTHAM There’s also something incredibly powerful about telling your own story in 2016. That is not something that most celebrities get to do. It’s either going to be in Us Weekly, it’s going to be in the Shade Room, it’s in the comments. And this is her saying, I’m telling my story, this is my narrative, and that’s the ultimate act of agency.

CARAMANICA If you think of Jay Z and Beyoncé as the royal couple, and even when there are whispers and hints, the sort of placid royalness of them has really never been perturbed. But here she’s sort of saying yes, love is important but love is not this placid thing. Love is actually disruptive, emotionally violent, challenging and ultimately damaging.

HANNAH-JONES Destructive, right? When you think of the opening scenes where there’s fire, and this is when I realized that the hot sauce in her bag is actually a bat, which is pretty amazing. That gives it whole new meaning.

MORRIS Can I say another thing about “Formation” that occurred to me before we’re done?

CARAMANICA Wait, I wonder if it’s the same thing I thought of.

MORRIS AND CARAMANICA (in unison) “O.K. ladies, now let’s get information!”

CARAMANICA She’s saying you have to dox your man — you have to check his phone, you have to watch his every move. She laid it all out there for us two months ago, and we’re only just seeing it now.


