


René Holguin, the founder of a shop and brand called RTH, likes the scent of wood. The smell of cedar dominates one of his two locations in West Hollywood, Calif. At the other one, just next door on North La Cienega Boulevard, it’s palo santo.

Mr. Holguin is also a fan of the poncho. “A poncho is a global truth,” he said. “Every culture has their version of it.”

After having worked at Levi’s and Ralph Lauren, he never intended to start his own shop, which has a branch in Tokyo as well. But then he began making leather goods and had some success selling them. What is now the primary RTH location got its start as a workshop.

“I thought I was going to be Geppetto, making a bag a week, with my dog,” said Mr. Holguin, 50. Then he transformed the place into a showroom, dressed a few mannequins in customized jeans and, voilà, he was in business.

Leather seems to be the heart of your stores. What’s the attraction?

My dad had a boot company. I grew up around leather and leather craftsmen. I love leather, just like I love wood, in that it ages beautifully.

And these shirts, these are all your own line?

Our shirt program includes the pop-over shirt, the camp shirt, stock-tie shirt, artist shirt, long shirt and tent shirt. Everything is made here in L.A. I’m a big woven-shirt wearer. I’m not a T-shirt fan. In a collared shirt, you always look a little tidy.

This denim, is it vintage material that you have messed with?

“Customized,” is what we say. My jeans, I’ve always customized. During my time at Ralph and Levi’s, I would always take their product and customize it, because it would never fit the way I wanted. I did it for all the mannequins here, and everyone started to ask for it. People call it a drop crotch. We don’t call it that. It’s a slouch.

Why have you moved into the moisturizers and whatnot?

We’re more about scent. We made a room spray that was really for vintage textiles. Vintage always has a little mustiness, no matter how much you have it cleaned. We developed a scent to spray on the clothes in your closet and make it purified from any odor. And any juju as well.


