


In Jonathan Franzen’s “The Corrections,” published in 2001, one of the adult Lambert siblings, Gary, takes a laptop to his basement to find some information on a corporation and its founder. “Feeling a bit e-weary, fighting an e-headache, he ran a word search for earl eberle,” Franzen writes. Gary next finds a document in an S.E.C. database and hits the “Download Later button.” Then, as unattended men at subterranean computers are wont to do, Gary searches for “beautiful, nude and blond” and is treated to a series of lewd images.

E-weary and e-headache? Word search? Download Later? Fortunately for Franzen, these fin-de-millennium terms have not dimmed the reputation of his pre-9/11 novel, planted squarely in The Way We Live Now territory (or, as his critics might charge, The Way White Upper-­Middle-Class Midwesterners Live Now).

Social-realist writers like Franzen who target the bull’s-eye of contemporaneity, of course, still seek artistic timelessness. “Ulysses” is an ultraprecise document of life in Dublin on June 16, 1904, but Bloom and Stephen’s peregrinations are intended to reverberate outward in space and time. Joyce had it easier than Franzen, however, in bridging the chasm from the here and now to eternity. For starters, he began “Ulysses” nearly a decade after the events described, essentially making it a work of historical fiction; he was already aware of what had gone extinct in its ecosystem.

Also advantageous to Joyce was the epoch in which he wrote. Even for a modernist attuned to, well, what was modern, everyday technology wasn’t that hard to keep up with, evolving at a much slower clip in 1904 than in 2001, which had dial-up velocity compared with the 4G bandwidth of 2016. In Joyce’s era, paradigms shifted once in a long while (the light bulb, the automobile, the radio) and then remained generally the same, with incremental improvements. Now entire industries are disrupted overnight.

Silicon Valley-era fiction writers are in a bind. To ignore the latest quotidian technology today (at least when concerning the middle and upper classes of developed nations, as most published fiction here tends to be) is to imagine some screenless 19th-century world in which people may as well still be riding in horse-drawn buggies instead of hailing Ubers and Lyfts and, not long from now, self-driving cars. Incorporating up-to-date devices and applications, on the other hand, risks mayfly ephemerality by the time the book has been printed (or, indeed, sent to Kindles). Consider how preposterous a novel composed in 2003 would look today — or even by 2005 — if a character logged in to the now-defunct social media site Friendster to check whether he had any new “testimonials.” Movies, bearing the burden of actually showing graphics and interfaces, suffer more acute retrospective ­embarrassment.

So what’s a chronicler of the present to do? One tactic is to determine which technologies best represent the decade and also stand the greatest chance of outlasting the book’s shelf life. Facebook and Twitter, for instance, seem like safer bets to me than Snapchat and Seamless. Alternatively, one can anonymize the technology, lest it soon be replaced. Instead of having a character watching a show on Netflix or HBO Go, it might be more prudent to talk of generically “streaming” it (a term that may someday look as needlessly silly as “word search”). Many post-Pynchon writers invent their own ­futuristic-sounding tech companies and products, too, as a workaround for imminent ­oldfangledness and, perhaps, legal repercussions. But such evasions can come off as coy or phony, the same way that made-up celebrity names in fiction typically sound overdetermined and absurd — although no more overdetermined and absurd than Tom Cruise or Ke$ha.

The most radical approach, though, is to put the technology directly under one’s writerly microscope. Analyze it, situate it in a historical context, dissect and reassemble it before our eyes to make us see it — and our tech-besotted culture — anew. The result may someday look like the antiquated “e-weary,” but it’s an earnest assessment of current conditions with restricted foresight. A Gchat transcription without any attempt to understand the medium’s message is merely typo-riddled dialogue.

Or do the exact opposite. Don’t write about the newest gadget as if it’s a marvel; simply treat it as part of the backdrop, like the landline. We send texts now, a form of communication I expect will seem quaint not too far into the future. “He texted that he was running late” is sufficient. “He opened up the text-messaging application on his Apple iPhone 6 Plus and keyed into the 5.5-inch screen that he was running late” is in advertorial thrall and aesthetically ugly.

That’s a hyperbolic example, but I nearly fell into a similar trap with my new novel. I had initially written that the protagonist was watching “Internet porn.” Then I realized that few young men these days find their pornography offline and deleted “Internet.” I figure this will provide a little more durability until virtual reality repaves the pornographic landscape and the notion of someone’s being passively ­titillated by a 2-D, low-definition video is risible.

Then again, maybe deferring technological obsolescence is ultimately irrelevant for expressing Faulkner’s “old verities and truths of the heart” — and the debased ones of other organs. In “The Corrections,” Gary primitively searches the web for jpegs of nude blondes. About a century earlier, Bloom stashes away a “smutty photo” of a nun in “Ulysses,” a tame book by today’s standards that was itself banned at first in America for obscenity. Plus ça change.


