


PARIS — The French choreographer Maguy Marin, whose work “Les applaudissements ne se mange pas” is being performed by the Paris Opera Ballet, is a contentious figure in contemporary dance. Part of a fecund generation that emerged in France in the 1980s, Ms. Marin has never had an identifiable style and aesthetic. Her work, which first came to notice with the brilliant “May B” in 1981, is difficult, austere, relentless, and occasionally charming and funny.

But it has constantly evolved, and over the past decade has often precluded anything that might conventionally be called dance.

In “Umwelt” ( 2004), dancers perform random tasks between upright mirrors, occasionally stepping through them to peer at the audience. In “Ha! Ha!,” her dancers laugh to a score for an hour while bricks smash down onto seated mannequins. In “Turba” (2008), they move in a dreamlike landscape of flower-strewn tables, donning and discarding costumes and wigs while reciting texts from “On the Nature of Things” by Lucretius.

Although Ms. Marin won an international reputation for a “Cinderella” that she created for the Lyon Opera Ballet in 1985, her work has rarely migrated into the repertories of companies abroad. (On Thursday, it was announced that she had won the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement in Dance, awarded by the Venice Biennale.)

It had not even migrated into the repertory of the Paris Opera Ballet; apart from a 1987 commission from Rudolf Nureyev, “Leçons de ténèbres,” the company had not performed Ms. Marin’s work until “Les applaudissements ne se mange pas” opened at the Palais Garnier on Monday.

It’s a surprising omission, given the Paris Opera Ballet’s focus on contemporary work under Brigitte Lefèvre, who directed the company from 1995 to 2014 and brought in important choreographers like Pina Bausch, Angelin Preljocaj, Jérome Bel, Robyn Orlin and Sasha Waltz.

That has been rectified by Benjamin Millepied, who succeeded Ms. Lefèvre last year, and shocked the dance world by announcing, in February, that he would leave at the end of this season, after just 15 months. (He will be succeeded by Aurélie Dupont, a former étoile.) Mr. Millepied’s focus during his short tenure has been largely on new ballet, but he spoke at his first news conference about the importance of Ms. Marin’s work and his belief that the Opera dancers should perform it.

He was right. Wednesday’s performance of the hourlong “Les applaudissements ne se mange pas” (You Can’t Eat Applause), which runs till May 3, is tough and brilliant, an unflinching portrait of human beings surviving one another—-or not.

The work was created for the Lyon Dance Biennial in 2002, which had a Latin American theme and it evokes a world in which people are victims and oppressors, the hunted and the hunters, the dead and the living.

The title comes from writings by Edouardo Galeano, whose book “The Open Veins of Latin America” is cited in the program by Ms. Marin as the direct inspiration for the work. But there is nothing literal or specific shown on stage, where only brightly striped curtains hung on its three sides might suggest a Latino exuberance.

To a humming, grinding electronic score by Denis Mariotte, Ms. Marin’s regular musical collaborator, the performers, dressed in street clothes, repeatedly enter through these curtains, which prove to be strips of colored plastic. Sometimes these encounters are one on one, sometimes in groups. Always they stare warily, cautiously, at one another, eventually dropping their gazes. Fear leaks in. Bodies are dragged through the curtains, evoking those who have disappeared and an unknown darkness beyond.

Ordinary movements — walking, running, standing, falling — are interwoven with sweeping movements that resemble martial arts, as the dancers circle their arms around one another or fall in unison to the floor.

Ms. Marin manages to make everything feel equally naturalistic and deceptively simple. Images of execution, paralyzing fear, group obedience and numb acceptance come and go. A brief embrace is startlingly moving; the only evocation of human warmth in the hourlong work.

As the piece progresses, Ms. Marin suggests a growing tension and fear without any obvious tricks. Mr. Mariotte’s score builds and drops in volume and density; the lights dim and brighten. Sequences are repeated, and the patterns become recognizable: the ineluctable and inescapable games of power, the fear and the hope of those caught up in a world beyond their control.

All the dancers — Myriam Kamionka, Camille De Bellefon, Lucie Fenwick, Sofia Rosolini, Aurélien Houette, Alexandre Carniato, Takeru Coste and Antonin Monié — are superbly rigorous. There is no emoting, no acting in “Les applaudissements.”

Not everyone likes this. Several audience members on Wednesday were visibly irritated; one man booed loudly at the end. Nonetheless, Ms. Marin dares to show us her uncompromising truth.


