


A sprawling 14th-floor apartment at 10 Madison Square West, the Witkoff Group’s condominium conversion of a century-old showroom building at the International Toy Center, sold for $14,255,500 and was the most expensive closed sale of the week, according to city records.

The 3,309-square-foot sponsor unit, No. 14D, at Broadway and West 24th Street, overlooks Madison Square Park, with sweeping cityscape views from its oversize windows. Its monthly carrying costs total $7,546.

There are four bedrooms and four and a half baths. The large master suite, with east-facing exposures that look out at the park, contains three walk-in closets and a spalike bath with a double vanity and a soaking tub.

The apartment, with wide-plank oak floors and ceiling heights of nearly 11 feet, is entered through a foyer that leads to a sizable gallery that separates the master suite from the other en-suite bedrooms. There is also a utility closet with a side-by-side washer and dryer.

A second gallery leads to a massive 23-by-32-foot corner great room that connects to the chef’s kitchen, which has Bianco Carrara marble and SieMatic cabinets.

Kirk Rundhaug, Holly Parker and Darren Sukenik of Douglas Elliman Real Estate were the selling brokers, while Megan Duryea Scott of Stribling & Associates represented the buyer, identified as the Sweet Pea Trust.

The Witkoff Group, which developed the 125-unit luxury condominium with a subsidiary of the Vector Group, had acquired the former toy showroom, a.k.a. Toy Building North, at auction in 2011 for about $190 million. The building was reimagined with the help of Goldstein, Hill & West Architects, which added six stories to the top and created a space for a private courtyard. Interiors are by Alan Wanzenberg and landscaping by Mathews Nielsen.

The building offers numerous amenities, among them, a 10,000-square-foot residents’ club, a 60-foot heated lap pool, a fitness center with yoga and Pilates studios and the courtyard garden.

Big Ticket includes closed sales from the previous week, ending Wednesday.


