


New York, a city dominated by high rents and short attention spans, can be dangerous for small pizzerias that specialize in the humble slice. Vinnie’s, about 200 steps from the Bedford Avenue stop on the L train in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, thrives by selling colorful pizzas designed for customers who post pictures of their food on social media before they take a bite.

For such a small pizzeria, Vinnie’s has an outsize online footprint. It is home to the photogenic Mini Vinnie, a slice covered in tiny pizza slices that caught the Internet’s attention last year. On the day that the Supreme Court ruled that same-sex marriage was a right, Vinnie’s created a rainbow slice. When Prince died, a Purple Rain slice with violet-hued cheese was on the menu.

On a recent afternoon, a woman walked into the tiny dining room, smartphone at the ready. Her eyes landed on something intriguing: a pizza box fashioned out of pizza crust. The creation features a small pepperoni pie nestled between a base of Sicilian-crust pizza and a lid of garlicky, naan-like bread.

“I saw this on social media,” she said.

Another curious diner joined her, snapping photos. Nearby, one of the pizzeria’s owners, Sean Berthiaume, 35, beamed like a proud father. The pizza with an edible pizza box costs $40, and Vinnie’s has sold over 100 since posting the first photo of it on social media in late April.

It sounds like the kind of creation dreamed up in a stoner haze, but Mr. Berthiaume said his goal was to reduce the number of pizza boxes piled up around the neighborhood. As for the inspiration, he added that he may be the “only person in Williamsburg” who doesn’t smoke marijuana.

“My dad says I’m getting residuals,” he said.

In 2007, Mr. Berthiaume and two friends, Jacob Petrera and Henrik Toncic, borrowed from relatives and pooled money to buy the pizzeria for $150,000 from a police officer who preferred to sit at the counter and smoke cigars. (As for the original Vinnie, whoever he was, he’s been out of the picture for decades, Mr. Berthiaume said.) The pizzeria hasn’t changed much from those days: The no-frills red booths, the black-and-white photographs and even the trash can are holdovers.

The new owners quickly extended the pizzeria’s hours into the early morning and overhauled the menu. They focused on maintaining the existing clientele by selling New York classics, like meatball-ricotta, as well as attracting a new type of regular customer by introducing gluten-free options and dozens of nondairy, meat-free recipes. Vegan fare accounts for about a quarter of all sales, Mr. Berthiaume said. By their third year in business, the friends had paid their relatives back. In 2010, they opened another Vinnie’s nearby in Greenpoint.

“It doesn’t look like a quote-unquote vegan spot, which I like,” said Juliane Casey, 27, who works in events marketing. She completed her meal — a vegan version of a macaroni-and-cheese slice and a vegan barbecue chicken slice — by posting a photo on Instagram.

“The things I miss the most are pizza and mac and cheese,” she said of eating a vegan diet. “When I see it on the menu, it feels like they care about you.”

The Internet’s affection is welcome, but it doesn’t pay the rent. So Vinnie’s owners focus on building relationships with their regulars, a mix of tourists and locals, often in the neighborhood uniform of black leather and Ray-Bans, who flood the tiny dining room during the evening rush.

Brian Pramberger, 27, works in advertising and has been coming to Williamsburg since he was a teenager, back when many of the bars were lax about asking for ID.

“I would go out of my way to stop here,” Mr. Pramberger said. “It holds up.”


