


Evan Longoria and Curt Casali homered off David Price, and the Tampa Bay Rays chased Price, an ex-teammate, in the fourth inning to beat the Red Sox, 12-8, on Thursday in Boston.

The Rays gave up five runs in the first inning but scored six in the fourth to take a three-run lead. The score was tied at 8-8 in the eighth when Steven Souza Jr. doubled home the go-ahead run.

The Rays, who entered the game with the fewest runs scored in baseball, topped their previous season high of seven.

Erasmo Ramirez (4-0) struck out Mookie Betts with the bases loaded in the seventh, then pitched out of a two-on, one-out jam in the eighth. Alex Colome got two outs for his third save.

William Cuevas, making his major league debut, pitched two and a third innings and allowed two runs on three hits and two walks for Boston.

DIAMONDBACKS 6, GIANTS 2 Yasmani Tomas hit a go-ahead home run in the fourth, Paul Goldschmidt drove in two runs, and visiting Arizona beat San Francisco for a four-game sweep.

Tyler Wagner (1-0) allowed two hits in five relief innings of Shelby Miller as Arizona wrapped up a 7-3 road trip with its fifth straight win and the first four-game sweep ever in the Giants’ 17th-year ballpark.

Johnny Cueto (3-1) was tagged for his first loss since joining the Giants on a $130 million, six-year contract.

DODGERS 2, BRAVES 1 Yasmani Grandal doubled in the go-ahead run in the 10th inning, and Los Angeles overcame Clayton Kershaw, beating host Atlanta.

Enrique Hernandez singled with one out against Alexi Ogando (1-1) and scored on Grandal’s shot off the center-field wall. Chris Hatcher (2-1) worked a scoreless ninth before Kenley Jansen earned his seventh save.

Kershaw entered the game with a 1.64 E.R.A. The Braves got to the three-time Cy Young winner for 10 hits in eight innings, only the fourth time in 246 career starts that he had given up double figures. He struck out 10.

MARLINS 5, NATIONALS 1 Ichiro Suzuki had two hits, scored twice and made two sliding catches in right field for host Miami, which used a makeshift lineup to beat Max Scherzer and Washington.

Suzuki, 42, batted leadoff for the first time this season and started in right field for the slumping Giancarlo Stanton, who was given the day off.

Also sitting out for the Marlins at the start of the series finale were Dee Gordon and J. T. Realmuto. But the lineup shake-up produced four runs in the first two innings against Scherzer (2-1).

MARINERS 10, INDIANS 7 Robinson Cano hit a three-run homer in the 10th inning off Cody Allen, lifting visiting Seattle over Cleveland.

Cano had an early single and then a run-scoring double in the sixth before connecting with two outs for his sixth home run this season. He had been hitless in seven previous at-bats against Allen (0-1).

Tony Zych (1-0) pitched the ninth for his first major league win. Steve Cishek worked the 10th for his second save in two days.

TWINS 8, BREWERS 1 Ricky Nolasco struck out seven and allowed five hits over six-plus innings, and visiting Minnesota ended a season-opening seven-game road losing streak by beating Milwaukee.

Nolasco (1-0) allowed a run-scoring double to Ryan Braun in the first before settling down and retiring 16 of the next 18 Brewers hitters.

ANGELS 3, WHITE SOX 2 Mike Trout hit a two-run homer and reached base four times, helping back Jered Weaver as Los Angeles beat Chicago to close a 10-game trip.

Melky Cabrera’s solo homer in the seventh was the lone run off Weaver (1-1), who allowed three hits in seven innings despite velocity that topped out at 85 miles an hour.


