


Name Hailey Gates

Age 26

Hometown Los Angeles. “Growing up, I moved about 16 times in the city,” Ms. Gates said. “I’ve lived everywhere from Elvis’s weird bachelor pad in Bel Air to across the street from the house where Sharon Tate was murdered.”

Now Lives In a one-bedroom apartment on the Upper West Side, close to Central Park. “I have a Mailer-Breslin and the 51st State poster, and a neon-pink sign of Raoul’s in SoHo, one of my favorite restaurants,” she said of her quirky design taste.

Claim to Fame Ms. Gates is a model and the host of “States of Undress,” a travel series on the new cable channel Viceland that explores the societal impact of fashion in various countries. In the first season, which just ended, she interviews an extremist imam in Pakistan, prowls a runway alongside aspiring beauty queens in Venezuela, and gets her hair done in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Big Break In 2012, after graduating from the theater program at New York University, Ms. Gates landed a supporting role in “Ricki and the Flash,” starring Meryl Streep. She also did some modeling, starring in fashion campaigns for Miu Miu, Target and Costume National. Vice executives liked her film work (which also included several independent films) and contacted her to host “States of Undress.” “I met with Viceland and decided to do the show on Tuesday,” Ms. Gates said. “And by Friday, I was on a plane to Pakistan.”

Latest Project She is in talks to host a second season of “States of Undress.” But she may need some time to scrub off the first season’s escapades. “In China, I had my body lit on fire,” she said. “And in Russia, I took a bath in reindeer blood, which apparently had some kind of youth-enhancing elements.”

Next Thing Ms. Gates, who worked at The Paris Review after college as its advertising director, now contributes to the magazine as an advisory editor. She is also writing a film script, which she describes as “about religion and the Internet.”

Personal Style Her interest in fashion came at an early age. “When I was young, I made all of my own clothes,” she said. “I would wear entirely one color: tutus, furry pants. It was totally outrageous. My family was deeply embarrassed to be seen with me.”


