


They may lack the dazzle and finesse of “Dancing With the Stars,” but videos of uniformed police officers from around the world dancing to a 1990s hip-hop song have become an online sensation.

The videos, set to “My Boo,” by Ghost Town DJs, started to gain notice in May, after officers in New Zealand issued the Running Man Challenge to the New York Police Department. The challenge, an internet craze similar to other popular memes like the Harlem Shake, began with two New Jersey teenagers and went viral after college basketball teams picked it up.

At a time when police departments have come under criticism for officers’ treatment of minorities, including several high-profile killings, the videos appear to be a way to show law enforcement in a different light, interacting with diverse members of the public.

As one police department posted a video, it called out others to take the challenge. Over time, some of the productions have become more theatrical, with elaborate props and sharp choreography.

Dancers with riot shields and bagpipes? Check.

Officers showing off break dancing moves? Check.

Officers in bomb-disposal protective gear busting a move, capped off with an explosion? Of course.

Not to be overlooked: A video featuring an officer on a unicycle, firefighters in full protective clothing, a person in scuba gear, with appearances by hula dancers and a flame twirler.

The video posted by the New York Police Department on Facebook has drawn more than five million views and 8,000 comments, many of them applauding the officers.

Candace McCoy, a professor of criminal justice at the City University of New York, dismissed those who would criticize the videos as squandering public resources.

“I cannot imagine who such sourpusses would be,” she said in an email. “To paraphrase Cyndi Lauper, ‘Cops just wanna have fun.’ Truly, they do.”

Professor McCoy added that the videos were not about the police trying to change their image, “because the many police forces participating from other countries are not currently under deep scrutiny for misconduct.”

Some police commanders, such as James Craig, the chief in Detroit, have good-naturedly appeared in the videos. In his department’s production, he dropped a police belt in a move that mimicked a mike drop.

He said the videos could have a “profound impact” on reducing antipolice tensions, The Associated Press reported. “People like it, they appreciate it, and this is a move in the right direction,” he said.


