


Twice a year, Jaime Bremnes, 35, a fifth-generation resident of Garden City and the president of its Welcoming Club, arranges a cocktail party for new residents in this affluent village of around 22,600, part of the town of Hempstead in Nassau County. The organization has running and walking clubs, toddler play groups and gourmet and book clubs in addition to the parties for newcomers, which are held at members’ homes.

“We aim to introduce neighbors to one another so they may become friends and part of the community,” said Dr. Bremnes, a dentist, who moved back from Manhattan four years ago with her husband, Lars, 34, an accountant, to start a family; their two children are now 19 months and 4 months. “Residents here are invested in one another and the community.”

Christy and Ryan Eller discovered Garden City’s welcoming atmosphere when they relocated from Alabama two and a half years ago for Mr. Eller’s job as the president of Resorts World Casino New York City in Queens. “We moved nine times across the country in 15 years,” said Ms. Eller, 41, a homemaker. “This is the first time there is a sense of community. The schools are fantastic. We absolutely love it here.”

On Friday afternoons, their daughter, 14, and son, 13, walk to town to gather with friends at Starbucks or Dunkin’ Donuts. “They drink their coffee and feel big,” Ms. Eller said. The girls “go and shop with their gift cards” at Coquette, a boutique. The children “have independence,” she said, and she feels “comfortable” that they are “completely safe.”

When Eileen and Ian Perry, both 36, moved from Manhattan to Garden City in May 2013, paying $735,000 for a three-bedroom three-bath ranch on an 80-by-100-foot lot, Ms. Perry was looking for “something fresh” close to Rockville Centre, her hometown. The couple had a young son, now 4, and have since had a daughter, who is 1½.

For Mr. Perry, deciding where to live boiled down to the hourlong door-to-door commute from Garden City to Midtown Manhattan for his job in risk management. That includes a half-mile walk “that lets me stretch my legs a bit” from his home to the Stewart Manor train station. Five Long Island Rail Road stations are in the village.

The friends Mr. Perry found were a bonus. “The one thing you can’t know going in is how cool your neighbors can be,” he said. “You end up chasing your sons up the street, hanging out and playing music together.”

Jennifer Staub, a stay-at-home mother, and her husband, Craig Staub, an investor in a private equity firm, who have lived in Garden City for 16 years, are following a pattern familiar to longtime residents: trading up. This summer, they are moving to their fourth home in the village. They bought an old Tudor on a 150-by-100-foot lot in the Estates section for more than $1.5 million and knocked it down to build a five-bedroom seven-bath colonial.

Ms. Staub described Garden City as “a bubble, in a good way,” with six neighborhood parks. The Staubs, both 44, belong to a private country club, but their socializing mostly revolves around family outings after a game — the couple’s three children, ages 9 to 14, are “entrenched” in youth sports, she said — dinners at friends’ homes or throwing a Christmas party for 125 guests.

“The majority of people are like us,” Ms. Staub said. “They want the best for their children and they expect a lot from their children. They are successful people.”

What You’ll Find

Garden City, at 5.3 square miles, is characterized by tree-shaded avenues, manicured gardens and handsome Tudors and colonials. Its neighbors include the villages of Hempstead and West Hempstead to the south, Mineola to the north and Stewart Manor to the west and the hamlet of East Garden City to the east. The median household income is $152,401, according to 2014 census data.

Franklin Avenue, the main north-south corridor, is lined with office buildings, financial institutions, a Lord & Taylor, a Sears, jewelers, a furrier and an array of restaurants. Running east-west, Seventh Street has gift and clothing boutiques.

About 10 of the village’s original 19th-century mansard-roofed houses remain; one, which was moved, houses the Garden City Historical Society, said William Bellmer, the village historian.

Garbage is picked up behind houses. “We don’t put it on the curb,” said Stephanie Cullum, an associate broker and manager at Coach Realtors Christie’s International Real Estate, and a 19-year resident. “It really helps make the village look much neater.”

What You’ll Pay

According to data from the Multiple Listing Service of Long Islandprovided by Claudia Galvin, an associate broker at the Garden City office of Daniel Gale Sotheby’s International Realty, 108 single-family homes were for sale on May 6. Listings ranged from $529,000 for a four-bedroom two-bath two-story on a 55-by-124-foot lot to nearly $5 million for a 16-room colonial on 1.17 acres. Twenty-one condominium and co-op units ranged from $229,000 to nearly $2 million.

The median sales price through May 1, with 58 closed sales, was $827,500, Ms. Galvin said, an increase of 1.54 percent over the same period of 2015.

“The first-time buyers’ market is extremely active and aggressive,” Ms. Cullum said. There are often bidding wars for starter homes, which typically have three bedrooms and one and a half baths and priced from the $600,000s to $900,000s.

In contrast, the high end, above $2 million, is sluggish, Ms. Cullum said, with prices still below 2005 levels. Taxes, which on a $2 million home sometimes top $40,000 a year, “have something to do with it.”

Doubleday Court, the village’s newest condominium, was completed in March 2015. Its 54 two-bedroom two-bath units, priced from $685,000 to $797,000, were “substantially sold prior to putting a shovel in the ground,” said Steven Krieger, a partner of the Engel Burman Group, the developer.

Two rental buildings in the village are prewar, with large rooms and high ceilings, Ms. Galvin said. Typical monthly rents start at around $2,200 for a one-bedroom, rising to around $4,250 for a two-bedroom, according to data from the listings service.

What to Do

The community park on Cherry Valley Avenue has baseball, softball and soccer fields, a hockey rink, indoor and platform tennis courts, miniature golf and a playground. The village pool complex, for residents only, has seasonal passes; a family pass is $550.

Youth leagues play on 30 acres of sports fields behind the village-owned former St. Paul’s School, an imposing 500-room building on Stewart Avenue that is on the National Register of Historic Places.

Theater, music, film and dance are presented at the Adelphi University Performing Arts Center. There is a multiplex cinema at Roosevelt Field mall, east of the village, and another nearby on Corporate Drive.

The Schools

The highly regarded Garden City Union Free School District serves 3,862 students. There are three primary schools for kindergarten and first grade. Two elementary schools for Grades 2 to 5 feed into Garden City Middle School, then Garden City High School.

Mean SAT scores for 2015 were 549 in critical reading, 565 in math and 539 in writing, compared with New York State scores of 489, 502 and 478.

The Commute

The Hempstead Branch of the Long Island Rail Road has stations at Stewart Manor, Nassau Boulevard, Garden City and Country Life Press. The Port Jefferson Branch stops at Merillon Avenue. The 7:04 a.m. train from the Garden City station is scheduled to reach Penn Station 48 minutes later. A monthly pass is $252.

The History

In 1869, Alexander Turney Stewart, a department store mogul, bought 10,000 acres on the Hempstead Plains. Stewart created his legacy — Garden City — on the western portion. While his master plan for a model suburb lacked a church, after his death in 1876, his wife, Cornelia Clinch Stewart, built the Gothic-style Cathedral of the Incarnation with a mausoleum for her beloved’s final resting place.


