


LOUISVILLE, Ky. — The horses for the 142nd running of the Kentucky Derby are listed in order of post position, with comments by Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert of The New York Times. The morning-line odds were set by Mike Battaglia of Churchill Downs.

Purse: $2 million guaranteed

Distance: 1¼ miles

Track record: 1:59 2/5 (Secretariat, 1973)

Weight: 126 pounds

Post time: 6:34 p.m. Eastern

Television: NBC

Joe Drape’s win-place-show picks: Mor Spirit, Mo Tom, Nyquist

Melissa Hoppert’s picks: Nyquist, Creator, Mor Spirit

Trainer: Patrick Gallagher Jockey: Aaron Gryder Odds: 50-1

Joe Drape: He has never won a race, and won’t be close in this one.

Melissa Hoppert: There are only two horses in the field that I think have no shot. He’s one of them.

Trainer: Donnie Von Hemel Jockey: Luis Quinonez Odds: 20-1

J.D.: He closes like a freight train and hails from an underrated trainer. I like him.

M.H.: The No. 2 hole shouldn’t be a problem for this closer. A live long shot with a great name.

Trainer: Steve Asmussen Jockey: Ricardo Santana Jr. Odds: 10-1

J.D.: One of the many late bloomers that is going to take money.

M.H.: This Tapit colt won the Arkansas Derby and is getting hot at the right time. He’s also been training well.

Trainer: Tom Amoss Jockey: Corey Lanerie Odds: 20-1

J.D.: He’s had two bad trips at the hands of the same jockey. He needs a clean trip.

M.H.: One of two entrants for the Saints owners Tom and Gayle Benson. He’s the better of the two, but he always seems to find trouble.

Trainer: Steve Asmussen Jockey: Florent Geroux Odds: 10-1

J.D.: He has been the buzz horse in the mornings here.

M.H.: The Louisiana Derby winner has the ability to shift gears, which is helpful in the 20-horse Kentucky Derby, but I don’t think he is fast enough.

Trainer: Chad Brown Jockey: Irad Ortiz Jr. Odds: 20-1

J.D.: He closed very fast in the Blue Grass.

M.H.: There’s been some buzz on the backstretch about this second-place finisher in the Blue Grass, but that field hardly seemed imposing.

Trainer: Mike Maker Jockey: Julien Leparoux Odds: 50-1

J.D.: No chance at all.

M.H.: The Spiral Stakes winner is the slowest of the Derby bunch. Pass.

Trainer: Mikio Matsunaga Jockey: Yutaka Take Odds: 30-1

JD: He’s bred to run all day, but he has had his mind on the girls and his workouts have been erratic.

MH: The U.A.E. Derby winner shipped from Dubai and has been acting up since his arrival. The only reason I left him off my no-shot list is that he is by Tapit, a champion sire.

Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: Javier Castellano Odds: 15-1

J.D.: He ran very fast early in the year, but has been away for a while.

M.H.: Earned a big speed figure while winning the Tampa Bay Derby in March and has been out of action since then. But if anyone can train a horse into this race, it’s Pletcher.

Trainer: Ron Moquett Jockey: Victor Espinoza Odds: 20-1

JD: He will be running late. Too late.

MH: Espinoza, trying to win a record third straight Derby, was given a chance to ride several horses. He picked this third-place Arkansas Derby finisher. Must count for something.

Trainer: Keith Desormeaux Jockey: Kent Desormeaux Odds: 8-1

J.D.: Did he run well in the Santa Anita because of a wet track?

M.H.: This Curlin colt turned in the most impressive prep-race performance this season, in the slop in the Santa Anita Derby. But does he perform better on a wet track?

Trainer: Dallas Stewart Jockey: Brian Hernandez Jr. Odds: 30-1

J.D.: He’s probably a little bit behind his competitors.

M.H.: I have a soft spot for this Benson colt because he loves to nap. But on Derby day, will he be asleep on the track? Stewart, however, does know how to get a horse on the Derby board.

Trainer: Doug O’Neill Jockey: Mario Gutierrez Odds: 3-1

J.D.: He’s undefeated in seven races, and the 2-year-old champion. Favorites have won the last three here? Your call.

M.H.: I can’t help but wonder if he’d be getting more respect if American Pharoah hadn’t just won the Triple Crown. He’s done nothing wrong, so I’m going to give him his due and make him my pick.

Trainer: Kiaran McLaughlin Jockey: Junior Alvarado Odds: 10-1

J.D.: He was the hot horse early, but didn’t lift his feet in Florida. I’m passing.

M.H.: I really want to love this Tapit colt with only one loss. But his performance in the Florida Derby, which McLaughlin says we can throw out, still leaves me scratching my head.

Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: John Velazquez Odds: 15-1

J.D.: He has gotten a lot of attention here, but the Wood Memorial was slow, slow, slow.

M.H.: The Wood winner has been training lights out since arriving at Churchill Downs. He could certainly hit the board.

Trainer: Chad Brown Jockey: Joel Rosario Odds: 20-1

J.D.: He’s stepping way, way up.

M.H.: This fifth-place finisher in the Wood, while training well, doesn’t appear to be fast enough to win here.

Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Gary Stevens Odds: 12-1

J.D.: Here’s your winner: He’s finished one or two in all of his races. Hall of Fame connections, nice price, why not?

M.H.: I nearly picked him to win — until he drew Post 17, where no horse has ever won this race from. I still believe the California horses are the superior bunch, so I’m making him my third choice.

Trainer: Gustavo Delgado Jockey: Emisael Jaramillo Odds: 30-1

J.D.: He is one of the best bred for the distance.

M.H.: The second-place finisher in the Florida Derby capitalized on Mohaymen’s bad day. He won’t catch a lucky break here, but his Venezuelan connections have been a refreshing sight among the Kentucky bluebloods.

Trainer: Dale Romans Jockey: Luis Saez Odds: 12-1

J.D.: He’s a hometown favorite here.

M.H.: As a closer, the Blue Grass winner will not be hampered by the outside post. In a year like this, in which the race is essentially wide open, he could very well hit the board.

Trainer: Clifford Sise Jr. Jockey: Mike Smith Odds: 15-1

J.D.: He needs to get out, cross in front of 19 other horses and then lead every step of the way. Good luck with that.

M.H.: This speedy colt has been going toe to toe with the big guns in California, and his fourth-place Santa Anita effort in the slop is not the best indicator of his ability. Still, the 20 hole is a tough spot.


