


CHARLESTON, S.C. — The Charleston church where nine African-Americans were shot in what the police say were racially motivated killings has given $1.5 million in donations to family members of the victims.

The Post and Courier of Charleston reported that Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church said it kept about $1.8 million in donations for building maintenance, an endowment and a scholarship fund.

The money was donated to the church in the months after the shootings last June. Church leaders say that only $280,000 worth of donations were specified for the victims’ families, but that the church decided to add more than $1 million to those gifts.

An additional $78,000 specified for the city of Charleston’s Hope Fund will be sent there to be distributed, said Wilbur Johnson, the church’s lawyer.

Some family members are upset that the church kept more than it gave to them.

“It’s just sad how the church continues to disrespect the families,” the Rev. Sharon Risher, whose 70-year-old mother, Ethel Lance, died in the shooting, told the newspaper.

The Post and Courier reported that victims’ family members and survivors received certified mail last week with checks and form letters from the church.

“This sum represents the distribution to you of a percentage of the total amount of funds, calculated upon the basis of the number of immediate family members of the Emanuel nine victims and survivors,” the form letter said.

The letters did not provide details about how much money the church received or how it decided to divide the donations.

“There was nothing personal about it at all,” Andy Savage, a lawyer who represents several victims’ families and Felicia Sanders and Polly Sheppard, two survivors, told the newspaper.

Mr. Johnson, the lawyer for the church, told The Post and Courier that the church used roughly the same formula the city used to disburse the Hope Fund but also included additional family members “in an effort to broaden the reach of the donations and in recognition of the church’s pastoral outreach.”

The Hope Fund formula divided 55 percent of donations equally among the nine victims’ beneficiaries, 25 percent among the five shooting survivors, 10 percent among children of those killed, 5 percent to education expenses and 5 percent to a special needs account, the newspaper said.

There have been two distributions from the Hope Fund — the first for $2.5 million and the second for $600,000 — and a third and smaller distribution is expected, the newspaper reported.

Nine people were shot and killed on the evening of June 17, 2015, during a prayer service at Emanuel. The victims included the church’s senior pastor, Clementa C. Pinckney, who was also a South Carolina state senator.

After the killings, thousands of contributions poured in from around the world, much of it going directly to the church. The city established the Hope Fund to help distribute contributions it received.

The Post and Courier said that originally, Emanuel officials planned to send the donations to the Hope Fund. But city lawyers declined to accept the donations because of a pending lawsuit and other questions raised about the church leadership’s handling of the donations.

A judge’s order had prevented Emanuel from disbursing donations until a few weeks ago when a lawsuit against the church — brought by the husband of Cynthia Graham Hurd, another victim — was dismissed. Arthur Hurd filed the lawsuit last fall seeking an accounting of the donations after lawyers for the families accused the church of not being transparent, The Post and Courier said.


