


Your show, “United Shades of America,” debuted this year on CNN, but one of your side gigs is co-­hosting a podcast called “Denzel Washington Is the Greatest Actor of All Time Period.” When you ask, “Who’s the greatest of all time, period?” you hear a lot of the same actors: De Niro, Pacino, DiCaprio. Why can’t it be Denzel? The podcast has also become, in part, about diversity in Hollywood, but the people who listen to the podcast get really mad if we don’t talk about Denzel Washington enough.

Recently you were on the radio show “Wits” and you did a speed round of the “Am I Racist?” game, where you joked that you could do it for hours. Part of me thinks that could be really handy, but it must be a burden. I’ve turned the annoying questions that white people ask into a career, so I understand that’s where I live.

Do you have white friends who ask you about their racism a lot? You know that quote, “Some people are born into greatness, some people have greatness thrust upon them”? Some people are born into racism, some people have racism thrust upon them. I spent a lot of my youth not knowing how to answer all those questions, feeling like I didn’t have access to the black experience because I wasn’t black the way I was told the black experience was going. I was like: “Dude, I’m in the same private school that you are. I’m not around a lot of black people either.”

How did you get out of that mind-set? I started reading a lot about Muhammad Ali. I thought: This is the guy I relate to. I felt like I could find my place in blackness.

Ali’s death, like Prince’s, sparked another conversation about the idea of celebrities’ transcending race. I got so offended by that. If you say, “I don’t care if Muhammad Ali was a Muslim or not, he was just great,” what you’re really saying is, “I don’t care about Muhammad Ali.” Same with Prince being black. When you say, “I don’t care about Muslims or blacks, this person was great,” what you’re saying is, “I hate Muslims and blacks, but in this one case I like this person so much I’m making an exception.”

It’s a privilege of whiteness not to think of yourself as white or as having a race. Yeah. Part of the next stage of my career is sort of encouraging liberal white people to claim their whiteness. When the “good white people” of the left won’t claim their whiteness, they think they’re doing a good thing, when they’re actually opting out of America’s biggest and most defining problem.

Your wife is white, and you’ve talked about how that relationship has informed your view of how white people get to choose a narrower slice of whiteness. I have an upfront, sort of in-­the-­trenches knowledge of white people’s trying to avoid their whiteness and replace it with something else. When I met my wife, we went through the whole race-­slash-­ethnicity conversation, and she told me she was Italian. Later on, I find out she’s a quarter Italian, at best. For me to find out that level of detail, I got to go talk to Skip Gates and get some DNA swabs. Even if I find out, it’s not something that’s going to help anybody understand anything about me. I’m African-­American. I was born and raised in America.

During the run of your one-­man show in the Bay Area, you offered two-­for-­one tickets to people who came with a friend of a different race. That is a thousand percent true.

That sounds like a gimmick of sorts. Yeah, it’s a gimmick! It’s a gimmick to end racism. If Martin Luther King Jr. had thought of it, the March on Washington would have looked completely different. Not that I’m criticizing Martin Luther King Jr.

Did it work? It did! Audiences were 50 percent people of color sometimes, which meant that when I did jokes about racism, the right people could hear the jokes. I needed everybody in the room to make this work, and it did. I ended racism every time. It’s just then people left and went back to their regular lives and started being racist again.


