


PARIS — The Tennis Integrity Unit found “no evidence of corrupt activity” in its investigation into a mixed doubles match at the Australian Open in January that raised suspicions of possible match fixing — a finding that clears the players involved but raises further doubts about the effectiveness of the sport’s anticorruption efforts.

“No further action will be taken against any player involved,” said Mark Harrison, a spokesman for the unit, who divulged no further details, including when the investigation had been abandoned.

The match, a first-round encounter pitting David Marrero and Lara Arruabarrena against Lukasz Kubot and Andrea Hlavackova, had been flagged by bookmakers hours before it began for suspicious betting patterns, with Pinnacle Sports suspending wagering on the match after unusually large and lopsided betting activity on Kubot and Hlavackova. The aggregator site Oddsportal showed that at least 22 other betting companies — including Bovada, BoyleSports and Ladbrokes — also disabled betting on the match in the hours before it began.

When the match was played, Kubot and Hlavackova won quickly, 6-0, 6-3. In an interview immediately after the match, Marrero and Arruabarrena both denied the possibility of any improper influence on the match.

Match fixing had been a prevailing topic during this year’s Australian Open after a joint report from the BBC and BuzzFeed on the first day of the tournament highlighted the perceived ineffectiveness of the Tennis Integrity Unit, the sport’s watchdog body.

Despite the spotlight, and the warning signs surrounding the mixed doubles match in question, the Tennis Integrity Unit seemed slow to act. In February, the Melbourne newspaper The Age reported that Marrero, who had a pattern of losses with suspect betting patterns, had been allowed to leave the country without being interviewed in person, and that the integrity unit sent him an email days later asking him not to delete anything off his phone. In a post for the website Tennis Topic, Arruabarrena said she had learned that the match was a topic of interest outside her postmatch interview only after she had left Australia, when her phone was flooded with messages during a stopover at the Dubai airport.

Despite calls for greater transparency, the work of the Tennis Integrity Unit remains opaque. (It acknowledged that there had been an investigation into Marrero only after he told The Wall Street Journal last week that it had been resolved.) Before the Australian Open had ended, an independent review had been commissioned to investigate the effectiveness of tennis’s anticorruption efforts. In April, the unit published a brief digest of statistics for flagged matches in the first quarter of the year.

The most recent consequence of an investigation by the unit came for the French player Constant Lestienne, whose wild card into the French Open was revoked after a “minor breach” of the anticorruption program was discovered: He had placed a wager of 2.90 euros on last year’s French Open final between Novak Djokovic and Stan Wawrinka. Lestienne correctly placed the sum on Wawrinka, winning 1.40 euros. When his entry into this year’s French Open was revoked, Lestienne forfeited 30,000 euros.

Punishments in the most prominent cases appear scant. One of the most scrutinized cases of recent years centered on a match lost by the Ukrainian Denys Molchanov in February 2015 at a challenger-level tournament in Dallas. Bettors monitoring the match noticed money quickly flooding in on Molchanov’s opponent, Agustin Velotti, despite Molchanov’s leading and winning the first set. With social media chatter about a potential fix growing, hundreds tuned in to a live stream to witness the spectacle, and found Molchanov flailing about the court and ultimately losing.

Molchanov, who insisted he was bothered by an injury that limited his movement during the match, said in an interview that the Tennis Integrity Unit never reached out to him, despite the attention. Instead, he said, he ultimately contacted the unit on his own. Molchanov and the unit corresponded by email, he said, but never met face to face until 11 months after the match, in Australia this year.

Several other players who have been involved in matches that generated whispers of possible fixes said the unit never contacted them, either. Others who have dutifully reported invitations to fix the outcome of a match said their messages to the unit were never responded to or followed up on.

Molchanov acknowledged frequently receiving solicitations to fix matches.

“A criminal is always dangerous, but no one will kill you if you just walk away,” Molchanov said. “They can text you and you walk away. What can they do? They’re not going to kill you for that.”


