


In 1993, Stephen Shore traveled to Luzzara, a rural district in Northern Italy, to photograph its residents. The resulting portfolio paints a picture of a traditional community slowly embracing modernity. In one image, a young woman holds a child whose disposable diaper is visible behind the edge of his bodysuit. In another, a woman smokes a cigarette astride an old bicycle, protected from the weather in a zippered plastic rain jacket. These portraits are juxtaposed with images of ornate wrought-iron work, immaculately tended fields and crumbling plaster walls.

Forty years earlier, Luzzara had been the subject of a celebrated study by the American photographer Paul Strand, who evocatively captured postwar life there for the influential book “Un Paese.” In the early 1990s, the Reggio Emilia region launched a project called “Linea di Confine” (“Boundary Lines”) and commissioned leading photographers to document the area and its inhabitants. It was for this project that Shore came to Luzzara. “It was simply a coincidence that it happened to be 40 years after Strand was there,” Shore tells T. “But they thought that since this was the case, they should invite an American photographer who used a large-format camera. So that’s how I wound up there.”

Traveling to Luzzara, Shore — who had had his first retrospective at MoMA in 1971 — said he had “no expectation.” He adds: “I had never been to the city before, never been to anywhere in Reggio Emilia. I wasn’t interested in doing to Luzzara what I did in the U.S. 20 years previously — I had moved on.” He knew Strand and his work and owned a copy of “Un Paese,” but felt no need to pay direct homage to the older artist. “Strand’s work tended to be limited by his political outlook: He was looking for an idealized agrarian village,” explains Shore. “While he photographed Luzzara in 1953, there wasn’t anything in his pictures that couldn’t have been made in 1913, 40 years earlier: There were no telephone lines, there were no cars. His view was, to my mind, highly idealized, and I wanted to reveal Luzzara as it was.”

What Shore found was a town in which a peeling 16th-century farm building could house an office equipped with state-of-the-art Macintosh computers. “The people there to my mind integrated beautifully and enjoyed that integration,” he recalls. “I couldn’t help but think that they relished the contrast.”

This month the photographic imprint Stanley/Barker will publish Shore’s “Stephen Shore: Luzzara” as a stand-alone book, including a number of images that have remained unseen for over 20 years. Click through the slide show for a look.


