


The Brooklyn district attorney’s office has reopened an 11-year-old double murder investigation after discovering that exculpatory evidence in the case may have been withheld.

A special division of the office, the Conviction Review Unit, has begun an internal inquiry in the case of Wayne Martin, who is serving life in prison for the killings of a tire shop owner, Gary Turner, and one of Mr. Turner’s employees, Ricardo Davids, according to court papers filed on Friday.

On Nov. 27, 2005, Mr. Turner and Mr. Davids were gunned down during an apparent robbery attempt at Gary’s Tire Emporium on East 96th Street in East Flatbush. Mr. Turner’s teenage son, Donald, was also shot but survived.

Mr. Martin was found guilty of the murders in July 2010, but has always maintained his innocence. The new investigation into his case started this year, the court papers showed, when appellate lawyers in the district attorney’s office returned to the case file while preparing a response to Mr. Martin’s motion to vacate his conviction.

As the lawyers started reading through the file, the papers said, they discovered something strange: There were two different copies of the prosecution’s summary of the case, or what is known as a homicide scratch.

One version contained a paragraph stating that a witness in the case had implicated a man named Jeffrey Joseph, not Mr. Martin, in the murders; but in a second version, that potentially exculpatory evidence had been excised.

After finding the conflicting documents, one of the appellate lawyers interviewed Marc Fliedner, the prosecutor at Mr. Martin’s trial. Mr. Fliedner declined to discuss what he had said during the interview, but officials at the district attorney’s office said he did not recall the contradictory scratches and had no idea why one had been redacted.

At that point, court papers said, the appellate lawyer notified Eric Gonzalez, the chief assistant to Ken Thompson, the district attorney. Mr. Gonzalez subsequently turned the case over to the Conviction Review Unit, which came across another troubling document: a report from a detective’s interview with a witness named Michael Belgrove, who claimed in 2005 that he had seen a third and different man commit the killings. The unit found that this report was also never given to Mr. Martin’s lawyers.

Mr. Fliedner, a veteran prosecutor, was until recently the chief of the district attorney’s civil rights bureau. This winter, he scored a victory in one of the most prominent criminal cases in Brooklyn in years, securing the manslaughter conviction of Peter Liang, the former police officer who killed an unarmed man, Akai Gurley, in a housing project stairwell in 2014.

But this month, Mr. Fliedner resigned from his position amid a bitter personal dispute with Mr. Thompson. In an article in The Daily News last week, Mr. Fliedner accused the district attorney of being an “abusive” leader who ran roughshod over his staff and had lost his focus on performing “the unique and sacred” role of serving as Brooklyn’s top law enforcement officer. He also complained that Mr. Thompson had consistently allowed his deputy chief of staff, Wayne K. Williams, to wield undue influence over his and other prosecutors’ cases.

In an email Sunday night, Mr. Fliedner wrote, “If there are legitimate concerns about the fairness of trial proceedings that warrant the granting of a new trial, I am all for it.”

But at the same time, he warned that if the district attorney’s office had placed “false or misleading statements” in its filings that suggested “intentional wrongdoing” on his part, then “Mr. Thompson had better brush up on the law as it relates to slander and libel.”

“The very timing of this filing relative to one of my trials, just two days after I publicly expressed my concerns about the overly politicized environment he has created in the office of the district attorney, is glaringly transparent,” Mr. Fliedner added. “My guess is that, with this action, Thompson is simply affirming every concern I have voiced about the manner in which he instinctively operates.”

A spokeswoman for Mr. Thompson declined to respond to Mr. Fliedner’s comments.

But Mr. Gonzalez said that Mr. Fliedner will face an ethics investigation, even though he no longer works for the district attorney’s office.

Mr. Gonzalez also said that the papers about the Martin case were submitted only after the Conviction Review Unit received the defense’s case file and was able to determine that the exculpatory evidence had not been handed over.

Prosecutors got that file on Wednesday, court papers say, the same day Mr. Fliedner was quoted by The Daily News.

Justin Bonus, Mr. Martin’s current lawyer, declined to comment on the case. But as part of the continuing investigation, Mr. Martin is expected to appear in court in Brooklyn sometime in the next few weeks.


