


Nathan Eovaldi witnessed a series of unlikely events Wednesday at Yankee Stadium during his third start of the season, but one increasingly common occurrence — the Yankees’ failing to produce with runners in scoring position — left him on the wrong side of a 5-2 loss to the Oakland Athletics.

The Yankees, who had gone 2 for 42 with runners in scoring position over their previous four games, went 0 for 4 in those situations on Wednesday. Their recent ineptitude was embodied by a seventh-inning base-running blunder by Didi Gregorius that had Manager Joe Girardi fuming after the game.

Trailing by 3-1, the Yankees had runners on second and third with one out when Aaron Hicks hit a grounder to third base. Gregorius broke from second and was ruled to have been tagged out on his way to third, and Hicks was out at first on the throw. The Yankees challenged the play, saying that Gregorius had avoided the tag, but the call was upheld.

“It’s bad base running,” Girardi said. “You’ve got to understand what your run means. You can’t run into an out. He turns it into a double play — we don’t get any runs.”

Girardi added that he thought the call stood because the replays were inconclusive.

“I think if he originally calls him safe, I think we probably win,” Girardi said.

Gregorius, asked if the base-running gaffe was a result of the players’ pressing because of the Yankees’ dearth of runs lately, said: “We’re in a bad funk right now. We’re trying to do too much.”

The night began positively for the Yankees as Jacoby Ellsbury led off with a double, quickly putting pressure on Athletics starter Kendall Graveman. It was an encouraging sign that Ellsbury might be ready to break out of a slump of his own: He had one hit in his last 17 at-bats and was hitting .213 for the season.

Two walks helped the Yankees load the bases. But continuing the team’s recent trend, Alex Rodriguez followed by striking out looking to end the inning.

Gregorius helped compensate for that missed opportunity, hitting a solo home run to right in the second inning for a 1-0 lead, and Eovaldi kept the Yankees in front as he breezed through the first three innings, allowing only a leadoff single to Billy Burns, whom he picked off first base.

At the start of the fourth, though, Eovaldi allowed four consecutive hits.

Burns and Chris Coghlan doubled to tie the score at 1-1. Josh Reddick followed with a single to left field, and Coghlan beat out an off-target throw home by Hicks. Danny Valencia then singled to move Reddick to third, and Stephen Vogt drove in Reddick with a sacrifice fly.

“He left some pitches up,” Girardi said of Eovaldi, adding, “I didn’t think his stuff was as sharp this time as his last outing.”

The Yankees’ defense almost compounded their deficit. With Valencia on first base with one out, Jed Lowrie hit a potential double-play grounder to Chase Headley, who bobbled the ball. Headley regrouped and tossed it to second, only to see Gregorius drop the throw.

Eovaldi then watched Khris Davis hit a grounder off the third-base bag, with the ball ricocheting high into the air and providing enough of a delay for Davis to beat out Headley’s throw to first and load the bases.

In an act of redemption, Hicks caught a fly ball from Yonder Alonso for the second out and threw out Valencia, who had tried to tag up and score from third.

The damage was done, though: Oakland led, 3-1.

“We gave them some extra outs, is what we did,” Girardi said of the inning, “and that usually leads to trouble.”

Frustrated by those unusual bounces of the ball, Eovaldi never recaptured his form from early in the game and was pulled after the sixth inning, having allowed eight hits.

The fifth inning featured another odd twist as Eovaldi faced Graveman, who became the first starting pitcher to bat at the current Yankee Stadium, after the Athletics had to move Lowrie, the designated hitter, into the field because of an injury to Valencia.

Graveman struck out, but he was cruising on the mound by then. After Gregorius’s homer in the second, the Yankees managed only one more hit off Graveman before he left in the seventh.

The Yankees were missing one of their few steady presences this season: Hicks was a late addition to the starting lineup in place of Brett Gardner, who was experiencing neck stiffness. After the game, Gardner said he was feeling a lot better and was prepared to enter the game in the late innings if needed.

Hicks, acquired in the off-season from the Minnesota Twins, went 0 for 3 and is 1 for 20 on the year. And his missed opportunity in the seventh — the grounder that led to Gregorius’s base-running error — proved fateful as the Athletics scored two runs in the eighth off reliever Branden Pinder, sending the Yankees to their sixth loss in seven games.

Despite holding leads in 11 of their 13 games, the Yankees are now 5-8.

Reflecting on his team’s scuffling start, Girardi said, “There’s too much experience in that room, and I’m somewhat surprised.”


