


When horseback riding was the dominant mode of transportation, equestrian shops were as common as fresh-pressed juice bars are today. East 24th Street was so populated with places to outfit and care for horses that it came to be known as Old Stable Row. Times have changed. And for the city equestrian, a rare breed in itself, the only remaining shop of its kind on Old Stable Row is Manhattan Saddlery.

“There’s probably no equestrian store in the world that is as far away from a horse as we are,” said Nick Tsang, 31, the store’s owner. Most of his customers head to Long Island, Westchester County or New Jersey to ride.

The smell of leather permeates the sprawling two-story shop, greeting customers who arrive looking for saddles, bridles, halters, crops, stirrups and riding pants. There are even horse treats and stacks of equestrian magazines (Pony Quarterly, Equestrian Living, Today’s Equestrian) to browse while trying on riding boots.

Mr. Tsang came to horse-shop ownership in an usual manner. The Tsangs were living in New Jersey, where his mother introduced the family to riding after she learned it might prove therapeutic for Nick’s brother, who has autism. As she fell in love with horses, she became devoted to the Miller Harness Company, a Manhattan equestrian shop that had been around since 1912. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and the Rockefellers were fans. When the shop on East 24th Street went up for sale in 2001, Ms. Tsang bought it, and eventually changed the name to Manhattan Saddlery.

When she became ill six years later, Mr. Tsang took over. Though he doesn’t ride much himself, he can’t imagine life without the shop. “I’m never closing this store,” he said. “It has such an emotional connection.”

That kind of devotion seems to be common among horsy types.

Charlotte Kullen was shopping on a recent Saturday, as she does about once a week. At the shop she finds a receptive audience for her latest stories about Asantro, her horse. “It was his birthday yesterday,” she said, displaying photos on her phone of the Dutch Warmblood, an athletic breed often used in competitions.

Owning a horse is expensive. Ms. Kullen admitted to eating a lot of frozen pizza to help pay for her horse’s care, but riding one doesn’t have to be a break-the-bank hobby, Mr. Tsang said. “It gets pigeonholed as a rich person’s sport, but it’s not.”

Many of Mr. Tsang’s patrons are parents of children who take their lessons on other people’s horses, like Owen King, who came in with his daughter Sarah seeking a helmet and protective gear for summer riding camp.

Sarah’s helmet, which cost about $400, was a necessary expense, Mr. King said, as was a protective vest, a requirement at many summer camps.

Mr. King welcomed the safety precaution. He recalled a skiing trip in Argentina years ago on which he was the “only one not smoking, and the only one wearing a helmet.”

Safety — or for that matter, horses — was the last thing on Alex Roy’s mind when he walked into the shop. Mr. Roy, who tests vintage cars as editor at large for The Drive magazine, comes to Manhattan Saddlery for apparel he can wear “without irony.” He bought a riding jacket and a tweed cap on past visits. This time he was in the market for riding gloves, to be worn while driving his three-wheeled Morgan, an open-top two-seater.

“It’s funny, like any brick-and-mortar shop, if you think about it, you can buy anything they carry online,” Mr. Roy said. “But you come here to talk to the people and to see the place.”

He bought a pair of white crochet gloves with a leather palm and dashed off to brunch.


