


The postman left the cardboard box marked “Warning! LIVE BIRDS” in the backyard. Fortunately, the warning was right. Inside were three Rhode Island Red pullets, six weeks old, peeping and blinking.

They had survived an extra day in transit — the Postal Service’s one-day shipping guarantee turns out not to apply to animals — from a hatchery in Ohio, 400 miles from Brooklyn as the chicken would fly if it had the wings.

The gawky, rust-colored birds were installed in a small brown plywood coop, and so, on the last day of March in Ditmas Park, Brooklyn, another New York household joined the ever-growing ranks of the chickened.

As spring erupts across the city’s backyards and community gardens, new recruits report to a galline army that now numbers in the thousands, supplying hen-warm eggs, a few chicken dinners and a taste of the wonders and worries of farm life.

On the North Shore of Staten Island, Kathy Venezia rushed home from work on April 21 to greet the 20 three-day-old fuzzballs that had just been delivered. “Life’s little pleasures,” she said. In Jamaica Estates, Queens, David Xu is building an extra enclosure to protect his four new chicks from the violent attentions of a year-old hen.

There are no reliable statistics on the city’s chicken population, but one vendor alone, mypetchicken.com, says it has shipped more than 3,000 birds to New York City in the last three years, and 34 community gardens — including the one I belong to in Park Slope, Brooklyn — now keep flocks.

At Imani Community Garden in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, a dozen people crowded around a picnic table on April 14 to hear a lecture on egg production presented by the City Chicken Meetup (current membership: 873) and to discuss their poultry aspirations.

“It’s been my dream to have chickens for a long time,” Miriam Cohen of Brooklyn told the group. The meetup is run by Just Food, a nonprofit that supports urban agriculture.

Mr. Xu, 50, a semi-retired importer from Fujian, China, related the bittersweet tale of his recent road trip to Ohio to pick up six baby chicks. “Two of them died,” he said. “I don’t know why. Maybe I didn’t give them enough feed. Maybe the hotel room wasn’t warm enough.”

Lydia Ahonen, who runs the City Chicken workshops, clucked sympathetically.

“It’s very easy to lose chicks,” she said. “They are quite a project. What often happens, aside from them getting cold, is they’ll overheat and then die of heatstroke.”

At every stage of life, Ms. Ahonen said, pitfalls await. Novice hens can lay eggs without shells — “it looks like someone’s trying to cook an egg in the nest,” she said. Hatchlings can come out shrink-wrapped (the membrane of the egg sticks to them and they suffocate) or cemented (the fluid in the egg sticks to them and they can’t move). Laying hens get eggbound, when the egg is stuck inside and sometimes has to be dislodged manually.

Even healthy chickens can require a surprising amount of maintenance, as anyone who has ever crouched in a coop in a minus-20 windchill massaging Vaseline into the comb of a squirming hen to prevent frostbite can attest. (Only hens can kept in New York City — roosters are illegal because they make too much noise.)

But it’s all worth it, said Ms. Ahonen, 36, who is tending three new chicks this spring at Imani Garden. One April day, at the age of 3 weeks, they were looking a little pterodactylish as they entered the brief stage where chickens are proficient fliers.

“When they get a little bigger you can watch them hunt squirrels,” Ms. Ahonen said. “You say, ‘Oh, they really did come from dinosaurs. They really were raptors.’ They put their heads down and flatten their bodies out and just shoot off, zoom!”

The new backyard pullets on East 15th Street in Ditmas Park, now over two months old, are taking their time learning the ropes of chickenhood. One recent day, two sparrows flew through the chain-link fence and began to peck at the pullets’ organic, soy-free grower feed. There were no objections.

“You’d think they’d have some sort of instinct to protect their food,” said a woman who uses the name Shaolida and is an owner of the house and the designer of the chicken coop.

A sparrow returned a few minutes later, and one of the pullets trotted over and chased it off. “Good, chicks, good!” Shaolida, 28, called out.

Saturdays are my family’s day to tend the hens at the Warren-St. Marks Community Garden. Last weekend, someone had let the hens out. Black-and-white Dominique stood sentry in the low crotch of a pine tree. Others foraged for worms in the compost pile.

As I made the rounds, the eight hens gathered around me, cooing soft encouragement until I fetched a container of cracked corn from the shed and led them back to the coop. Then I opened the nest-box door and folded my hand around the smooth, cool shell of an Easter Egger hen’s blue-green egg. It was delicious.


