


House and Senate negotiators reached agreement on Thursday on far-reaching legislation to overhaul the nation’s 40-year-old law governing toxic chemicals, a compromise that would subject thousands of household chemicals to regulation for the first time.

Public health advocates and environmentalists have complained for decades that the 1976 Toxic Substances Control Act is outdated and riddled with gaps that leave Americans exposed to harmful chemicals. Under current law, around 64,000 chemicals are not subject to environmental testing or regulation.

But efforts to tighten the law have stalled for years, in part because of opposition from the chemical industry. The bipartisan authors of the new bill say their breakthrough represents a pragmatic, politically viable compromise between better environmental standards and the demands of industry.

“Anytime you have the Chamber of Commerce and you have the manufacturers and the Environmental Defense Fund all together on this thing, then that gets people’s attention,” said Senator James M. Inhofe of Oklahoma, the chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, who helped negotiate the agreement.

Senator Tom Udall of New Mexico, one of its Democratic authors, said current law “has been broken for nearly 40 years.”

Some House Democrats and environmental advocates have criticized the compromise as a capitulation to the chemical industry that weakens existing law. Representatives Frank Pallone Jr. of New Jersey and Paul D. Tonko of New York said Tuesday in a joint statement, “Unfortunately, at this point, it would be better for us to not act at all.”

Aides said Thursday that conversations were continuing with House Democrats on some changes to the agreement in the hope of bringing them on board in the next 24 hours.

Senator Barbara Boxer of California, the ranking Democrat on the Environment and Public Works Committee, said Thursday that she opposed the first version of the bill — until she helped improve it. The final version is better than current law, she said.

The bill is expected to reach the House and Senate floors for final votes early next week. Mr. Inhofe said Thursday that it could reach President Obama’s desk before the Memorial Day recess.

Mr. Obama appears poised to sign the measure. An Environmental Protection Agency spokeswoman, Liz Purchia, called the final draft “a clear improvement over current law.”

Under the new bill, E.P.A. regulations would pre-empt most new state regulations, although states could still enact measures such as monitoring and labeling of chemicals. State chemical restrictions passed before April 22 would be allowed to stand. Environmental groups failed in their push to allow states to enact laws stronger than federal rules.

Daniel Rosenberg of the Natural Resources Defense Council said Thursday that the new bill was still too weak, citing its pre-emption of states’ authority, its failure to provide the E.P.A. with enough authority to check imported products, and its restrictions on citizens’ abilities to petition the E.P.A.

But the authors of the bill say it would strengthen the law in other ways. Under the 1976 law, the E.P.A. is required to evaluate the safety of new chemicals introduced in the marketplace but not the roughly 64,000 chemicals that were already being used in American commerce. Since then, about 22,000 new chemicals have been introduced and evaluated, and those the agency designates as toxic and hazardous are subject to regulation.

The new measure would require the E.P.A. to begin evaluating those untested chemicals. The E.P.A. would be required to prioritize high-risk chemicals and to test at least 20 chemicals at any given moment, with each test limited to seven years. User fees of as much as $25 million a year would be levied on companies to help pay for the testing.

Those mandates still fall far short of what environmental advocates had once envisioned, a law requiring the E.P.A. to test up to 300 existing chemicals a year.

The new legislation would also require the E.P.A. to take only the health and environmental effects of a chemical into account when devising new rules, not the financial effect of those regulations. The existing law requires new chemical regulations to consider compliance costs.

Chemical reviews would have to consider exposure impact on vulnerable people, such as pregnant women, children, poor communities and industrial workers.

Andy Igrejas of Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families, said that although the pending deal would bolster the E.P.A.’s authority, some issues remained.

“We don’t get opportunities for big reforms often, and we want to get it right,” he said.

The chemical industry backed the bill. Cal Dooley, the president of the American Chemistry Council, said, “This legislation balances the priorities and interests of multiple stakeholders.”


