


Freddy Galvis homered and hit a go-ahead single in the seventh inning Saturday night to lead the host Philadelphia Phillies to their fifth straight win, 4-3, over the Cleveland Indians.

The Phillies have won eight of nine and are four games over .500 for the first time since they finished the 2011 season 102-60.

Jeanmar Gomez had Phillies fans on edge in the ninth before he earned his eighth save. With runners on second and third and two outs, Jason Kipnis lined a shot to right that forced Peter Bourjos to leap and snag the ball for the final out.

WHITE SOX 8, ORIOLES 7 Jose Abreu hit a tiebreaking R.B.I. single in the ninth inning off reliever Vance Worley, leading Chicago past Baltimore on the road.

After Todd Frazier hit a two-run homer off Darren O’Day in the eighth to give Chicago a 7-5 lead, Chris Davis tied the game in the bottom half of the inning with a two-run double off Zach Duke.

NATIONALS 6, CARDINALS 1 Jayson Werth’s three-run home run capped a four-run first inning, and Joe Ross delivered another stingy outing for Washington in St. Louis.

Ross allowed one run on six hits in six innings, raising his E.R.A. to 0.79.

He has given up only two runs in 222/3 innings.

ROCKIES 5, DIAMONDBACKS 2 Trevor Story’s two-run triple in the top of the ninth inning broke a tie, and Colorado beat Arizona in Phoenix.

Story, who had hurt the Diamondbacks with home runs in the four previous meetings between the two teams this season, doubled, tripled and drove in three runs for the Rockies, who have won four of five against Arizona this year.

Carlos Gonzalez had three of the Rockies’ 13 hits.TIGERS 4, TWINS 1 Jordan Zimmermann won his fifth straight start in his first season with Detroit, Justin Upton hit a three-run homer in the first inning, and the Tigers beat Minnesota in Minneapolis.

Zimmermann gave up one run on six hits, with seven strikeouts and no walks, in seven innings.

Victor Martinez doubled twice for Detroit.

RAYS 4, BLUE JAYS 3 Curt Casali drove in the winning run with a single in the ninth inning, and Tampa Bay edged Toronto in St. Petersburg, Fla.

Brad Miller led off the ninth with a pinch-hit single off Brett Cecil. Kevin Kiermaier followed with a double before Casali’s single, the first game-ending hit of his career.

RANGERS 7, ANGELS 2 Rougned Odor matched a Texas record with three doubles, Mitch Moreland hit a three-run homer, and the Rangers trounced Los Angeles in Arlington.

Odor’s second double was part of the Rangers’ six-run third inning.

PIRATES 5, REDS 1 Francisco Liriano won for the first time since opening day, John Jaso homered to open the bottom of the first, and host Pittsburgh defeated Cincinnati for its sixth straight win and the Reds’ sixth consecutive loss.

Liriano allowed one run in six and two-thirds innings for his first win since April 3, when he pitched six scoreless innings against St. Louis.

ATHLETICS 2, ASTROS 0 Jesse Hahn pitched into the seventh inning in his return to the majors and combined with two relievers on a four-hitter as host Oakland shut out Houston.

Hahn was called up from Class AAA Nashville before the game and pitched as well as he did for most of 2015 before missing the final three months with a right forearm strain, which also delayed his debut in spring training.

MARLINS 7, BREWERS 5 Adeiny Hechavarria had four hits, including one of four Miami solo home runs, and the Marlins won in Milwaukee.

Giancarlo Stanton, Derek Dietrich and Marcell Ozuna also homered as Miami won its seventh consecutive game. It is the team’s longest winning streak since 2012.

CUBS-BRAVES RAINED OUT Saturday’s game in Chicago against Atlanta was postponed because of rain.

The game was called about two hours before the scheduled first pitch at 1:20 p.m. No makeup date was announced.


