


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this piece, Nina Bernstein, a reporter for The Times’s Metro section, describes the research behind — and some of the results of — her recent investigation into Hart Island.

Sometimes it is hard to say precisely when you began working on a story, especially one that takes more than a year to reach the readers of The New York Times. But I know exactly when my project on the Hart Island mass graves changed from a vague hunch into a journalistic mission. The moment was captured by an exclamation mark in an email dated November 10, 2014.

“Doris McCrea!” I wrote in the subject line. “I found her....I’m so excited.”

At the time I was still in the middle of reporting a different story, about nursing homes seeking guardianship over residents. But as an investigative reporter for the Metro desk, I had also been doing what Michael Luo, my editor, calls “poking around.” In this case, it meant hunting for data to shed light on a disturbing sight recalled by two people I had interviewed: body bags removed from nursing homes in the dead of night, said to be destined for a common grave on Hart Island, New York City’s potter’s field.

For years I had thought of Hart Island as the graveyard of last resort for homeless people. I had never forgotten a story I wrote in 1999 about a former tunnel dweller whose friends could not bear to see death make him homeless again. The specter of an anonymous burial on Hart Island, an uninhabited strip of land in Long Island Sound, prompted generous strangers to provide him a grave of his own.

“I’m wondering where I might find numbers, on how many people buried in potter’s field, i.e. Hart Island, last resided at a nursing home,” I wrote in October 2014 to Susan Beachy, a Times researcher who is invaluable in any investigation. “I’m planning to try to reach Melinda Hunt, who wrote the book on potter’s field, so to speak. … She may have some ideas.”

I knew that Ms. Hunt, a visual artist, had long helped families seeking relatives buried on Hart Island. Now I learned that, as founder and director of The Hart Island Project, a nonprofit organization, she had a trove of numbers she was willing to share with The Times — data from as far back as 1980, digitized by volunteers from handwritten burial ledgers. The database included names, ages, and places and dates of death for 62,000 people among more than a million buried on the island since 1869.

Figuring that homeless people were unlikely to survive to be 100, I asked Sarah Cohen, a Times editor and database expert, to cull out centenarians. Later, newly aware of the pitfalls of nursing homes and guardianship, I suddenly had a powerful hunch: that we would find the wards of court-appointed guardians buried on Hart Island, even though a guardian’s duties include setting up a burial trust to prevent that fate.

Susan, the resourceful researcher, found an electronic list of guardianship petitions filed in New York County for me. Sarah sent me a spreadsheet of 60 centenarians buried on Hart Island, highlighting four recent cases. On impulse, I gave my hunch a chance, choosing a woman named Doris McCrea who had died at Calvary Hospital on July 10, 2012, at age 100, and had been buried four months later in a Hart Island trench.

And there she was on Susan’s list as the subject of a 1996 guardianship petition: Doris McCrea! I felt as though I had stepped into a Dickensian mystery of buried truths and misdeeds waiting to be told.

It was not until a frigid day in February that I could start investigating in earnest. The McCrea case was the first of many I requested from courthouse storage rooms. But bad news came back: Her file was most likely among the records lost in a Brooklyn warehouse fire.

I moved on to other cases — the housekeeper whose guardian allowed her home to go into foreclosure and her body to go unclaimed; the homeless boy in an $8 suit; the opera costume designer who escaped the Holocaust, but not Hart Island. By the time I was revising the first draft of my article in October 2015, the problem was how to cut individual stories, not add more.

But the mystery of Ms. McCrea would not let me go. On a late trip to a Manhattan courthouse almost a year after I had learned her name, I filled out a new request. This time, a bulging file showed up, held together with elastic bands.

Ms. McCrea, I learned, had worked for decades at the Park Avenue headquarters of Continental Grain, a global agribusiness corporation, rising to lead its central files department. Widowed in midlife, with no children, she lived frugally in two furnished rooms at the Ten Eyck-Troughton Residence, an inexpensive haven for women run by the Salvation Army on East 39th Street. But she spent weekends in her antique-filled house in Turners Falls, Mass.; her husband, Arthur Donald McCrea, a former employee of the Treasury Department, was buried there.

In retirement, her life changed abruptly when she objected to being discharged from a New York hospital to a nursing home after having colon surgery. The hospital’s lawyers filed a guardianship petition, saying she had dementia, and eventually collected $4,618 from her savings for legal costs. Some $67,000 from the sale of her house would go to the nursing home, Queens Boulevard Extended Care Center, before she was poor enough to qualify for Medicaid. Another $37,000 in legal and administrative fees went to Margaret Bomba, a prominent guardianship lawyer appointed as her legal protector.

Ms. Bomba, who bowed out of the case in 2000 and died a year before her former ward did, was paid in full, despite a memo in the court file pointing out that she had charged extra legal fees for routine work, including calls to directory assistance. Still, unlike some guardians, she had fulfilled her responsibilities by writing two checks for Ms. McCrea’s use: $3,500 marked “luxury fund” and $1,400 marked “burial fund,” both made out to the nursing home.

What happened to that money? When I called Audrey Ponzio, a former colleague and friend of Ms. McCrea’s, she was shocked to learn where Ms. McCrea had ended up. She told me of a prepaid burial arrangement on file at the nursing home, which called for Ms. McCrea’s body to be transported by Thomas Quinn Funeral Home for burial at her husband’s side. Later, the funeral home told me that the money had been left in escrow, rather than prepaid. Either way, the information — and the money — got lost in the shuffle when, toward the end of her life, Ms. McCrea was sent from nursing home to hospital to hospice.

Six more months would pass before the publication of my 6,700-word article. It ran with extraordinary video footage recorded in March 2016 by drones that The Times used to fly around Hart Island, after the city declined our repeated requests to witness burials firsthand.

But Doris McCrea was no longer there. Two weeks before Christmas 2015, about two months after my queries, she was exhumed and reburied. “She’s where she’s supposed to be,” Kevin R. Mack, the funeral home’s director, said recently, declining to divulge the cost. “She’s resting at peace.”

Her name on a headstone? Well, no, not yet. “We’re working on that,” he said.


