


Four people were killed in separate shootings across New York City late Saturday and early Sunday, the police said.

The killings were a reminder of the pockets of violence that exist in the city, even as it has become safer in recent years. Two of the shootings, in the Bronx and in East New York, Brooklyn, happened in police precincts that are among the city’s deadliest.

No arrests had been made in any of the killings as of Sunday evening.

The first shooting was reported shortly after 9:30 p.m. Saturday, near the intersection of East 175th Street and Monroe Avenue in the Mount Hope section of the Bronx, the police said. A man, identified by the police as Marvin Harris, was shot three times in the abdomen, and in an arm and a leg.

Mr. Harris, 32, was taken to Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, where he was pronounced dead, the police said.

The police said that they had suspects, and that it was unclear what prompted the shooting. Police officials said Mr. Harris, who lived about five miles away in the Bronx, had an extensive arrest history.

Less than an hour later, the police were called to the John Adams Houses, a New York City Housing Authority complex on Westchester Avenue in the Bronx, where a 29-year-old woman was found with a single gunshot wound to the torso.

The police said the woman, Jessica White, was with a group of about a dozen people in a courtyard behind one of the buildings when a man wearing a black sweatshirt and a ski mask approached them and opened fire. Ms. White was taken to Lincoln Hospital, where she was pronounced dead. Later on Sunday, the police released a photograph from a surveillance camera of a “person of interest” in the killing.

The shooting, which investigators believe was gang related, was the ninth homicide recorded this year in the 40th Precinct, an area of the South Bronx where violence has persisted.

Shortly after 11:30 p.m. on Saturday, the police were called to Rogers Place, near East 163rd Street in the Bronx, where officers found a 31-year-old man who had been pushed from his wheelchair and shot in the head during a dispute, the authorities said. The man, Eric Oliver, was pronounced dead at the scene.

Mr. Oliver had about 30 packets of crack cocaine on him when he was found, police officials said. The police said he had a criminal history. Mr. Oliver was paralyzed in 2006 after he was shot in the lower back.

On Sunday, around 3 a.m., the police were called to Linwood Street, near Hegeman Avenue, in the East New York section of Brooklyn, where they found two men had been shot.

Those two and another man had been sitting on a building’s front stoop when gunshots were fired, and they ran inside. A 22-year-old was shot several times in the lower body and a 32-year-old was shot once in the left hand. Both men were taken to Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center, where the 22-year-old, whose name has not been released, was pronounced dead. The third man was not injured.

The police said that the motivation for the killing was unclear and that they did not have any information about suspects. Investigators found a “large quantity” of marijuana and money inside the home, a police spokesman said. At least 10 other killings have been recorded this year in the 75th Precinct, which covers East New York and is among the city’s most violent, according to police statistics.


