


The title track from Ariana Grande’s new album, “Dangerous Woman,” posits Ms. Grande, not that long ago an ingénue, as an avatar of sexual strength and control. Yet there’s something curiously dry about the song: Her voice, which is powerful, is practically tamed. Her vocals are so weakened, lines like “I wanna savor” and “I live for danger” lack punch. It’s like hearing her shout in a field very far away — she’s singing with force but nothing hits hard.

Something similar is happening on “Work From Home,” the single from “7/27,” the new album by the girl group Fifth Harmony. Here, too, the vocals have been compressed so the rhythm of the words stands out, rather than their timbre or meaning.

Both Ms. Grande and the members of Fifth Harmony — Ally Brooke, Camila Cabello, Dinah Jane, Lauren Jauregui and Normani Kordei — are formidable but loose singers, the sort of vocalists who grew up with Mariah Carey as a vocal inspiration, not a cautionary tale.

But what’s striking about these albums is how gently they treat their stars, as if they were fragile artifacts in need of safe shipping. In the past, each act has delivered memorable singing, but something deadening is at play on these records, which reflect a pop universe not much interested in displays of vocal flamboyance.

Pop, as ever, is struggling to identify its center — is it dance-music-centric wallops and bloops? Melodic post-hip-hop rap-singing? Ms. Grande, a boisterous soul singer by disposition, has never been a neat pop fit, but on previous albums has found ways to let her huge voice predominate. On “Dangerous Woman,” though, she’s curiously muted — several of the songs are strong, but they rely on her gifts less. Fifth Harmony’s album, especially, reflects a group of impressive singers fighting against technology and algorithms designed to flatten them into a homogenized whole. Much of the time, they are reduced to rhythmic components, serving up unmemorable lyrics at quick tempos.

In small part, that’s the result of the spread of tropical house, one of the most anodyne branches of dance music, into the pop mainstream over the past two years. (Kygo, a titan on streaming services, with a feather-light sound, contributed production to two songs on Fifth Harmony’s album.) Also, R&B has had diminishing influence over the sound of pop, as it’s been subsumed into hip-hop, meaning that singers inclined toward flash and power have found themselves stymied at every turn.

Add to this one additional recent phenomenon: the resurgence of lite-reggae on the pop charts, whether in the form of the Felix Jaehn tropical house remix of OMI’s “Cheerleader” last year, or the cloying, banal lovers-rock of “Rude,” by the Canadian band Magic!, the year before. In each case, the source genre is denuded, reduced to an unobtrusive lilt — reggae as signifier, not engine.

This isn’t novel, alas. There’s no shortage of reggae (or reggae-ish) music made by white performers, or pop with echoes of Jamaican sounds. A small cluster of songs currently on the Billboard Hot 100 are reggae-based: Justin Bieber’s “Sorry,” Drake’s “Controlla,” Beyoncé’s “Hold Up,” Rihanna’s “Work” and “Light It Up,” by Major Lazer featuring Myla and Fuse ODG.

“Light It Up” is perhaps the most noteworthy: Major Lazer is the reggae and dancehall-influenced side project of Diplo, who’s become one of pop’s go-to producers. Who knew, seven or eight years ago, that his pan-global dance music experimentation would lead to this, with a handful of innocuous reggae songs on radio. (He also had a hand in “Hold Up.”)

This sudden ubiquity has meant that even singers not inclined toward reggae are nudged toward it. Both Ms. Grande and Fifth Harmony have reggae-esque songs on their new albums, and with each they’re among the highlights. Ms. Grande’s cool, sultry “Side to Side” features Nicki Minaj, and Fifth Harmony’s “Scared of Happy” incorporates a quick beat somewhere between dancehall and soca for the most rhythmically intriguing song on its album.

The recent reggae-pop blueprint might have been written by Diplo, but he’s not responsible for these songs: “Side to Side” is by the pop studio wizards Max Martin and Ilya, and “Scared of Happy” is by the R&B-minded pop producers Stargate along with BloodPop (who also was a producer on Mr. Bieber’s “Sorry”). Both songs are, relatively speaking, toothless, with borrowing so casual as to be inoffensive — there is no play for authenticity, only an acknowledgment of the genre’s universal appeal.

But they both reflect a flawed assumption that reggae is incompatible with power; that its ease isn’t designed for vocal complexity. Neither Ms. Grande nor Fifth Harmony are built for relaxation, but on these songs — and the rest of their new albums — they’re encouraged to sit passively by as the beats wash over, burying them with softness.


