


Gary Burton, a multiple-Grammy-winning jazz vibraphonist, is the latest artist to cancel a performance in protest of state legislation that allows discrimination against gays, lesbians and transgender people.

His concert had been scheduled for next spring at Alcorn State University in Mississippi, which recently passed into law a measure that allows those with religious objections to deny services to gay couples. The measure has been criticized as widely discriminatory, with implications beyond its stated focus on same-sex marriage.

Beyond a show of principle, the cancellation is personal for Mr. Burton, one of the most prominent openly gay musicians in jazz. “So far it’s been famous straight people taking a stand in these states,” he said. “I figure it falls even more importantly on me to speak up.”

The singer-songwriter Bryan Adams and the comedian Tracy Morgan have also called off appearances in Mississippi, citing the new law. They join a recent series of other high-profile cancellations — by Bruce Springsteen, Ringo Starr, Pearl Jam and others — in North Carolina, over that state’s law regulating use of public bathrooms by transgender people.

Mr. Burton married his longtime partner, Jonathan Chong, in 2013. One day before their ceremony, on Cape Cod, Mass., he reflected on his life and career in an interview with The New York Times. “I thought I might lose some of my foothold in the business,” he said then, recalling his decision to come out publicly in the mid-90s. “But that didn’t happen. I always jokingly say I’m either really lucky or I have great taste in friends.”

A peerlessly influential force on the vibraphone — the Burton grip, a standard technique, bears his name — Mr. Burton is also an important figure in jazz education, through a 33-year affiliation with the Berklee College of Music in Boston.

As a bandleader he was responsible for some of the earliest stirrings of jazz fusion, in the 1960s, and has since mentored artists including the guitarists Pat Metheny and Julian Lage. He has a long collaborative history with the pianist Chick Corea: all but one of Mr. Burton’s seven Grammys have been for albums they made together.

Earlier this month Mr. Burton was recognized as a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master, the highest honor reserved for a jazz musician, in a ceremony and concert at the Kennedy Center in Washington. He is the first openly gay inductee to the Jazz Masters program, which started in 1982.

Speaking of the recent legislation in Mississippi, Mr. Burton was blunt. “It is an attack on what is already settled law,” he said. “It opens the door to not only stopping gay marriage but stopping gay life: the ability to rent a place to live, or simply do business, shop in certain stores. It’s kind of amazing that it could go this far.”


