


Lawrence Montoya was 14 when he was questioned for nearly three hours at the Denver Police Headquarters as a suspect in the killing of a schoolteacher.

There, detectives screamed at him, banged on the table and told him he would be going to prison for the rest of his life, a lawsuit says. Finally, Mr. Montoya, an eighth-grade student, confessed.

That was in 2000. In 2014, he was released from prison after new DNA tests raised doubts about his involvement in the murder. Mr. Montoya, now 31, is suing the police and city of Denver for $30 million in damages over the “coerced interrogation” and false arrest, the lawsuit says.

“He basically grew up in prison for something that he didn’t do,” said Jane Fisher-Byrialsen, one of Mr. Montoya’s lawyers. “He has tried to get used to living in a world of internet and cellphones and stuff that he did not have access to before.”

The civil rights complaint, filed June 14 in United States District Court, seeks a jury trial. It names the city and county of Denver, and several individual officers and detectives as defendants. A spokesman said the police department does not comment on pending litigation, and the acting city attorney, Shaun Sullivan, said late Monday that his office had not yet been served with court papers and could not comment.

The Montoya case is the latest in which DNA tests helped free people from prison. At least 342 criminal convictions in the United States have been reversed with the testing since 1989; 96 of those cases involve forced confessions, according to the Innocence Project, which tracks the statistics.

Ms. Fisher-Byrialsen also represents Kharey Wise, who won a $12 million settlement from New York City after serving 13 years in prison in the Central Park jogger case. Defense attorneys said those teenage suspects had been tricked or coerced into confessing, and Mr. Wise and four others were later exonerated by DNA and other evidence.

The Montoya lawsuit was reported by local Colorado outlets last week, including The Denver Post and Fox 31, which broadcast taped excerpts from the confession.

After 2 a.m. on New Years Day of 2000, the 29-year old special education teacher, Emily Johnson, was assaulted at her Denver house and later died of her injuries. The lawsuit says Mr. Montoya had been asleep at his girlfriend’s residence at the time, but he became a suspect after he went for a ride in Ms. Johnson’s stolen car with other kids, at least one of whom was later convicted in the case.

Excerpts from the Mr. Montoya’s taped confession show him slumped in a chair, his arms crossed over his chest and his head down.

“This is the time to save yourself,” a detective seated near him said.

“Are you listening to me? You better tell us what your involvement in this murder was,” the detective said.

Denying 65 times that he was involved, Mr. Montoya, whom the lawsuit described as having suffered from emotional and learning disabilities, began sobbing and eventually “confessed” to being in the teacher’s home, the lawsuit said.

A trial started in October 2000. Prosecutors accused him of accompanying 16-year-old Nicholas Martinez in what began as an effort to steal Ms. Johnson’s car but ended in her murder. Mr. Montoya was sentenced in November 2000 to life without parole for felony murder, robbery and other charges, though no physical evidence had tied him to the crime scene, the lawsuit said. Mr. Martinez was also convicted and given a life sentence, while charges against a third defendant were dropped before the trial.

Over the years, Mr. Montoya maintained his innocence. His lawyers filed a motion for a new trial saying he had ineffective counsel in 2000. They also requested DNA testing in 2013 on a jacket and shoe from the crime scene that detectives said belonged to him. It had never been tested. The results were not a match, the lawsuit said.

In 2014, a judge vacated his conviction after Mr. Montoya pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of being an accessory to the murder. That arrangement allowed him to be released with time served. In an announcement that year, the Denver district attorney’s office insisted that the case was not a DNA exoneration.

It said the office had consulted with Ms. Johnson’s family, the original prosecutors and investigators and “determined that allowing Montoya to plead guilty to being accessory was in the interest of justice.”

“Specifically, Emily’s family noted that they wanted to speak with Emily’s voice and heart, and that she would want Montoya to have another chance,” the statement said.

But Ms. Fisher-Byrialsen said that with the absence of DNA matches, the confession was “the only argument for the arrest warrant they had,” she said. “Nothing else.”


