


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking six days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

I was in London recently, rambling around town with Yotam Ottolenghi in his Prius, then watching him cook with pals for this awesome feast he put together in celebration of spring. (Check out this cool store Ceramica Blue, where he buys plates and platters.) You can read about the adventure here, then use the recipes to create your own extravaganza.

I scored his great recipe for lamb shawarma, which he served on top of rosemary cuttings from the garden in South London where we ate. I think it’s the highest use of rosemary imaginable, and beautiful to boot. It pairs incredibly well with his saffron-scented recipe for baked rice.

To go along with, how about his recipe for a deconstructed baba ghanouj? And a platter of grilled asparagus with a caper salsa? You could make this terrific recipe for a cucumber and mâche salad – if you can find purslane to swap out for the mâche, so much the better. And a tomato and pomegranate salad? Yes, please: that, too.

For dessert, Yotam knocked out what he calls a celebration cake, a gluten-free layer cake of astonishing beauty and great deliciousness. Get started on it tonight – you’ll need to freeze the layers overnight, and make the ganache as well.

That’s one idea for a weekend of cooking, anyway. Alternatively, you could take a slightly easier route and fire up the grill for a weekend repast of Mark Bittman’s recipe for spicy grilled shrimp. Or Martha Rose Shulman’s recipe for grilled halloumi and vegetables. Or Melissa Clark’s recipe for yakitori chicken.

We love Amanda Hesser’s recipe for rhubarb-strawberry mousse this time of year. And Emily Weinstein’s recipe for a simple strawberry tart, adapted from Yossy Arefi.

And take a close look at the farmers’ market tomorrow. Do you seen dandelion greens? If so, grab some and make David Tanis’s recipe for dandelion salad with beets, bacon and goat cheese toasts. You won’t be sorry.

Other ideas for what to cook this weekend can be found by browsing through the Cooking site and apps. Save the recipes of interest to you to your recipe box. Then cook them! And if you run into problems, either with the food or the technology that supports its preparation, please let us know. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com and will get back to you.

Now, read the oral history of Run-DMC’s 1986 collaboration with Aerosmith on “Walk This Way” in The Washington Post. Read Nicholas Casey’s horrifying report on Venezuela’s failing hospitals in The Times. Hail John Berry, an original Beastie Boy, who died yesterday at 52. And don’t forget to wish Tina Fallon a happy anniversary day. She’s put up with me 16 years! Have a great weekend.


