


WASHINGTON — Arrayed along a strip of pavement, with the White House as the backdrop, the five Nordic leaders held forth Friday afternoon before clusters of reporters from their home countries — a rare tableau of prime ministers and one president linking themselves with the planet’s most powerful residence.

The leaders had come to Washington to spend much of the day at the White House and attend a state dinner. Being the delighted guests they were, none complained about failing to get a dinner devoted exclusively to their own countries.

“It’s always best to be invited to come alone, but then there wouldn’t have been a 90-minute meeting and a state dinner,” Prime Minister Erna Solberg of Norway said recently.

Mr. Obama has for years showered praise on Nordic countries, telling an interviewer not long ago that “if only everyone could be like the Scandinavians, this would all be easy.”

In a morning welcoming ceremony that was moved inside because of the rainy weather that has cursed Washington for weeks, Mr. Obama gave a long list of values shared by the United States and the Nordic countries — Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark and Iceland.

“So I really do believe that the world would be more secure and more prosperous if we just had more partners like our Nordic countries,” Mr. Obama said. “There have been times where I’ve said, ‘Why don’t we just put all these small countries in charge for a while, and they could clean things up.’”

Nordic nations, of course, have their own challenges. Prime Minister Sigurdur Ingi Johannsson of Iceland, for instance, was a late addition, having been appointed only last month after his predecessor stepped down over revelations related to an offshore company owned by his family. Mr. Johannsson’s nation is still recovering from the near collapse of its financial system in 2008. Norway and Denmark have been hurt by low oil prices; Sweden is contending with renewed racial tensions; and Finland is struggling with lost trade with Russia and the decline of Nokia.

But Mr. Obama praised the countries for “punching above their weight” on the international stage, and said that Friday’s summit meeting and state dinner were an important acknowledgment.

“Sometimes we have a tendency to take our best friends for granted, and it’s important that we not do so,” he said.

Meeting in the Oval Office, the leaders discussed issues like growing Russian aggression, refugees, climate change and the fight against the Islamic State. At the same time, Michelle Obama, the first lady, walked across Pennsylvania Avenue with their spouses to the Renwick Gallery to watch a student musical performance.

Heather A. Conley, the director of the Europe Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said the summit meeting and dinner were a smart investment in international diplomacy.

“You have to tend the garden,” Ms. Conley said. “When that doesn’t happen, it can cause some problems.”

Mr. Obama said “there was probably too much agreement to make for as exciting a multilateral meeting as I sometimes participate in.” A joint statement indeed had a laundry list of agreements, including a pledge to cooperate more on security in the region.

“Russia’s illegal occupation and attempted annexation of Crimea, which we do not accept; its aggression in Donbas; and its attempts to destabilize Ukraine are inconsistent with international law and violate the established European security order,” the statement said. Donbas is a region in eastern Ukraine.

As members of the coalition against the Islamic State, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark reaffirmed their commitment to defeat the militant group. Denmark and Norway have each contributed nearly as many troops in Iraq as Germany.

The countries agreed to apply strict environmental standards and climate-change goals to any development of Arctic regions, joining Canada in pledges that could significantly curtail future energy exploration and fishing in one of the most ecologically sensitive regions of the world. Among the major Arctic powers, only Russia has yet to agree to a similar framework.

At the state dinner, attendees were to be serenaded by the pop singer Demi Lovato in a tent with a transparent ceiling that would allow guests to see the night sky.

The guests included the comedian Aziz Ansari, the actress Tracee Ellis Ross, the actor Will Ferrell, the former television host David Letterman and the chef Marcus Samuelsson, who was raised in Sweden.

The tables had ice vases filled with white flowers, and the menu featured cured salmon, salt-cured ahi tuna and a venison tartar with truffle vinaigrette. For dessert, each table was to receive an edible fishing boat made of chocolate and gum paste. In one of the many challenges of the evening, each boat had to fly six flags.


