


When the Brazilian painter Roberto Burle Marx started to design gardens in the early 1930s, landscape architecture wasn’t considered much of a discipline. The recognizable geometric shapes, stringent symmetry and acceptable flora established in French gardens had remained unchallenged for centuries; Burle Marx abandoned the rigid layouts and began to use local plants. Importantly, he treated these projects as a form of art. “The flowers and the plants were his brushes and his colors, and the landscape became the canvas,” says Jens Hoffmann, the deputy director of exhibitions and public programs at the Jewish Museum. “And there was an added dimension of time. He became very, very sophisticated in his understanding of the way that things grow, when, under what conditions — and he could influence these conditions, too, by planting things next to one another, or he sometimes created shadows so certain plants weren’t exposed to light.”

In putting together an exhibition of Burle Marx’s work, Hoffmann and his co-curator, Claudia J. Nahson, had to address a glaring issue: “You can’t transport any of the gardens to New York,” he says. Sure, they assembled plans, maquettes and photographs of some of his 2,000 landscapes. They also lucked out, as Hoffmann says: “Burle Marx made a lot of other things.”

“Roberto Burle Marx: Brazilian Modernist,” opening Friday, puts on display more than 100 different items that span six decades, and account for work in a huge variety of fields: landscape architecture and painting, of course, but sculpture, theater design, textiles and jewelry, too. “He had a hand in almost every medium that you can imagine,” Nahson says. “He really had this urge to create, and he said that although his various fields of expression were all interconnected, he still approached each medium in its own way. ‘If I’m doing a painting, I’m doing a painting. If I’m doing a garden, I’m not doing a painting, I’m doing a garden.’” The show comprises traditional still-life oil paintings, a tile mosaic reminiscent of Matisse’s “Dance,” Art Deco-like bracelets, nearly Cubist Pithecellobium tortum plant studies, semi-Futurist bronze statues and his later-in-life acrylic paintings on denim (he died in 1994). Taking it all in, it seems the singular commonality is actually Burle Marx himself, whom Nahson describes as a Renaissance man, noting that in his spare time he cooked, sang baritone and cared deeply about ecology.

A 90-foot-long wool tapestry made for the Santo André Civic Center in 1969 comes closest to a garden, according to Hoffmann, and is installed along a back wall, so the shapes unfold across the horizon; Burle Marx’s preferred plants, philodendrons and bromeliads, fill the entrance to the exhibition; one of the galleries is devoted to the artist’s former plantation outside of Rio de Janeiro; and a screen over the museum’s Central Park-facing window leaves the nearby nature viewable. However, it’s the American experimental musician Arto Lindsay who provided the finishing touch (the exhibition is part retrospective and part group show of contemporary talents): a soundscape that allows viewers to feel entirely enveloped, Nahson remarks, as one would in a Burle Marx garden.


