


Ruhrfestspiele Various venues, through June 19

The Confederation of German Trade Unions is a co-sponsor of this theater festival, an international, interdisciplinary affair that is one of the oldest summer events in Europe. The festival focuses on heady, experimental theater pieces, and works that push genre boundaries. Highlights this year include an adaptation of “Oresteia” by the Italian director Romeo Castellucci, and a stage adaptation of the French writer Michel Houellebecq’s novel, “Submission,” about an Islamic political party coming to power in France. Some dance works like this one will appear in the festival alongside traditional theater. ruhrfestspiele.de

Jesters, Villains and Players at the Medici Court Galleria d’Arte Moderna di Palazzo Pitti, through Sept. 11

This exhibition explores the art of the Medici court in the 17th and 18th centuries, focusing on depictions of social outcasts, like gamblers, jesters and dwarves. Around 30 artworks are on view, including pieces by Gabbiani, Bocchi and Bosch. The show examines how the appetite for renderings of unusual subjects in that period opened up new artistic possibilities for painters. polomuseale.firenze.it

Russia and the Arts; From Elizabeth to Victoria National Portrait Gallery; State Tretyakov Gallery, through June 26; July 24

These two major museums are making an exchange this spring, with each displaying prominent works from the other’s collection. The two exhibitions focus on portraiture. The National Portrait Gallery show features Russian portraits painted from the 1860s to the brink of World War I — like Valentin Serov’s portrait of Ivan Morozov. The show at the Tretyakov focuses on artwork produced from the time of Elizabeth I to the time of Queen Victoria. npg.org.uk; tretyakovgallery.ru

Modafe Arko Arts Theater, May 18-29

Dance companies and performers from around the world, including LEV from Israel, Cie Philippe Saire from Switzerland, the dancer-choreographer Nobuyoshi Asai from Japan and the Scottish Dance Theater will appear in this contemporary festival. Some companies will show new and recent works. Several companies from South Korea will also perform. modafe.org

Mawazine Festival Rhythms of the World Various venues, May 20-28

This diverse event — a world music festival with a popular music flair — will include performances by American pop stars, Spanish flamenco artists, Moroccan folk musicians and a Pakistani fusion concert. The major pop acts include Chris Brown, Iggy Azalea, Pitbull and Christina Aguilera. Ms. Aguilera will play the festival’s final main stage concert, at the giant outdoor venue, the OLM Souissi. festivalmawazine.ma

Festival Internacional de Teatro Palco & Rua de Belo Horizonte Various venues, May 20-29

Street spectacles, performance art and traditional theater will all play a part in this festival, which takes place at an eclectic range of venues across this medium-sized city in eastern Brazil (around half of the shows are street pieces that take place outdoors). Pieces in the lineup include “The Gospel According to Jesus, Queen of Heaven,” about a transgender Jesus returning to Earth; and Dakh Daughters, a “freak cabaret” band from Ukraine. fitbh.com.br

Luminous: Australian Watercolors 1900–2000 NGV Australia, through Aug. 21

Gouache and watercolor paintings by around 50 Australian artists are on view in this exhibition of works from the museum’s collection. The show looks at how artists rendered the Australian landscape in paint, and how, beginning around the 1950s, they began to experiment with new styles. Artists on view include Tony Tuckson, Frank Hinder, Joy Hester and John Brack. ngv.vic.gov.au

Albert Marquet: Painter of Time Pending Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, through Aug. 21

Around 100 artworks by the French painter Albert Marquet are on view in this solo show, which aims to shed light on an often-overlooked artist. Marquet (1875-1947) was associated with the bright, abstract Fauvist movement early in his art career, but his tastes changed over the decades (some of his works looked much more like traditional Impressionist pieces). The show explores his relationship to those art movements, and to other artists, like Matisse, with whom he had a close friendship throughout his life. The show travels to the Pushkin Museum in Moscow in October. mam.paris.fr


