


Brendan Steele, whose only PGA Tour victory was in his rookie season five years ago, shot a five-under-par 67 and was tied for the lead with Matt Kuchar (66) at 132 in the Memorial at Muirfield Village in Dublin, Ohio. The scoring was so good that the cut was at two-under 142, the lowest since Jack Nicklaus started the tournament in 1976.

AIMING FOR A REPEAT Anna Nordqvist began her title defense in the ShopRite L.P.G.A. Classic in Galloway Township, N.J., with a seven-under 64. She birdied nine of her last 12 holes and shared the lead with Ai Miyazato and Paula Reto.

Martina Hingis and Leander Paes each completed a career Grand Slam in mixed doubles as they won the French Open final against Sania Mirza and Ivan Dodig, 4-6, 6-4, 10-8. It was the 10th mixed doubles title at a major for India’s Paes, the fifth for Switzerland’s Hingis.

John Lackey struck out nine while pitching into the seventh inning, and the Chicago Cubs pulled away late to beat the Arizona Diamondbacks, 6-0, for their ninth win in 10 games. Lackey (6-2) combined with three relievers on Chicago’s sixth shutout, allowing five scattered hits. And the Cubs, pursuing their first World Series title since 1908, improved to 38-15, the best record in the majors. “It’s too early to talk about surreal,” Lackey said. “We have high goals. We have a long way to go before we can reach that.”

INDIANS BEAT ROYALS AGAIN In pitching Cleveland to its fourth victory in five games against Kansas City this season, 6-1, Danny Salazar (6-2) allowed two runs or less for the ninth time in his 11 starts.

The federal judge hearing the Minnesota Vikings’ dispute with Wells Fargo over office-tower rooftop signs near the team’s new stadium said he would rule by June 24 on whether the case will proceed to trial, with neither side budging after months of negotiations.

U.S. Bank Stadium, named for a Wells Fargo competitor, will formally open this summer. Across the street, twin 17-story office towers are each emblazoned, at a total cost of $490,000, with red-and-yellow Wells Fargo logos, as part of a mixed-use development largely funded by that bank. The Vikings’ lawyers have called the signs a giant “photo bomb” of aerial images of the $1.1 billion stadium, like those from a blimp during football telecasts.

FULLBACK FACES CHARGES The former Seahawks fullback Derrick Coleman Jr., 25, was charged with felony hit and run and vehicular assault related to a crash in Seattle in October. Coleman, a free agent, is legally deaf, and he wrote a book about overcoming his disability to play football.

Sugar Rodgers scored 21 points to help the host Liberty (3-3) beat the Indiana Fever, 91-59, in a rematch of the W.N.B.A. Eastern Conference finals. Shavonte Zellous, who signed with the Liberty after six seasons with Indiana, scored 13. The rookie Tiffany Mitchell scored 11 points to lead the Fever (3-4).


