


BLACKWOOD, N.J. — Hillary Clinton on Wednesday mocked Donald J. Trump as evasive and secretive after he suggested that he would not release his tax returns before the November election, which would be a break with 40 years of political precedent.

But Mr. Trump quickly hit back, saying that he still intended to release his tax returns as soon as a federal audit was completed — and that Mrs. Clinton was hitting him out of desperation.

Mrs. Clinton, at a rally here to open her campaign for the New Jersey primary on June 7, had just begun attacking Mr. Trump’s proposed tax cuts for wealthy Americans when a man in the audience called out, “What about his tax returns?”

Mrs. Clinton, who often ignores catcalls, smiled and said, “We’ll get to that.”

Moments later she urged the man and other voters to keep asking to see Mr. Trump’s tax filings and indicated that her campaign would make them an issue in the general election, saying, “We’ll get around to that, too.”

“Because when you’re running for president and you become the nominee, that’s kind of expected,” said Mrs. Clinton, who, with her husband, former President Bill Clinton, has released annual tax returns since 1977 and posted eight years of returns on her campaign website.

“So you’ve got to ask yourself, why doesn’t he want to release them?” Mrs. Clinton said with a slightly dark edge to her voice. “Yeah, well, we’re going to find out.”

The tax filings are a ripe target for the Clinton campaign given that Mr. Trump has been portraying her as the candidate with something to hide, attacking her for using a private email server as secretary of state and earning millions of dollars for paid speeches that have not been made public.

Clinton advisers have also been seeking fresh lines of attack on Mr. Trump’s character, given that he has begun criticizing Mrs. Clinton as an “enabler” of Mr. Clinton’s extramarital behavior. By seizing on the tax issue, rather than responding directly to Mr. Trump’s broadsides, the Clinton campaign could undermine Mr. Trump’s attempt to sit in judgment of the character and transparency of the Clintons.

Mr. Trump, who had said for months that he would release his returns for voters to scrutinize, opened himself up for criticism after he told The Associated Press, in an interview published on Wednesday, that he did not plan to release his returns before the general election.

“There’s nothing to learn from them,” Mr. Trump told The A.P., explaining that he did not think voters were particularly interested in the contents of his returns.

Mr. Trump, in a telephone interview later on Wednesday, said he was following legal advice by not releasing his tax returns until the “very unfair government audit” was complete.

“I will release them as soon as the audit is done. I hope that’s soon,” he said. “I’d like to do it before the election.”

Mr. Trump added that he thought Mrs. Clinton was attacking him because she was struggling to win over voters and beat Senator Bernie Sanders for the Democratic nomination.

Making tax returns public is not required of presidential candidates, but there is a long tradition of major party nominees doing so. Joseph J. Thorndike, who tracks presidential tax returns as the director of the Tax History Project at the nonpartisan Tax Analysts, said Mr. Trump would be the first major candidate since 1976 to not make any of his full returns public. President Gerald R. Ford released a summary of his tax returns that year.

Dr. Thorndike noted that President Richard M. Nixon released his tax returns while he was under audit, starting the tradition of presidential candidates making their returns public.

“I think 40 years of tradition carries real moral and ethical weight,” Dr. Thorndike said. “It is quite striking that a major candidate would decide not to release their tax information — especially someone with an admittedly complex tax situation.”

Among the most prominent people to call on Mr. Trump to release his returns this year has been Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee, who did not want to release his tax returns but finally relented under pressure. One of the people who encouraged him to do so was Mr. Trump, who said that Mr. Romney should be proud of his wealth and not hold back his financial information.

At her New Jersey rally, Mrs. Clinton highlighted Mr. Trump’s tax returns to reinforce a broader point about his approach to taxation, portraying him as a billionaire businessman who was concerned only with his own interests and those of fellow wealthy Americans.

She said that his tax plan — which envisions a top tax rate of 25 percent, compared with the current maximum rate of 39.6 percent — would provide $3 trillion in tax relief to millionaires and billionaires over the next decade, a figure that her campaign attributed to an analyst at a left-leaning think tank. She also cited studies showing that the plan would add $34 trillion to the national debt over 20 years.

“Donald Trump’s tax plan was written by a billionaire for billionaires,” Mrs. Clinton said, adding that $3 trillion would be “enough money to make Social Security and Medicare solvent for the next 75 years.”

Mrs. Clinton was blunt about her own tax plans, noting that she would target the wealthy and rule out any tax increases on middle-class Americans.

“I do want to raise rich people’s taxes because they have benefited the most from the economy in the last 15 years,” she said to cheers from several hundred union workers, college students, professors and others gathered in a gym at Camden County College. “It’s time they paid their fair share for America’s prosperity and our success.”


