


The group resurrecting New York City Opera from bankruptcy announced on Tuesday that it would be collaborating with an important figure from the company’s past: the director Harold Prince, who plans to stage Leonard Bernstein’s “Candide” next season.

“It’s all about City Opera: I want the people’s opera back in New York,” said Mr. Prince, 88, who directed a number of celebrated productions for the old City Opera, including the well received company premiere of “Candide” in 1982, which helped change perceptions of the piece.

Mr. Prince said in a telephone interview that he had been outraged to see the old company, which was founded by Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia in 1943 to bring opera to the masses, descend into mismanagement and, ultimately, bankruptcy. “When that happened I was appalled, furious,” he said. “You know, my God, Fiorello gave us this!”

The new “Candide,” which will open on Jan. 6 at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center and will be based on the productions Mr. Prince mounted at City Opera and on Broadway, is a centerpiece of the company’s 2016-17 season. The company’s other operas at the Rose Theater next season will include a double bill that pairs Rachmaninoff’s rarely seen “Aleko” with Leoncavallo’s crowd-pleasing staple, “Pagliacci”; Respighi’s “La Campana Sommersa” (“The Sunken Bell”), a coproduction with the Teatro Lirico di Cagliari; and Peter Eotvos’s “Angels in America,” based on the Tony Kushner play, which will receive its New York premiere on June 10, 2017.

It will be the company’s first full season since it emerged from bankruptcy under new management. This year it hastily put together an abbreviated season. Its first productions, of Puccini’s “Tosca” and Stewart Wallace’s 1997 chamber opera “Hopper’s Wife,” received mixed reviews.

Michael Capasso, the company’s new general director, said in an interview that he had tried to include several of the elements that once made City Opera a vibrant part of New York’s cultural scene: a mixture of operatic chestnuts, rarities from the past, new works and seminal American pieces like “Candide.”

“The idea is that we’ll always have an American piece that has strong ties to City Opera’s past,” Mr. Capasso said. “So much of what is now the standard rep of American opera all comes from City Opera.”

He added that the company was building itself back up — mining a database of 450,000 people who previously bought tickets or donated to the company, in the hopes of persuading them to return; issuing refunds to patrons who bought tickets to performances that were canceled after the company declared bankruptcy in 2013; beginning to pay creditors in the bankruptcy case; and hiring a lean staff.

The company also plans to offer a pair of chamber operas next season. “Fallujah,” a 90-minute one-act by Tobin Stokes, a Canadian composer, with a libretto by Heather Raffo that explores the Iraq war, will open on Nov. 17 at a location to be announced. And City Opera will present a Spanish Baroque rarity, “Los Elementos” by Antonio de Literes (1673-1747), in May 2017 at Harlem Stage.

“Los Elementos” will be the second installment in the nascent company’s “Ópera en Español” series, which aims to present an opera in Spanish each season. Its first, “Florencia en el Amazonas,” by Daniel Catán and inspired by the magical realism of Gabriel García Márquez, will be given its New York premiere by the company on June 22 at the Rose Theater. Mr. Capasso said that the company also planned to perform in Bryant Park this summer. City Opera has also commissioned the composer Tobias Picker to write “American Venus,” about the true story of the rise and fall of a Gilded Age supermodel, for its 75th anniversary in 2019.

Mr. Prince said he was grateful that the company had opted to reorganize in bankruptcy rather than close.

“The one correct thing they’ve done is to allow the name to continue,” he said. “It’s all in business, and, God, I hope it flourishes.”


