


John Frank Corvino and Mark Darrell Lock were married Friday at their home in Detroit. Judge Helene N. White of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, who has her chambers in Detroit, officiated.

Mr. Corvino (left), 46, is a professor and the chairman of the philosophy department at Wayne State University in Detroit. He is a co-author of “Debating Same-Sex Marriage” and the author of “What’s Wrong With Homosexuality?” He graduated from St. John’s University and received a doctoral degree in philosophy from the University of Texas.

He is the son of Annette R. Corvino and John R. Corvino of Round Rock, Tex. The groom’s mother retired as an aesthetician in Austin, Tex. His father, also retired, was a vice president for customer service and sales at Barton Press, a printing company that was in West Orange, N.J.

Mr. Lock, 41, is a staff lawyer in the legal department of Ally Financial, a financial services company in Detroit. He graduated from Wayne State University and received a law degree from Michigan State.

He is the son of Juliet A. Lock and Percival O. Lock of Macomb Township, Mich. His mother is a registered nurse at Hutzel Women’s Hospital in Detroit. His father retired as a plant maintenance mechanic for the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.

The couple were introduced at a party hosted by a mutual friend in Royal Oak, Mich., in October 2000.

The following day, Mr. Lock called Mr. Corvino and the two had a pleasant conversation. But nothing more.

Both understood that it was Mr. Corvino’s turn to call Mr. Lock, and he didn’t. To this day, he is still not quite clear about why he balked, though he had recently broken up with a partner, he said. “Maybe I didn’t feel ready for a relationship,” he said.

In summer 2001, the two began bumping into each other regularly in Detroit, again through their mutual friends. But it was awkward, both agreed.

“I was the jerk who didn’t call him back,” Mr. Corvino said.

“I was hesitant, and I was kind of over it,” Mr. Lock said.

Eventually, after getting to know each other and realizing that they had much in common (including both being raised Roman Catholic and attending Catholic schools), they set a first date for mid-September, and even after the events of 9/11, they decided to keep it.

“We went out for sushi, had a nice time and have been together since,” Mr. Corvino said.


