


LOS ANGELES — Lawsuits by artists and collectors, seeking the return of consigned works, demanding profits, or both, have never stopped Douglas Chrismas, the founder of Ace Gallery, from doing business. An early champion of trailblazers like Robert Irwin, Richard Serra and Michael Heizer, Mr. Chrismas has spent nearly 50 years helping to start or jump-start the careers of artists here, even as he was scrutinized for sometimes failing to pay when works sold.

But on April 6, Mr. Chrismas lost the keys to his gallery, after failing to make a $17.5 million court-ordered payment to settle his debts in a long-running Chapter 11 bankruptcy case. Sam Leslie, a bankruptcy trustee, took over as what he calls a “de facto C.E.O. of the reorganized business,” which includes a 30,000-square-foot mega-gallery in a historic Art Deco building in the mid-Wilshire district, and a space in Beverly Hills.

“It’s a new world for Ace,” said Mr. Leslie, who is trained in forensic accounting. “Douglas is no longer involved in finances.” Mr. Leslie’s big challenge is tracing ownership of thousands of artworks held by Ace. He plans to sell what he can to satisfy the gallery’s creditors.

Dozens of artists could be affected by his decisions, said Christine Steiner, a lawyer who has worked with some of the gallery’s artists. “So many important artists have showed with Ace and deposited works with the gallery,” she said, but under Mr. Chrismas, she added, “the gallery has made it very difficult for some artists to pick up their art. I think the fact that an accountant is taking over is going to be seismic.”

De Wain Valentine is one of a handful of artists who filed claims during the bankruptcy case, seeking back payments or return of artwork, bringing to light the sort of artist-dealer disputes that often remain behind closed doors.

He is seeking the return of eight early, experimental sculptures, made in resin or acrylic, consigned to Ace in 2010 to 2012. The group includes a study for his monumental “Gray Column” sculpture once featured at the Getty Museum. His claim placed their value at around $1.45 million.

“The artworks are not on display at the gallery,” said Mr. Valentine’s lawyer, Gregory Salvato, “so we don’t even know for sure whether they’ve been sold or if they’re in storage.”

Asked in an interview last week why he had not returned the eight artworks, Mr. Chrismas said, “It’s complex because we believe De Wain owes the gallery a large chunk of money.”

Mr. Salvato responded, “We have absolutely no idea what he is talking about.” Mr. Valentine said, “He’s never advanced me any money.”

Mary Corse, one of the few women associated with the Southern California Light and Space movement of the ’60s, makes highly reflective paintings that have been gaining in value. She, too, has filed a motion seeking the return of her early, pre-1980 artwork. She is not, however, attempting to recover recent work or to cancel her contract with Ace, which grants the gallery exclusive international representation in exchange for advances now at $60,000 per month.

Ms. Corse’s lawyer, Jerome S. Cohen, said, “Mary Corse has enjoyed a good working relationship with Ace Gallery, and Ace has been responsive to her requests.”

Mr. Leslie is now keeping both branches of the gallery open and beefing up sales staff. He is also planning to engage Mr. Chrismas to help with exhibitions and sales.

Founded in Los Angeles in 1967, Ace has shown a wide range of art, with a strength in post-minimal sculpture. Known for his adventurousness, Mr. Chrismas let artists like Mr. Irwin and Mr. Heizer radically remake his gallery architecture. Mr. Chrismas since helped put Tim Hawkinson and Tara Donovan on the map with big shows in his cavernous spaces in Los Angeles, as well as in a New York branch that’s now defunct.

He also organized early solo shows of Bruce Nauman, Sol LeWitt, Andy Warhol, Sam Francis and Ed Ruscha, but complaints of late checks began early, too. In a 1979 entry from the book “The Andy Warhol Diaries,” Warhol said that Mr. Chrismas gave him the runaround: “He’s so awful … If he’d just say, ‘I can’t pay you,’ you’d know where you stood.” As Kristine McKenna reported in a 2003 article in L.A. Weekly, Mr. Chrismas had been sued more than 55 times under nine different business names — “by artists, dealers, collectors, private investors, service industries, landlords and former friends.”

Ms. McKenna’s article begins: “One of the great mysteries of the art world is how Doug Chrismas keeps on doing what he does.”

Looking relaxed at the gallery after a meeting with Mr. Leslie, Mr. Chrismas put a positive spin on the new situation, which will allow Ace to continue for the time being — nobody will say how long. “I’m so thrilled these gentlemen are here,” he said, adding that it relieved him from replacing light bulbs and paying bills. “I can now focus on what everyone says I do best, which is curatorial and sales.”

He said that he filed for bankruptcy in 2013 because his landlord was seeking to terminate his mid-Wilshire lease over “one month’s late rent payment.” The real incentive, he said, was the lease’s valuable purchase option.

“Coldwell Banker valued the property at $50 million; my option to buy is $20 million. That’s $30 million at stake. That’s why all of this is happening — the real estate,” Mr. Chrismas said.

But at this stage, Mr. Leslie said, art assets are also in play. “Our priority is to protect the value of the artwork,” he said. “That’s what the artists want, and that’s what we want.”

The legal claims by Ms. Corse and Mr. Valentine both cited a California law that says that consignments by artists of their own work should be held in trust and “not be subject to claim by a creditor of the consignee.” In other words, there is a difference in California between gallery-owned inventory and artist consignments.

The challenge for Mr. Leslie is telling those two groups apart. After getting an initial estimate of 750 artworks in Ace’s inventory from Mr. Chrismas, he found many more pieces on a gallery visit in March with Robert Suiter, a director at the appraisal firm Winston Art Group.

“This is a massive collection, estimated to be about 2,750 individual works,” Mr. Suiter wrote in his report. “To contextualize the size, the Broad collection is understood to have just over 2,000 works.”

“Moreover, there appears to be no computerized inventory — hard to believe, given the proliferation of art-management software providers in recent years,” the report continued.

Mr. Leslie said he was now building a proper inventory of all gallery-held artworks to track ownership, location and sales.

Gary Lang, who had made a claim for the return of numerous eye-catching circular paintings, has opted to leave work with the reorganized gallery under a renegotiated sales contract. His bankruptcy lawyer, J. Scott Bovitz, sounded optimistic about the new, “more professional” management: “I think you will see an upsurge in sales of gallery inventory under Mr. Leslie.”

Ms. Steiner, the art lawyer, predicts that other artists, who have had a hard time retrieving their work, will use this opportunity to do so.

“I hope those artists now line up at the door with their consignment sheets and demand their work back,” she said, “so they can get on with their lives and careers.”


