


ARLINGTON, Tex. — The Yankees did not take batting practice Wednesday, which is to say they spent only slightly less time hitting baseballs than they have in many games this season.

Manager Joe Girardi said the move had been intended to give his team of older players a break, after nine consecutive days of games, and was not designed to shake them out of their offensive doldrums. The idea of doing something whimsical, like pulling his batting order out of a hat — as some managers occasionally do when their hitters are mired in a funk — did not appeal to his sensibilities.

“I’m too math oriented to do that,” said Girardi, who majored in engineering at Northwestern.

The math for the Yankees is beginning to add up this season. And the bottom line is that an offense meant to carry them by pounding baseballs off the walls and over them is not doing much of either.

It was more of the same Wednesday night when the Yankees were muzzled by the Texas Rangers, 3-2. They concluded the series having scored a total of six runs and have scored more than four runs only once since April 9.

It was their 10th loss in 14 games and kept them in last place in the American League East as they head to Boston for a three-game series this weekend.

“We know that we can be more productive than we’re doing right now,” right fielder Carlos Beltran said. “It’s just not working, my man. I cannot point a finger on what it is or how or the reasons. I just think right now we’re approaching every day with the right attitude and a great mentality — it’s just not working.”

If there was a kernel of optimism, it was the return of Alex Rodriguez, who had not played since leaving Sunday’s game after tweaking an oblique with a warm-up swing. It was unclear how much Rodriguez might help, considering he was batting just .145 this season, but he hit a solo home run, doubled, singled and walked, figuring in both of the Yankees’ runs.

“I’m just trying to find the cadence that I had last year,” Rodriguez said. “The last week has been a little better.”

Rodriguez’s single came with one out in the ninth inning, but after he was replaced by pinch-runner Aaron Hicks, Rangers closer Shawn Tolleson got Brian McCann to ground out and retired Starlin Castro on a sharp grounder to end the game.

Girardi said earlier that he was hopeful that Rodriguez’s return to the lineup would coincide with a return to the form he carried most of last season. He said Rodriguez had used the last couple of days to tinker with his swing.

Rodriguez’s return to form is important, he added, because he is a middle-of-the-order hitter. “If you get a couple guys going in the middle of the order, you can really score a lot of runs,” he said.

But other than Rodriguez, the Yankees did little to dent the left-hander Martin Perez, who was pummeled in a 21-5 loss in July, the last time he faced the Yankees.

Besides Rodriguez’s home run, double and single, the Yankees managed four other singles, which was the continuation of a troubling pattern. Their slugging percentage is .370, second worst in the A.L. Last year, it was .421, second best in baseball.

The Yankees are a team that is built around their sluggers, aging as they are, and an indomitable bullpen. Everything else — the starting pitchers, the defense, a few table setters — is in service to those strengths. So when the Yankees do not slug, they typically do not win. They are 3-12 this season in games in which they do not score more than three runs and in half their games this season they have not scored more than two.

“It’s frustrating but it’s going to turn and when it turns it’s going to turn big,” said Girardi, who was buoyed that the Yankees hit several balls hard for outs. “You can’t lose perspective. It’s 20 games; that’s one-eighth of the season.”

The Yankees got a better-than-expected performance from pitcher C. C. Sabathia, who gamely prevented big innings early before settling into a groove and retiring nine straight hitters to carry himself into the sixth inning for only the second time this season. The Rangers’ first run came when Ryan Rua scored from third on a grounder that Sabathia fielded and threw to first, reminiscent of mad dash home by the Royals’ Eric Hosmer in the clinching game of the World Series.

But after Sabathia surrendered a two-out walk to Rougned Odor in the sixth, Elvis Andrus drove a triple into the spacious right-center field gap that put the Rangers ahead, 3-2. It was not until Odor walked that Johnny Barbato began to stretch and loosen in the Yankees bullpen, a courtesy that might have been extended to Sabathia when he was the unquestioned ace of the staff, not an innings-eating fifth starter.

The decision to let Sabathia face Andrus, who had previously doubled in a run and had entered the night hitting .481 (13 for 27) against Sabathia, was even more curious considering that Girardi had said beforehand that he was ready to lean on his bullpen with an off day looming Thursday.

“I liked the way he was throwing the baseball,” Girardi said in explaining his decision. “I think he deserved to be out there. At that point it was his game.”


