


“O.K. ladies, now let’s get in formation.” These were Beyoncé’s first words at Citi Field on Tuesday night, when her “Formation” world tour made it to New York. The ladies in question — her backup dancers — were already in place, their heads nodding, like hers, under wide-brimmed black sombreros. But it’s fitting that Beyoncé acknowledged them before doing anything else. For what she does in concert, she needs all her ladies.

I went to Citi Field to check out the dancing, and there was a lot of it to take in. (The “Formation” concert has already been reviewed, when the tour opened in Miami in April.) There are sections of the show when Beyoncé sings alone, but it’s never long before the dancers return, as few as a pair or as many as 20, and she dances with them.

[ Jon Caramanica’s review of Beyoncé’s “Formation” tour ]

They are both a source and a manifestation of her strength, and it matters a great deal that they are all women — not something you see at a Rihanna or a Madonna concert. All the musicians are also women. A Beyoncé concert is a display of a female power, even when she isn’t singing about girls running the world or telling the audience that “there’s no such thing as a weak woman.” The dancers back up that message, too.

And they have her back, especially in the context of her latest album, “Lemonade,” with its story line of male infidelity and betrayal and violent emotional reactions. When she follows her own instructions in “Sorry,” to wave a middle finger in the face of a cheating man, the ladies all wave their fingers with her.

Projected images from the hourlong video version of “Lemonade,” rightly praised as an advance in Beyoncé’s artistry, give the concert much of its visual style. But nothing happens onstage that has the power of the video images of Beyoncé smashing car windows and surveillance cameras with a baseball bat and a big smile. And there’s nothing as politically provocative as the Black Panther gear that she and her dancers wore for this year’s Super Bowl halftime show. The video, in its high ambition, largely avoids dance; the concert, using dance heavily, doesn’t aim as high.

Because Beyoncé mostly does the same moves as the dancers do, and vice versa, they are a kind of visual amplifier of her dancing. As much as the jumbo-screen projections on the monolithic cube that is the concert’s main set piece, the dancers broadcast Beyoncé’s actions all over the arena. Dressed as she is, they sometimes seem an extension of her outfit, flowing behind her like a cape as she struts out onto the catwalk that extends into midfield, or advancing in front of her like body armor.

The dancers’ comings and goings are essential to the concert’s theatrical rhythm. When they leave her by herself, their absence creates a sudden intimacy, like a spotlight: just Beyoncé and her thousands of fans.

The main power expressed by the dancing is sexual. “She loves to grind,” as she says in “6 inch,” and grind she does, very well. Beyoncé has always bragged about her body and flaunted it. The strength of the choreography flows from its wide and low squats, its whipping hair, its percussive isolation of body parts, sometimes accompanied (aptly) by the sound of a gun being cocked. A hip thrust forward is a potent weapon, even when fired often, but the highest-caliber ammunition, of course, is Beyoncé’s famous backside, nearly bare in some costumes.

There is not necessarily any contradiction between this exhibition of female bodies and the theme of female empowerment, between the booty shaking and the raised fists. When Beyoncé and her dancers act out the song “Feeling Myself,” there’s a clear sense of self-pleasure, of their doing what they are doing as much for themselves as for the benefit of any man watching. And along with bragging and flaunting comes the threat of withholding, of see-what-you’ll-be-missing, an exercise of control.

And yet it’s hard not to notice that the women are often in boxes. For one number, the containers look like sarcophagi; in another, they are mirrored doors. But as the dancers writhed and slinked against their framing boxes, or cages, the image they kept summoning, at least for me, was of prostitutes selling themselves in the windows of Amsterdam’s red-light district. The bit with Beyoncé mounting a chair is borrowed from the Crazy Horse cabaret in Paris.

Sex, obviously, is part of what Beyoncé sells. But the range of her music is notably wider than that of her movement. Her songs, especially on the current album, break out of genre boxes, and her versatile voice handles many accents and styles. The dancing is much more restricted. It has essentially three formations: vertical line, horizontal line or a “V” with Beyoncé at the tip. It is always attached to the song’s rhythm in the same way, the line of bouncing dancers looking like a graphic equalizer on an old stereo flashing the beat in mobile bar-chart form.

The tough-girl country song “Daddy Lessons” occasions a little shuffling and a hint of the Virginia reel. And for “Freedom,” the ladies slip out of their platform heels to splash in a wading pool of water, their swinging kicks and stomps sloshing up the party-time release toward which the whole concert rushes, the water emphasizing the footwork absent elsewhere.

But mostly, the dancing stays in one mode. A bit of aerial display with women in harnesses is perfunctory. Beyoncé sings her anger and pain and vulnerability. She doesn’t dance it.

No one can say that Beyoncé isn’t a hard worker. Where other pop stars throw their fans bits of clothing or drumsticks, she throws them towels drenched in her sweat. Is it asking too much to want more from her? Beyoncé raises expectations.


