


Midway through “Miles Ahead,” Miles Davis, anticipating a journalist’s question, asks, “Why don’t you play like you used to?” He answers himself: “You have to play a long time to be able to play like yourself.”

Comebacks, however, are not simply what haunt Davis (played here magnificently by Don Cheadle) in his non-recording years in the late 1970s, when the movie is set. Chasing the ghost of one’s first love, whether it be the muse for the music or simply the music itself, coincidentally is the main conceit for two other new jazz movies, the Chet Baker-inspired “Born to Be Blue” and “Nina,” based on Nina Simone.

As much as these movies resemble each other — with flashbacks and films-within-a-film, as well as plots driven by how effectively their aging characters master personal demons and professional demands — they are not so much about the life of jazz luminaries in an era past their prime. Instead, these are films about our own genre expectations and the fate of a Hollywood standard: the jazz biopic itself.

Since 1927, when Al Jolson donned blackface in “The Jazz Singer,” jazz movies, perhaps more than any other genre, have reflected and reproduced our nation’s deepest anxieties about race, gender and musical genius.

In his book “Jammin’ at the Margins: Jazz and American Cinema,” the cultural critic Krin Gabbard identified two stages of development for the jazz biopic. The first focused on white musicians and became well established in 1946 with the success of “The Jolson Story,” spurring copycats like “The Fabulous Dorseys” (1947) and “The Glenn Miller Story” (1954).

After 1960, the few jazz biopics that came to screen largely featured the stories of African-American artists: “Lady Sings the Blues” (1972), about Billie Holiday, and Clint Eastwood’s “Bird” (1988), about Charlie Parker.

Reflecting the politics of a post-civil-rights-era America, the recognition that African-Americans played a foundational role in creating and innovating in jazz was a sign of progress after their often marginal to nonexistent presence in the white jazz biopics. But while “Lady Sings the Blues” and “Bird” were lauded for the performances by Diana Ross and Forest Whitaker, the films were criticized for focusing more on their subjects’ tragic heroin addiction than their musical contributions. For African-American musicians in such movies, Mr. Gabbard wrote, “the only success is the kind that leads to self-annihilation.” He concluded, “For white artists the conditions of success are much less dire.”

But as the threat of self-annihilation hovers over “Miles Ahead,” Mr. Cheadle (who also directed, and wrote the film with Steven Baigelman) actively pushes back against such a stereotype. There are several Davises here: lover, jazz experimenter, wife abuser, addict, philanderer and racial provocateur.

The film does not simply expand our notion of Miles, but also, through his interracial friendship with David Brill (Ewan McGregor), a fictional white Rolling Stone journalist that Mr. Cheadle has said he had to add to get financing, the film completely explodes the category of the jazz biopic itself. Unlike in “Bird,” the main white character here is not a savior but a source of slapstick humor, less the filter through which we are supposed to understand Miles’s genius and more a character who ultimately misreads Miles’s silence as failure rather than creative process. In this sense, “Miles Ahead” is the quintessential anti-jazz biopic — messy, sprawling, nonlinear and triumphant.

And oddly feminist. One trait that jazz biopics, white or black, have shared historically is the marginalization of black women as wives, lovers and actual artists. Davis’s first wife, the dancer Frances Taylor (played by Emayatzy Corinealdi), is cast not simply as the muse of Davis’s best albums, including “Kind of Blue,” but also as the figure he uses to fill up his silence.

Likewise, in “Born to Be Blue,” starring Ethan Hawke, it is Baker’s relationship with Jane Azeku (Carmen Ejogo), a composite of his three wives, that is the heart of the film. That Baker did not have an African-American wife, or had a reputation for dating African-American women, as implied by his mother in the movie, matters little. Rather, Jane is both a stand-in for and safeguard against Baker’s own racial anxiety as a white trumpeter best known for his looks, his singing and his cool West Coast sound. His desire to be accepted by Miles Davis as a peer and not a white interloper might be a cause of his heroin use and subsequent physical and musical decline but that does not result in full self-annihilation. The film’s ultimate message about his drug abuse is much more ambivalent: Being high enables him, as he says, to walk through “the spaces inside and between notes,” and ultimately make the best music of his career in his final decades in Europe.

But if Baker finds freedom in getting high, in Cynthia Mort’s “Nina,” Simone (Zoe Saldana) has no such luck. Instead, after pointing a gun (in a scene quite similar to one in “Miles Ahead”) at an executive who owes her money, the 62-year-old Simone is hospitalized for psychological disorders and drug abuse. In this sense, the movie riffs on the opening of “Lady Sings the Blues,” in which a dazed and crazed Holiday, charged with possession of heroin, goes through a tormenting withdrawal, only to be saved by her soon-to-be-husband, Louis McKay (Billy Dee Williams).

Even though it is Simone’s nurse, Clifton Henderson (David Oyelowo), rather than her lover, who saves her, both films resort to the even more familiar device that female genius must be nurtured by, rediscovered by and even dependent on men to be taken seriously. The audience learns of Simone’s singular contributions to American music through Henderson’s eyes, as he discovers old interviews and recordings, but we are simultaneously limited by his viewpoint. As Simone’s muse and our guide, Henderson simply updates the male gaze of Mr. Williams’s McKay.

But — like the criticism that Ms. Ross faced because she didn’t resemble Holiday physically or vocally (as Farah Jasmine Griffin explored in her book “If You Can’t Be Free, Be a Mystery) — “Nina” has been plagued by criticism. Most notably there was the decision to cast the light-skinned Dominican-American Ms. Saldana and, dare I say it, the offensive darkening of her face and eyes in the movie to approximate Simone’s dark brown complexion. To be fair, by inhabiting Simone’s most mercurial moments and performing Simone’s music herself, Ms. Saldana does give her best performance to date.

But it is the presentation of Simone — the bad makeup, unpicked Afro wigs and the casting of Ms. Saldana in the first place — that underscores Hollywood’s persistent resistance to showcasing the range of black women’s beauty. Equally troubling is the fact that in the film, Simone’s best music is behind her and Henderson must convince her to play again, making her comeback more tragic and her genius less illuminated than that of her male biopic counterparts.

Clearly we are in a new phase of the jazz biopic. One that self-consciously tries to both glorify and demystify the golden age of jazz, the 1950s and 1960s, in order to explain its rarefied status in American culture and the price that artists paid for their cultural transgressions. “Miles Ahead” and “Born to Be Blue” self-consciously play with genre by transforming Davis’s impressionistic style and Baker’s tender pathos from the stage to narrative structures. But perhaps for Simone, whose genre-breaking music never quite fit in the confines of jazz, a new genre of the biopic needs to be invented altogether.


