


FRONT PAGE

An obituary on Sunday and in some editions on Saturday about Muhammad Ali misstated the name of a Broadway show in which he appeared. It was “Buck White,” not “Big Time Buck White.” (“Buck White” was a musical version of the play “Big Time Buck White.”) The obituary also misstated the outcome of the 1963 fight between Ali, then still known as Cassius Clay, and Henry Cooper. The fight was stopped in the fifth round, after Cooper had knocked Clay down in the fourth; Cooper did not “go down in the fifth round ... after he had staggered Clay in the fourth.”

•

An article on Friday about the naming of Robert F. Smith as chairman of Carnegie Hall referred incorrectly to the National Museum of African American History and Culture, to which he has made substantial gifts. It is to open in September; it has not “recently opened.”

INTERNATIONAL

Because of an editing error, an article on March 25 about the simmering frustrations of many Belgians over the country’s deep and longstanding divisions, which were highlighted by the terrorist attacks of March 22, misstated the Empire State Building’s tribute to the Belgian victims on that day. The building remained dark; it was not lighted in the colors of the Belgian flag. A reader alerted The Times to the error shortly after publication, but editors failed to follow through with a correction.

SPORTS

Because of an editing error, a picture caption in some copies on Wednesday with an article about the Toronto Blue Jays’ recent success against the Yankees misstated the day Toronto’s Jose Bautista was shown throwing an imaginary ball to Yankees fans was taken. It was during the Yankees’ 6-0 win on May 24 at Yankee Stadium — not during the Blue Jays’ 4-2 victory of May 30, which was played in Toronto.

THE ARTS

A report in the “Arts, Briefly” column on Monday about this year’s Drama Desk Awards misstated the number of Tony nominations for “Hamilton,” which won seven Drama Desk Awards last year. It is 16, not 17.

•

A picture credit on Monday with the Books of The Times review of “The Course of Love” by Alain de Botton and “Labor of Love” by Moira Weigel, using information from the publisher Farrar, Straus and Giroux, misidentified the photographer. The picture, of Ms. Weigel, is by Joni Sternbach, not Jean Ervasti.

•

A television review on Saturday about “Africa’s Deadliest,” on Nat Geo Wild, misidentified some of the predators shown. A cheetah, not a cougar, eats a gazelle; and a leopard, not a cougar, is seen trying to eat a wildebeest.

WEEKEND

An art review on Friday about “Nicole Eisenman: Al-ugh-ories” at the New Museum in Manhattan and “Nicole Eisenman” at the Anton Kern Gallery in Manhattan, using information from the museum, misidentified a painting that depicts a panoply of neediness and degradation. It is “Beasley Street,” not “The Work of Labor and Care.” The review also misstated the number of paintings in the exhibition. It is 22, not 20. And the review described incorrectly one of the two people who appear in the painting “TM and Lee” at the gallery. According to the artist, one figure is intended to be of indeterminate gender; the work does not depict two women.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


