


TORONTO — Pitchers are perpetual tinkerers. If they are not this way by nature, they are made so by circumstance — having so much time on their hands by virtue of having four days between starts or many idle innings in the bullpen.

They fiddle with different grips, test new arm slots and experiment with varying velocities of their pitches, so when a pitcher toes the rubber, he does not do so by happenstance.

Where a pitcher places his plant foot may be a matter of inches, but it can make a world of difference. Jake Arietta transformed his career several years ago when he moved to the third-base side of the rubber and began to throw across his body.

So it was no trifling matter two weeks ago when, after back-to-back poor outings, Masahiro Tanaka began pitching from the first-base side of the rubber for the first time in his three seasons with the Yankees.

As encouraging as the results have been for Tanaka, there are no such simple adjustments for the Yankees, whose offense continued to flounder on Wednesday night in a 7-0 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays.

In six innings, Tanaka allowed one earned run, as well as an unearned run after center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury dropped a routine liner. Tanaka then watched Toronto bludgeon the Yankees’ bullpen to complete a three-game sweep.

The loss was the Yankees’ seventh in nine games against the Blue Jays, who have won 20 of 28 against the Yankees dating to the start of last season.

“You shut this team down to two runs in six innings, you should have an opportunity to win the game,” said Yankees Manager Joe Girardi, whose team has scored a combined five runs in its last four games.

Although Tanaka had trouble locating his pitches and allowed seven hits, his usual resolve kept Toronto scoreless until Josh Donaldson poked a 1-2 slider off the plate into right in the fifth, scoring Darwin Barney from second. “I actually threw it exactly where I wanted to, that pitch,” Tanaka said through an interpreter. “Donaldson did not have the best swing, but he got to the ball very well.”

Meanwhile, the Yankees remained punchless at the plate. Aaron Sanchez shut them out for six and two-thirds innings as the Yankees left runners in scoring position five different times. Chase Headley struck out four times, including twice to end innings with runners in scoring position, and catcher Brian McCann struck out and flied out to leave two runners aboard in the third and in the fifth.

The lack of support has been acute for Tanaka (3-1), who picked up his first loss, although his E.R.A. dropped to 2.78. The Yankees have scored three or fewer runs in six of his 11 starts.

Moving to the other side of the pitching mound was tied to his decision to stray from his four-seam fastball, which he began to do last season when his velocity dipped several miles per hour, to the low 90s. This season, he has all but abandoned the four-seamer in favor of a two-seam sinker, which complements his splitter and his slider, giving him pitches that dart left, right and down.

The move allows Tanaka’s right arm to be more centered on home plate, McCann said, giving the ball the appearance that it is coming out of the strike zone.

“It gives him a little more on both sides of the plate with right-handers,” said the pitching coach Larry Rothschild, who described the transition as relatively seamless. “The ability to command fastballs on both sides of the plate allows him to set up his other pitches.”

The reasons a pitcher stands in a particular way on the rubber are as varied as pitchers themselves. It depends on the types of pitches they throw, where they throw them from and what type of movement they get. Andrew Miller, a 6-foot-7 left-handed reliever, moved to the third-base side in 2010 because it meant a more direct path to the strike zone when he was struggling to throw strikes.

Tanaka said he was pleased with the way he had pitched in his last start, a two-hit shutout of Tampa Bay for seven innings. He was less pleased with his first start from the new spot on the mound, in which he allowed five hits and one run at Oakland, and Wednesday night’s performance, which he will examine more closely in the coming days.

Then Tanaka will spend time preparing for his next start.

“Tinkering as always,” he said.

INSIDE PITCH

Ivan Nova called a lawsuit alleging he trashed a home he had rented in White Plains “a complete lie.” The suit, filed Wednesday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan by the home’s owner, Jose Rodriguez, alleged that Nova and his ex-wife, Jasmine, held “raucous” parties between September 2014 and September 2015 and left behind a cockroach infestation. Nova said he never lived in the home but acknowledged that his name was on the lease. He said he would fight the suit, which seeks $175,000.


