


It isn’t warm. It isn’t fuzzy. From its extraterrestrial presence on the Bronx skyline to its security-state name, PSAC II is not in the least bit neighborly.

Yet it may save your life someday.

PSAC II is New York City’s second Public Safety Answering Center, where more than 11 million emergency 911 calls are taken by the Police and Fire Departments each year. Beginning next month, it is to supplement PSAC I at 11 MetroTech Center in Downtown Brooklyn.

When necessary, PSAC II can handle the work of both centers. It is intended to be virtually impregnable and, if needed, self-sufficient for three days at a time. No food deliveries. Nothing. The fuel supply for its generators can last even longer.

Time will tell whether it fulfills these promises. The city’s 911 response system has not been without problems in the past.

But officials of the de Blasio administration are confident and proud enough to have opened the $800 million PSAC II recently to a circumscribed visit.

My colleague Ángel Franco and I accepted several conditions. He agreed not to photograph the vast call room, where about 230 operators and dispatchers will soon be working on round-the-clock shifts. I agreed not to publish critical specifications that could be used to plan an attack on the building.

There is no disguising its imposing existence, however.

“There has been criticism that it’s too tall, but that height is needed for the mechanical floors,” said Feniosky Peña-Mora, the commissioner of the city’s Department of Design and Construction, which built PSAC II for the Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications. The Police and Fire Departments will operate it.

Drivers on the Hutchinson River and Pelham Parkways have watched it rise since 2010. A 240-by-240-by-240-foot concrete fortress, as tall as a 24-story apartment building and all but windowless, north of Mercy College and the Hutchinson Metro Center complex.

In recent years, motorists saw the structure clad with silver- and charcoal-colored aluminum panels. These were set in a saw-tooth pattern that makes the enormous cube blend gauzily with the sky or stand out like an impenetrably dark mesa.

Then they saw it encircled by a gently sloping earthen berm that offers extra protection.

“It has the effect of making this big box appear to float,” said Gary Haney, a partner in Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, the architects of PSAC II. The berm also makes it appear, when seen from within, as if the center were surrounded by nature, not barriers.

There are many barriers. Beyond the berm is a picket of bollards. Around the perimeter of the nine-acre site are anti-ram walls. The truck bays and the entrance pavilion are independent of the main structure, which can be isolated by thick blast doors.

Operators and dispatchers are largely confined to the building for the duration of what can be enormously draining shifts, Mr. Haney said. “So we were thinking, ‘How could we make the interior relieve some of that stress?’”

One answer involves an experiment in phytoremediation, the use of plants to help purify the interior environment, undertaken with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

Exhaust air from a training room is pumped out through ductwork to a ceiling diffuser in a nearby corridor. As the air falls from the diffuser, it is gently pulled into a grid of permeable planters lining the corridor and carried through the plants’ root systems. These act as a filter.

The cleaned air is then pumped back to the training room in a relatively closed circuit that will permit architects and engineers to measure the system’s efficacy. Whatever else, it offers a breath of greenery within the mechanical cube.

Another way the architects sought to soften life in the high-anxiety center was with natural light. Though there are not many windows in the building, some are found around the 50,000-square-foot, L-shaped call room, which has 30-foot ceilings.

Above the call room are mechanical floors where there are two of almost everything: auxiliary generators and backup generators, battery arrays and backup arrays.

The battery power will constantly be online, said Dale Peterson, the project executive from the construction agency. This will act as a buffer between the telecommunications systems and the power supplied by Consolidated Edison, preventing even the slightest dips or surges.

If Con Edison power fails completely, the batteries will carry the systems for the 21 seconds needed before the generators kick in. On the call room floor, operators and dispatchers will at first be oblivious to any citywide crisis.

“When they get the calls is when they’ll notice,” Mr. Peterson said.


