


Crimes by Americans on the Japanese island of Okinawa, home to about half the 47,000 United States troops in Japan, have chronically irritated ties between the countries. But the arrest of a Marine veteran last week in connection with the murder of a woman whose body was found in the woods has escalated into a crisis that may complicate the Pentagon’s Okinawa operations.

The case has inflamed Japanese emotions to the point that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe raised it with uncharacteristically public anger this week in his welcome to President Obama, who is visiting Japan for the Group of 7 summit meeting and a precedent-setting trip to Hiroshima, where the United States dropped an atomic bomb almost 71 years ago.

The Okinawa victim, Rina Shimabukuro, 20, an office worker from the city of Uruma, disappeared in the evening on April 28 after having gone out for a walk, according to Japanese news accounts.

The suspect, Kenneth Franklin Gadson, 32, who goes by his Japanese wife’s family name, Shinzato, was arrested exactly four weeks later, on May 19.

Mr. Shinzato, who is originally from New York and served in the Marines, was a civilian employee at Kadena Air Base, a major American military installation on Okinawa, and lived with his wife and child in the city of Yonabaru, about 22 miles south of Uruma.

Japanese news reports about the case, which quote unidentified police sources that could not be independently corroborated, provided this basic account:

Mr. Shinzato, who did not know the victim, was questioned by the police after bloodstains were found in his car. He admitted to having killed Ms. Shimabukuro and he provided the police with the location of Ms. Shimabukuro’s body, in a wooded area of Onna, about seven miles north Uruma.

He was initially charged with the illegal disposal of a body, but additional charges including homicide are expected pending the results of an autopsy.

It is not known precisely how Ms. Shimabukuro was killed, with some Japanese news reports saying she was stabbed and others saying she was strangled. No murder weapon has been found and no motive has been established. It remains unclear if she was sexually assaulted.

Stars and Stripes, a newspaper that serves the United States military community, quoted Mr. Shinzato’s Okinawa lawyer as saying Mr. Shinzato admitted to the police he had strangled the victim but that the admission had been made under questionable circumstances — Mr. Shinzato was under the influence of sleeping pills taken in an attempted suicide.

“He was still in a daze,” the lawyer, Toshimitsu Takaesu, was quoted as saying. “I do not accept a statement taken under such conditions. Right now it is the statement alone with no supporting evidence.”

Efforts to reach Mr. Takaesu by telephone and email were not immediately answered.

The English-language edition of the Mainichi Shimbun reported on Thursday that Mr. Shinzato was “not currently answering questions from investigators.”

Mr. Shinzato’s mother, Shirley Gadson, 63, told reporters in New York last week that she could not believe her son was guilty of such a crime.

Mr. Obama, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter, Caroline Kennedy, the United States ambassador in Japan, and the top Marine officer on Okinawa, Lt. Gen. Lawrence D. Nicholson, have all offered condolences and expressed regret over the killing and have pledged American cooperation.

Still, the apologies have failed to assuage opponents of the American military presence on Okinawa, who have been galvanized by what they view as a crime with no accountability.

Thousands of angry Okinawans demonstrated near the Kadena Air Base on Wednesday, according to Japanese news accounts. Okinawa’s governor, Takeshi Onaga, who has campaigned for a reduced American military presence, has said he was left speechless by the killing.

Mr. Abe, who wants to maintain close military relations with the United States, said after Mr. Shinzato’s arrest: “I demand that the United States take strict measures to prevent something like this from happening again.”

Crimes committed by Americans on Okinawa have long been an issue on the island. The most notorious was the rape of a 12-year-old schoolgirl by three American servicemen in 1995, which set off mass protests.

The American sensitivity to the underlying issue was reflected in a posting on the Kadena Air Base’s Facebook account following Mr. Shinzato’s arrest, reminding base personnel and their families to be respectful.

“As you go about your day,” the posting reads, “please remember that you are our best ambassadors to the people of Japan and our friends and neighbors in Okinawa.”


