


Name Ariana Rockefeller

Age 33

Hometown Cambridge, Mass.

Now Lives In a one-bedroom apartment in a landmark building on the Upper East Side. An avid equestrian, however, she spends as much time as possible riding and showing her four horses in Wellington, Fla.

Claim to Fame The surname says it all. Her father is David Rockefeller Jr., the prominent fourth-generation member of the Rockefeller family. But Ms. Rockefeller is distinguishing herself with her namesake fashion label. The contemporary clothing line features lots of opera coats, tweed jackets and three-quarter-sleeve dresses, and is inspired by her preppy lifestyle.

Big Break After marrying Matthew Bucklin, an entrepreneur, in 2010, Ms. Rockefeller decided to pursue her lifelong dream of starting a fashion line. “I was influenced by my grandmother Peggy McGrath Rockefeller,” she said. “She was so stylish and always put together in a way that seemed effortless, whether at the stables or a black tie wardrobe.” Her first collection was inspired by the Picasso painting “Femme et Chien Sous un Arbre,” which hung in her childhood home. In 2014, she opened a 1,000-square-foot pop-up shop in SoHo. “Having a successful brick-and-mortar space was a great litmus test for the brand’s traction with consumers,” she said. “Designing and wearing my gown for the 2015 Met Gala was a momentous occasion, too.”

Latest Project When Reed Krakoff shuttered operations last fall, and his lead handbag designer, Bassam Ali, became available, Ms. Rockefeller jumped at the opportunity. Her first handbag collection, available in September, includes the Oxer satchel ($1,125), which is finished with brass hardware inspired by a horse’s bridle.

Next Thing She is tight-lipped about her label’s future but insisted that there were no plans to become a lifestyle brand. “People might think my company is some endorsement or licensing deal, and it’s not,” she said. “I’ve been perfectly happy building my brand piece by piece.”

Family Ties Ms. Rockefeller is actually the third clothing designer in the family (the other two started the brand Porter Grey, now defunct), but she is the first to invoke her family’s surname on the label. “It certainly makes people take a look, but it kind of stops there,” she said. “The clothes ultimately need to stand on their own.”


