


Justine Ezarik, known to millions of her fans as iJustine, was one of YouTube’s earliest stars. Before Jenna Marbles, Epic Meal Time and PewDiePie began posting videos, Ms. Ezarik was busy building a brand as the attractive girl-next-door who could also beat all the boys in “Call of Duty.”

As a tech enthusiast, amateur cook and a gamer, Ms. Ezarik, 32, has entered her 10th year of recording her life and editing it into bite-size chunks for fans. After a decade of building a family-friendly main channel on YouTube, she has amassed over 3 million fans across a handful of other channels. Her videos are generally bright, goofy — and laden with strategically positioned brand-name products, like Amazon Fresh and Heinz ketchup.

With the field of YouTube celebrities growing more crowded, it’s worth asking: What can we learn from a person who has spent the past decade streaming her life, acting as her own boss and weathering the changing landscape of social media?

Start early.

The daughter of a coal miner and a gym teacher, Ms. Ezarik grew up in rural Pennsylvania building her own websites. She was 12 when she built her first: “I Hate Steve,” about a nuisance classmate. (They’re friends now.)

If you’re an early adopter of [insert hot new social platform here], interview the next Justin Bieber.

Ms. Ezarik’s segue into early live-streaming paid off. In 2010, she interviewed Justin Bieber, an up-and-coming teenage musician who owed part of his celebrity to the social media platform. At the end of their chat, Mr. Bieber looked appraisingly at his interviewer: “You’re adorable.”

Ms. Ezarik said she’s not worried about what superstardom has done to him.

“I think he’s back on track,” she said of Mr. Bieber’s subsequent growing pains, and praised his new album. “Go Biebs!”

Create an ironclad character.

When Ms. Ezarik became one of the first users of the now-defunct livestreaming site Justin.tv in 2007, a New York Times reporter’s response after watching her videos: “She left me wondering whether her show was a parody of lifecasting and whether she, like Stephen Colbert, never breaks character.”

When you meet Ms. Ezarik in person, it is not easy to spot the lines between her and iJustine. She is unfailingly enthusiastic and open. Her mood shifted to downbeat only briefly, when I asked about her problems with Internet stalking and the nasty nature of some online comments.

You will be harassed.

Yes, even if you are nice to everyone, as iJustine generally is, there can be trouble. Ms. Ezarik said that she and her fellow YouTube personalities don’t like to talk about the problems they’ve had with online harassment, but said most people in the community have dealt with this problem at some point. Ms. Ezarik said that the authorities didn’t take her complaints seriously.

“I have so much documentation of someone who was harassing me for years, and I took it to the cops, and they actually laughed at me,” she said. “They were like, ‘he didn’t say that he was going to kill you, he just wanted to kill you.’ ”

So, while her greatest joy is mingling with fans at conventions and meetups, she does not consider attending without hiring security.

Being a YouTube star can get lonely.

A loner mentality is a trait shared by many successful YouTube stars, Ms. Ezarik said. She cannot even estimate how many hours a day she is by herself in her home, sitting and recording herself in front of a screen. Nor does she have a go-to trick to disconnect. “I was going to say video games, but then I’m still in front of a screen.”

She said that the lack of face-to-face interaction can get tough.

“The biggest obstacle is staying inspired and motivated to keep doing it,” she said.

Numbers aren’t everything.

Ms. Ezarik’s subscriber count isn’t as high as other big YouTube stars. Jenna Mourey, the comic personality better known as Jenna Marbles, has some 15 million, with an income estimated at $346,000 in 2012 by TubeMogul, an ad-buying site.

But iJustine doesn’t specialize in viral videos, parodies, shock humor or makeup tutorials. She dedicates most of her programming to highly engaged followers through tech coverage, cooking and experimenting with new video technologies, like virtual reality and 360-degree video.

“The front-facing numbers that people see don’t correlate to what you’re doing in the grand scheme of things,” Ms. Ezarik said.

Seriously. Numbers mean nothing.*

Ms. Ezarik won’t say how much money she’s made over the years, if the income has allowed her to buy a house, if she’s a millionaire or how long she could survive if she walked away from it all tomorrow.

“I don’t actually ever look,” she said of her bank accounts. “That’s what the accountants are for; that’s what the investing is for.”

* Numbers obviously mean something, but it’s hard to estimate without her help or data from YouTube.

Follow your dreams! Or maybe not. Or do!

What advice would she give to aspiring iJustines? “I would probably say maybe don’t quit your job right away.”

She added: “But heck, you know what, maybe quit your job. Because maybe that would be the motivation that you need.”


