


MOSCOW — Russia’s sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, said Friday that nearly all of the Russian athletes who tested positive for the banned drug meldonium this year had returned to competition.

The notable exception is the tennis champion Maria Sharapova, who still faces a ban of six months to four years after acknowledging in March that she had tested positive for the drug at the Australian Open in January.

According to the World Anti-Doping Agency, there have been 330 positive tests this year for meldonium, a heart medication that is commonly used as a supplement in Russia.

More than 40 Russian athletes have tested positive for meldonium since WADA added it to the prohibited list in January, wreaking havoc on team lineups and affecting some of the country’s top sports figures.

Last week, a heavyweight title fight was canceled after the Russian challenger failed a test for meldonium.

But Russian officials believe their meldonium nightmare may be nearing its end.

Following a shift in WADA guidelines last month, most Russian cases involving meldonium have been quashed or provisional suspensions lifted after the athletes proved that their positive tests had resulted from use of the drug before it was banned.

“In Russia, not one athlete has been punished,” Mutko said at a news conference, according to the Interfax news agency.

For weeks, Russian sporting officials have argued that their athletes were unfairly being penalized for meldonium taken before it was banned, saying there was confusion on how long the drug takes to exit the body.

Responding to that complaint, WADA issued new guidelines in April, establishing permitted amounts of meldonium in antidoping tests, which would indicate whether an athlete had taken it before the ban.

Since then, the majority of Russian athletes publicly named as having tested positive for meldonium have had their cases dropped. Although a number of athletes are still awaiting formal rulings, they have returned to competition. Four judoists fought in the European championships just days after the new WADA decision.

With the French Open, where Sharapova is a two-time champion, about to begin, Sharapova was thought to have a hearing scheduled with the International Tennis Federation this week, according to British news reports.

Another tennis player, Sergey Betov, a Belarussian doubles specialist, recently had his case dismissed because the amount of meldonium in his sample was below WADA’s revised minimums. That meant it was possible that Betov had last used the substance in October, before it was banned on Jan. 1, as he contended.

Sharapova has said that she was taking meldonium for 10 years for various health issues and did not know that it had been added to the banned list.

With many of its athletes seemingly in the clear, Russia’s top investigative agency on Friday announced a probe into why sports officials did not ensure that the meldonium ban was properly observed.

The moves appeared to be part of a broader effort by Russia to steer its shellshocked sporting establishment into a more presentable position before a crucial international vote on whether to let the country compete at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics in August. On June 17, the International Association of Athletics Federations will decide whether to lift a provisional suspension of Russian track and field athletes, imposed after WADA found that the country had orchestrated a yearslong doping cover-up.

Officials have been scrambling to prove that Russia has done enough to overhaul its antidoping procedures for its athletes to participate.

Those efforts, though, took another hit last week, after The New York Times reported fresh accusations of an elaborate doping scheme at the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics, revealed by Grigory Rodchenkov, the former director of Russia’s antidoping laboratory.

Since that report, Russian officials have issued blustery denunciations, calling it a conspiracy, as well as careful acknowledgments that the accusations were being taken seriously.

Describing the meldonium inquiry, Vladimir Markin, a spokesman for the Investigative Committee, said in a radio interview, “I have an absolutely clear impression, which could be a subjective impression, that our so-called frenemies took the bit between their teeth and decided to fully compromise Russian sport in particular, and Russia as a whole.”

He added: “No one says that the athletes are totally clean. True, this problem exists, but it’s not just Russian; it’s a world problem.”


