


A New York City police officer was convicted on Friday of misdemeanor assault for stomping on the head of a suspect as he lay prone on a Brooklyn street while being arrested.

The officer, Joel Edouard, was one of several who arrested the suspect, Jahmi-El Cuffee, on marijuana charges in July 2014 outside of a restaurant in Bedford-Stuyvesant. A cellphone video of the arrest, introduced at Mr. Edouard’s trial this week, showed him walking away from his partners as they tried to subdue Mr. Cuffee, then returning and, with no apparent provocation, bringing his foot down hard on Mr. Cuffee’s head.

Officer Edouard opted to have a judge, not a jury, decide the case, and Justice Alan D. Marrus of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn said on Friday that Officer Edouard had “let down” his fellow officers in a difficult situation.

During the trial, Marc Fliedner, an assistant district attorney, argued that Officer Edouard, 38, had lost his cool during the episode. The scene unfolded only days after Eric Garner died during an arrest by the police on Staten Island. Officer Edouard, who at one point, before the stomping began, pointed his gun at Mr. Cuffee’s head as he lay on the ground, had acted out “in vengeance and in anger, and sadly, in that moment, he was acting like a criminal,” Mr. Fliedner said.

Officer Edouard’s lawyer, Anthony Ricco, contended at the trial that Mr. Cuffee, 33, had reached behind his back while he was still on his feet, as if going for a weapon. Though Mr. Cuffee was in fact unarmed, the movement made Officer Edouard fear for his life, Mr. Ricco said.

The video of the encounter was captured by Gary Dormer, an employee of the restaurant, who testified at the trial that “an aggressive officer” — Officer Edouard — had at one point grabbed Mr. Cuffee and tried to take him into custody. But Mr. Dormer also said on the stand that Mr. Cuffee had appeared to be resisting the arrest.

Officer Edouard was charged in February 2015 with official misconduct as well as with assault, but four months later a judge dropped the misconduct charges.

The Police Department declined to comment on the conviction, but a spokesman said Officer Edouard was suspended as soon as the verdict was rendered. He faces up to a year in jail at his sentencing, now scheduled for June 10.


