


The Secret Service said it would investigate Donald J. Trump’s longtime butler over Facebook posts laced with vulgarities and epithets calling for President Obama to be killed.

The racially tinged posts by the butler, Anthony Senecal, were unearthed by Mother Jones on Thursday, and referred to Mr. Obama as a “Kenyan fraud” who should be hanged for treason.

“With the last breath I draw I will help rid this America of the scum infested in its government,” Mr. Senecal wrote last May, saying that the president should be dragged from the “white mosque” and hanged “from the portico — count me in !!!!!”

In a statement Thursday, the Secret Service said it was “aware of this matter and will conduct the appropriate investigation.”

Hope Hicks, a Trump campaign spokeswoman, said in an email about the posts by Mr. Senecal, “We totally and completely disavow the horrible statements made by him.”

Mr. Senecal did not immediately respond to a telephone call and Facebook message seeking comment.

The posts were revealed as Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, has come under scrutiny for his associations with, and support from figures such as the former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke. On Tuesday, Mr. Trump’s campaign aides said a technical glitch had included William Johnson, a self-proclaimed white nationalist, on a list of California delegates they submitted to the Secretary of State’s office.

Mr. Senecal had worked almost 30 years for Mr. Trump, and was the subject of a profile in The New York Times in March. He spoke of knowing Mr. Trump’s sleeping patterns, his culinary preferences and just the right ways to cheer him up when he was in a sour mood, once hiring a bugler to play “Hail to the Chief.”

When he tried to retire in 2009, Mr. Trump deemed him irreplaceable and kept him on as an unofficial historian at the Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida, the article said. But in her statement, Ms. Hicks said, “Tony Senecal has not worked at Mar-a-Lago for years.”

Some of Mr. Senecal’s other Facebook posts aimed at Ferguson protesters and various public figures, including Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner for president, whom he called “Killery Clinton”; Beyoncé; and the Republican National Committee, which has quarreled with Mr. Trump through the nomination process. The committee members should be hanged for treason, he wrote in March.

Although some of the posts, which dated to 2015, were written publicly while others were visible only to friends, Mother Jones said that Mr. Senecal had confirmed that they were his words: “I wrote that. I believe that.”


