


When the W.N.B.A. eliminated conference barriers from its playoff format this season, a common hypothesis was that the Minnesota Lynx and the Phoenix Mercury, the past two champions, would meet in the finals. The two teams battled in the Western Conference finals in four of the last five seasons, with the winner taking the championship each time.

The Lynx have continued unfettered on their path to back-to-back titles and their fourth in six years, setting the record for the best start in league history by winning their first 12 games. Despite the return of Diana Taurasi, who sat out the 2015 season at the behest of the Russian team she plays for in the off-season, the Mercury stumbled to a 4-8 mark.

But in their place a familiar power has emerged — the Los Angeles Sparks, winners of two W.N.B.A. titles, who are 11-0 behind Candace Parker and Nneka Ogwumike.

Ogwumike, 25, has long been regarded as one of the league’s most gifted athletes. In 2012, when the Lynx swept the Sparks in the conference finals, Ogwumike was the rookie of the year after being drafted first over all.

At the beginning of last season, though, she was lost at times on the floor. Parker was absent, choosing to rest from the rigors of the professional women’s basketball calendar, which basically requires year-round play to maximize earning potential.

The seeds of the Sparks’ latest ascent originate with Parker’s return last July 29, in a game they lost to the Lynx. Ogwumike, hampered by injuries and the workload of being the team’s focal point, was able to ease back into her natural position at forward and thrived again under Parker’s tutelage.

The Lynx and the Sparks, both undefeated about a third of the way through the W.N.B.A. season, will meet in Los Angeles on Tuesday afternoon, the anniversary of the league’s first game in 1997.

“Candace has been very influential on how we’ve played this season and the success that we’ve had,” Sparks Coach Brian Agler said, adding that he thought last year’s burden was unfair to Ogwumike. “She and Nneka have a great chemistry and a great rapport on the floor.”

Parker’s respite paid off. In 16 games last season, she averaged a career high in minutes and a double-double for the second time in her career, with 19.4 points and 10.1 rebounds per game. After the loss to the Lynx in Parker’s first game back, the Sparks put together an 11-6 record, overcoming a 3-13 start without her to make the playoffs, where they took the Lynx to a deciding Game 3 before elimination.

“Candace Parker, when she came back at midseason last year, was playing at an unbelievable level,” Lynx Coach Cheryl Reeve said.

This year, Parker’s artistry on the perimeter has combined with Ogwumike’s uncanny power in the post to form a dominant offensive pair.

Parker, 30, is on pace to more than double her output on 3-pointers made, shooting 39.5 percent from outside. On June 11, in a 97-73 win over the Dallas Wings, Ogwumike was 12 for 12 on field goals and 7 for 7 from the free-throw line for 32 points, setting a record for the number of field-goal attempts made without a miss. The streak was part of another league record for most consecutive field goals made at 23, spanning three games.

“Candace has definitely made me better,” Ogwumike said. “She’s made me more of a student of a game. She sees a lot of things that I don’t pick up on and I learned to pick up on now. She’s definitely enhanced the intellectual nature of my game.”

Ogwumike added: “After last year — what we do is difficult in, we don’t really get an off-season. For a player of her caliber to reset, decompress and come back halfway last year, I think sometimes it’s necessary. I think she made the right decision for herself. We were still in position to compete for a championship last year because of the tenacity she brought back. It’s perpetuated into this season.”

For Parker, her singular focus this summer will be on winning her first W.N.B.A. title, after she was left off the roster for the United States Olympic women’s basketball team. Parker, named the W.N.B.A.’s Western Conference player of the week on Monday, is a two-time Olympic gold medalist, and on Tuesday she could be honored when the W.N.B.A. announces its top 20 players in league history as part of the celebration of its 20th season.

Parker, the 2013 W.N.B.A. most valuable player, said earlier this year that she was “surprised and disappointed” at her Olympic omission and that she felt she was still in the prime of her career.

Reeve, who is on the women’s national team coaching staff, did not believe Parker’s play this season emanated from added motivation after the Olympic snub.

“It has absolutely nothing to do with U.S.A. basketball, trying to prove anything,” Reeve said. “She’s got nothing to prove.”

Reeve later added, “I just think that Candace is on a mission for her team to do well.”

Ogwumike, though, said that Parker’s maturation and its influence on the Sparks had been evident in their sharpened focus.

“It’s incredibly narrow, and it’s finite — we don’t look too far ahead,” Ogwumike said, adding: “We’re not satiated. The group that we have this year, we always want more.”


