


Donald J. Trump — he of the “huge” rallies, beautiful wall and superlative buildings — is happy to go small, at least with his team.

Asked on “Fox News Sunday” about Hillary Clinton’s stark advantage in staff and organization, Mr. Trump‘s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, insisted that the Trump campaign preferred to have a “smaller, leaner, more efficient team.”

He dismissed as “ridiculous” the notion that Mrs. Clinton’s edge in paid staff around the country put the Trump campaign at a disadvantage or that there was any confusion among Republican donors about which Trump-affiliated “super PAC” to support.

He also shook his head when asked about a report of dissension within the lean and efficient team, including fears among the staff that some of the campaign’s Trump Tower offices were bugged with listening devices.

“This is media hype,” he said. He also said that the relationship between him and Paul Manafort, the Trump campaign’s chairman and chief strategist who was widely reported to be Mr. Lewandowski’s chief internal rival, was “fantastic.”

“There is no sunlight between me and Paul,” he said.

As for the reports of people fearing they were targets of bugging, he said, “I think that’s a lot of speculation I don’t think that’s going on at all.”

Mr. Manafort, appearing on ABC’s “This Week,” also gave a less-than-definitive denial about the bugging.

“Do I believe it?” he said. “No, I don’t believe it. But I don’t know who said that.”

Mr. Manafort also tried to do some damage control on Mr. Trump’s attack on Gov. Susana Martinez of New Mexico, which came during a campaign rally in her state. But he said the media had misunderstood the criticism of Governor Martinez, who is Hispanic.

“He was talking about the welfare system and how it’s out of control in New Mexico,” Mr. Manafort said. He also argued that Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee, had criticized Mr. Trump because he was “jealous.”

Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, also appeared on the show, defending Mrs. Clinton after a damaging report from the State Department’s inspector general about her use of a personal email server.

“Hillary herself has said, ‘Yes, I made a mistake. If I had a chance to do it over again, I’d do it differently.’ I mean, what do people want?” Senator Feinstein said. “This goes on and on and on. We’re reaching the final stages of a primary. Hillary Clinton is going to win this primary. I say enough is enough.”

Ms. Feinstein, a Clinton supporter, also expressed frustration, as she has in private, about Senator Bernie Sanders’s aggressive campaign against Mrs. Clinton in spite of the fact that he trails her significantly in the delegate count.

“He ought to be able to read the signposts as well as anybody else. And if he did that, he would know that it’s all but over,” she said. “So, the question comes, you know: Why doesn’t he do those things which bring all Democrats together so that we can have a convention that’s positive, not negative — so that we can have a platform that all this great, wide, broad-based party can say: ‘This is my platform. I am proud of it.’? And the Democrats together can march to victory in November.”

Mr. Sanders himself seemed less than ready to start the unifying the party.

“The inspector general just came out with a report; it was not a good report for Secretary Clinton,” he said on CBS’s “Face the Nation.” “That is something that the American people, Democrats and delegates are going to have to take a hard look.”

He also said that he would not try to sway superdelegates in states where Mrs. Clinton had won the popular vote in primary contests, but he expressed his usual frustration that many superdelegates had given their support to Mrs. Clinton before the voting began.

“That’s not rigged,” he said. “I think it’s just a dumb process which has certainly disadvantaged our campaign.”

He also appeared on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” calling the upcoming primary in California, where polls show him to be closing in on Mrs. Clinton, as “the big enchilada.” But he also explicitly said that Mrs. Clinton was a better choice than Mr. Trump for president.

“But where my mind is right now is to do everything that I can in the remaining caucuses and primaries to try to win them and make the case,” he said. “But if your question is, do I think that Secretary Clinton is significantly a better candidate for America than is Donald Trump, that is not a debate. Of course that is true.”

Senator Marco Rubio of Florida appeared on CNN’s State of the Union with Jake Tapper in an almost-somber interview about his dashed presidential hopes. He confirmed his long-held intention not to run for re-election in Florida, though he said that “maybe” he would have if a good friend of his, Lt. Gov. Carlos Lopez-Cantera of Florida, were not running for the office. But he also said it was likely that he would run for president or some other office in the future.

Mr. Rubio, whom Mr. Trump disparaged as “Little Marco,” said he would go to the Republican convention and, if asked, speak in support of the party’s nominee “because I don’t want Hillary Clinton to be president.” But he also said he was not interested in being Mr. Trump’s running mate.

“In my view, that wouldn’t be the right choice for him,” he said, “We have real policy differences on foreign policy and on some other issues. And I think he just — he would be better served by having someone more aligned with him on some of these things or someone who didn’t run against him and had some of the interaction that we had.”

He did say, though, that he would be interested in being commissioner of the National Football League.

“I mean, who wouldn’t want that job?” he said.


