


Moise Katumbi, the former governor of an important province in the Democratic Republic of Congo and now an outspoken opposition figure, has announced he is running for president of Congo in an election that is supposed to be held by the end of this year.

Analysts have said that Mr. Katumbi poses the greatest threat to Congo’s president, Joseph Kabila, and soon after his announcement, his home was surrounded by security forces, aides to Mr. Katumbi said on Thursday.

Mr. Katumbi said on Twitter that the police had arrived to arrest him. “This is Kabila’s response to my presidential bid!” he wrote in French and English.

Dangerous tensions have been steadily rising across Congo as the presidential election approaches. Mr. Kabila, who has been in office since 2001, faces term limits and is supposed to step down this year, but he has not indicated he will do so. He seems to be heading in the direction of other recent African presidents who plunged their nations into turmoil by tinkering, or trying to tinker, with term limits.

On Wednesday, Congolese officials said they were opening an investigation into allegations that Mr. Katumbi was using American mercenaries. Mr. Katumbi, who has made millions of dollars subcontracting for mining companies, called that a “grotesque lie.”

Aides said the allegations might have arisen from the fact that Mr. Katumbi had hired an American company that provided unarmed security advisers — some with United States military backgrounds — for protection. No more than four advisers were assigned at any time, the aides said.

“The authorities’ low maneuvers will not obstruct my peaceful struggle,” Mr. Katumbi said on Twitter.

For years, Congo has been racked by war; the fear now is that it could slide into another especially bloody phase if Mr. Kabila, who became president after the assassination of his father, Laurent Kabila, tries to retain power by force. Western aid agencies say that a series of interlocking conflicts over minerals, land, ethnicity and political divisions during the past 20 years has killed millions. Many locally driven wars continue to rage today.

Mr. Katumbi, who announced his candidacy on Wednesday, is wildly popular across Congo, in part because he owns a successful soccer team.

Other opposition leaders have begun to coalesce around him. He is widely credited with doing a good job running what was then called Katanga Province from 2007 to 2015; he resigned to join the political opposition.

He lives in a new mansion in Lubumbashi, Congo’s second-largest city, where violent protests have recently erupted against Mr. Kabila’s rule.

Mr. Katumbi’s advisers say Mr. Kabila has been quietly building up military forces in Lubumbashi, in anticipation of more protests.


