


The wind off the coast of Hammonasset Beach State Park in Connecticut ratcheted up to more than 20 miles an hour by sundown on Sunday, but in the early evening, it felt still enough to a group of four people to head out into Long Island Sound by kayak and paddle board for a dusk ride on the water.

But the four, including a little girl, were swiftly overwhelmed by buffeting winds and strong tide that hauled them across the wide sound. By morning, two were dead and the other two — a woman and her 8-year-old daughter — were rescued nearly 20 miles away from where they launched, the police said. The two were found by a resident who heard them screaming for help after they washed up on a beach on Long Island.

According to the Southold Town Police Department, the four, all Connecticut residents, spent the night battling waves as the vessels were carried across Long Island Sound.

The woman, Delfina Reynoso, of Hartford, was found around 4 a.m. on Monday at Mulford Point in Orient, N.Y., with her daughter Damaris, said Martin Flatley, the police chief. They had hypothermia and were taken to Eastern Long Island Hospital for treatment.

The excursion began at 6 p.m. on Sunday. Ms. Reynoso; her boyfriend, Abdias Ventura, 30, also of Hartford; and Damaris were in a kayak, and a companion, Ferdinand Lagos, 39, of Manchester, was on a paddle board. As soon as they left shore, Chief Flatley said, Ms. Reynoso told the police that “they get caught up in the tide and the wind, and they start getting drawn out.”

“They are paddling furiously and can’t get back into Connecticut,” he continued.

Around 9 p.m., after three hours of fighting the current, Mr. Lagos decided to swim for shore, Chief Flatley said. His body was discovered Monday afternoon about five miles from the mouth of the Connecticut River, according to the United States Coast Guard.

Chief Flatley said that the three others stayed with the kayak, but that it was taking on water. “They drift with it across the sound,” he said, adding that at some point, the adults got out of the kayak and clung to it, leaving the girl inside. The water temperature at the time was below 60 degrees. Hypothermia was most likely setting in, the chief said.

Around midnight, Chief Flatly said, “Mr. Ventura said he can’t hold on anymore.” Mr. Ventura’s body was found on a private beach a quarter-mile west of where the woman and her daughter were rescued.

All four were wearing life jackets, Chief Flatley said.

“If you don’t respect the water,” he said, “and know how the tides run and how the wind affects it, it can be very dangerous.”


