


COLUMBUS, Ohio — A federal judge blocked certain requirements for how thousands of ballots are counted in Ohio, saying in a decision on Tuesday that the policies are unconstitutional and violate the Voting Rights Act.

At issue are two laws the Republican-led legislature passed in 2014 and how they are carried out.

Among other changes, the laws require voters to provide certain identifying information when casting absentee or provisional ballots. Voters must include their name, signature, valid forms of identification, address and birth date. Ballots from legitimate voters could be rejected because of errors or omissions.

Provisional ballots are those cast when a voter’s identity or registration is in question. The voter’s eligibility is verified later.

The judge, Algenon L. Marbley of United States District Court, said the laws could harm black voters in particular.

“The Ohio General Assembly took action after the disastrous 2004 election to expand voters’ access to absentee and provisional balloting,” the decision said, “and the rollback of these improvements will disproportionately harm African-American voters.”

Advocates for the homeless and the Ohio Democratic Party had sued the state’s secretary of state, Jon Husted, a Republican, saying the laws and procedures created hurdles for voters, particularly minorities.

Lawyers for the state said the laws were reasonable and nondiscriminatory and imposed a minimal burden on voters. Judge Marbley found otherwise.

The judge blocked Mr. Husted from requiring full and accurate completion of absentee- and provisional-ballot forms before otherwise qualified voters’ ballots could be counted. He also blocked sections that reduced the time voters could correct errors and prohibited poll worker assistance.

Mr. Husted said he would appeal the decision, which came two weeks after another federal judge ruled that a state law reducing early voting was unconstitutional.

“The sad reality is that much of Ohio’s election laws are no longer made by their elected representatives, but rather by unelected federal judges in response to politically motivated lawsuits,” Mr. Husted said in a statement.

In trial and in court documents, the state’s lawyers cited election data that showed acceptance rates for such ballots improved after the laws were put in place in 2014. They said the laws helped register unregistered voters and update voter registration information and had made more votes count.

“The State of Ohio has been held accountable again for disenfranchising legitimate voters,” said a lawyer for the plaintiffs, Subodh Chandra.

The judge heard testimony from county elections officials, election experts and others during a bench trial in March.

Also on Tuesday, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit delivered an incremental victory for critics of Republican-engineered changes to North Carolina’s elections procedures.

In a brief order, the court said North Carolina could not, at least for now, enforce its recent rollbacks of same-day voter registration and out-of-precinct voting. The appeals court, which sits in Richmond, Va., will hear arguments about North Carolina’s practices on June 21, nearly two months after a federal judge upheld the procedures.


