


BEIRUT, Lebanon — Five rescue workers with a civil defense group were killed in aerial attacks on their headquarters in northern Syria on Tuesday as violence escalated in the critical battlegrounds of Aleppo Province, where government and insurgent attacks have killed dozens in recent days.

The rescuers died after four airstrikes and a surface-to-surface missile hit the headquarters in quick succession in Atareb, in western Aleppo Province, according to the group, the White Helmets, a civilian organization that responds to attacks in insurgent-held territory and says it has helped save as many as 50,000 people. Airstrikes in the area are being carried out by the government and its Russian allies.

A day earlier, 19 civilians, including several children, were killed by insurgent shelling in the government-held section of the divided city of Aleppo, according to the state-run news media. Opposition groups and news outlets put the death toll from government airstrikes and shelling over the past week at well over 100.

The rash of attacks was an indication that a partial truce that held for nearly two months had collapsed, with dire results for Syrians in both government-held and rebel-held territory. Areas held by the extremist Islamic State group were not included in the truce.

Video from both sides of the divided city showed rescuers and dazed civilians fleeing amid yellowish clouds of dust. There were accusations of war crimes and calls from both sides for more protection.

“We are being killed for saving lives,” said Raed Saleh, head of the White Helmets, also known as Syria Civil Defense, accusing the Syrian government and Russia of deliberately targeting rescuers. He called for enforcement of United Nations resolutions calling for an end to bombing of civilian areas.

A Syrian state media reporter, Shadi Halwi, blamed rebels for indiscriminate attacks on the government-held side. He issued a plea on his personal Facebook page for the government to take the city of Aleppo from rebels, much as it took Palmyra from the Islamic State, “to liberate it from those who are proudly killing civilians.”

Video from White Helmets rescuers showed what appeared to be the bodies of several children being pulled from wreckage of a government airstrike in rebel-held Aleppo on Tuesday.

Across the line, in a government hospital, a doctor told her daughter, Abeer Pamuk, how a 9-year-old boy had died as she tried to treat him. “His lungs were outside his chest,” she said, according to an account posted by her daughter, an aid worker, on Facebook. “He had a tennis ball in one pocket and 10 Syrian pounds” — about five cents — “in the other.”

Last week, Mr. Saleh was denied entry into the United States, where he was to receive an award recognizing his contributions to humanitarian relief. Mr. Saleh had made several previous trips to the United States, and the State Department declined to say why he was denied entry last week.


