


I feel horribly disloyal telling you this, but I have been having a glorious long-distance love affair, and this weekend I finally had to admit I was having doubts.

This relationship has involved some of the sweetest spots imaginable: a riverside house w/views; stately property w/rolling hills; sheep in the pastures; four-poster beds; and homemade breakfasts. There was excitement, delight, generosity of heart. Oh, Airbnb, I am not ashamed to proclaim it before the world: I was crazy about you.

Then, this weekend, after an unsuccessful attempt to find an Airbnb in Pennsylvania, this guy I’d been going out with and I checked into a Hampton Inn. And as we were walking to our room, it just slipped out.

“You know, it is kind of nice to be able to go to your room without having to have a conversation with anyone,” I said to him.

A nerve had been struck. He went into a rant about an Airbnb owner who’d shown us her two horses, explaining how lonely the older one had been before she’d gotten it a friend.

“‘The horse was standing out there in the pasture alone, it was so depressed,’” he said.

“Horses have stood in pastures alone for centuries. It’s what they’re supposed to do, they’re horses. You know what I love about this place? For miles around there are farms with horses standing alone in pastures, and I do not have to hear one word.”

I was amazed.

“I thought you liked that place,” I said. “That woman was great. I loved that woman.”

“Her bedroom was right across from us,” he said.

Horrible, right? To have doubts at this point in our relationship. I’m sure it’s me, not them, because the people I have met through Airbnb have been terrific. There were the owners of an Airbnb outside Troy, N.Y., who took me to dinner and gave me a tour of the city. There was the host in the Maryland countryside who was so concerned that I would get lost on my way to a medical appointment she led me there in her car.

But you can’t help your feelings, as the therapists used to say when we had hopes they could fix us, and these dreadful ones about Airbnb have been begun popping up:

Boy, it’s depressing hearing how the taxes are killing him and he’s not sure he can carry this place.

I miss being able to throw all the towels on the floor.

Why am I making the bed? I wouldn’t make the bed in a Hilton. It’s because the bed is in somebody’s house.

She would have accent pillows. Where did this hexagonal one go? On the left or the right?

The somebody’s-house thing is of course the crux of the problem. It doesn’t matter that you have paid for the room. Airbnbs are homes in a way that the old bed-and-breakfasts were not. There’s not that commercial demarcation line, the sign out front. The dog’s drooling on you; the cat’s scratching at your door. You’re in the bedroom of the kid who’s at college and his books are still there.

Then there’s the matter of your grades.

Host and guests get to review one another at Airbnb. Do you want your review to read, “Could barely hide her indifference when I spoke of our depressed horse”?

(That was just an example, by the way. I was extremely empathetic when I met that horse and it sensed it; that horse liked me so much I am surprised it didn’t hop in my car and try to come back to New York.)

And because Airbnb is so personal, you have to consider the hosts’ emotional needs. Sure, they may say they’re doing it to make a little extra money, but the truth is they’re often also lonely or bored.

The tipoff, in my experience, is the cheese plate. The more impressive the cheese plate, the longer it’s been that the host hasn’t been able to get in to the city. If the cheese plate has three kinds of crackers and cute little sprigs of grapes, they’re going to want to hear all about the latest production of “Long Day’s Journey Into Night” and you won’t be having dinner till 10.

You’ve been driving for five hours, you want to shower, but faced with a cheese plate you cannot beg off. It is unspeakably rude in any culture. You remember that scene in “Lawrence of Arabia” when a British officer declines a cheese plate offered by his desert host and his hand — his cracker-eating hand, that is — is chopped off?

No matter, my point is that with Airbnb it is not all about you. You must be sensitive to the needs and feelings of others.

You cannot imagine how well I slept at that Hampton Inn.


