


The first Beethoven sonata I learned as a young pianist was the dramatic “Pathétique.” When I started working on it, I tried to copy the way the great Rudolf Serkin played it on a recording I loved. There is a place for learning by emulating masters, but it can easily become inhibiting. Fairly early on, aspiring musicians must develop their own voices.

So when a score that meticulously transcribes every detail of Glenn Gould’s famed 1981 recording of Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations was published recently, while I was impressed with the painstaking effort involved, I questioned what it was for.

What’s its purpose? For whom is it intended? From what we know of Gould, he would have been baffled, even horrified, at the idea that a student learning the “Goldberg” Variations would precisely mimic his performance. He was too restless a thinker to consider any recording of his at all definitive. And imitating a pianist as idiosyncratic as Gould may not be a good idea for impressionable young musicians.

Gould’s 1981 version, issued just days before his death from a stroke at 50 in October 1982, electrified the classical music world nearly as much as his classic 1955 recording had. That first version turned what had been considered a harpsichord piece for Bach specialists and erudite audiences into an unlikely hit that made the gangly, 22-year-old Canadian a sensation with the new generation. The fascination remains, judging from a new hip-hop remix project of Gould recordings by a young music producer.

In 1955, his tempos, overall, were breathless, sometimes fanatically fast. Yet the playing sounds eerily controlled. Ignoring all the score’s repeats, Gould brought the “Goldbergs” in at just over 38 minutes. (A performance with the repeats observed and more conventional tempos can last twice as long.)

Gould grew to be deeply dissatisfied with this first recording, which was, he said in an interview before the 1982 release, “just too fast for comfort.” His second take is generally slower, mellower and more reflective, though his trademark crisp touch and clarity are ever-present.

Gould had given up live concertizing at 31, considering recordings a superior way to allow an artist the freedom to present a personal conception of a work. Still, his 1981 recording was not the equivalent of a Glenn Gould “edition” of the “Goldberg” Variations. Many master musicians have prepared performing editions of seminal repertory, like the pianist Artur Schnabel’s edition of the Beethoven sonatas. But Schnabel’s markings in the score are intended as suggestions, not Holy Writ. (He even later referred to the edition as “sins of my youth.”) Gould’s 1981 “Goldberg” is a fiercely individual take on the piece. Had he lived longer and recorded it again, that third take might have been different in other ways. Gould’s mind was too restless to expect otherwise.

The 156-page volume edited by Nicholas Hopkins and recently published by Carl Fischer, however curious, has its fascinations. Gould’s embellishments of Bach’s lines are written out as precisely as possible. Other markings indicate the recording’s dynamics, articulations and tempos. And since this 1981 recording was also filmed, many of Gould’s fingerings and pedaling choices could be observed and are included in the edition.

For comparison, on the verso pages, the book offers a traditional score of the “Goldberg” Variations (or, to make matters more complicated, the closest we have based on scholarly sources, since Bach’s original manuscript is lost). The volume also contains a 40-page scholarly essay by Mr. Hopkins examining Gould’s interpretive practices with regard to the “Goldbergs” and Bach in general.

In a 2012 article for The New Republic, the inquisitive pianist Jeremy Denk wrote that a score is “at once a book and a book waiting to be written.” In Bach’s time, all composers were trained in improvisation, and Bach’s own ingenious improvisations were praised even by those who considered his music overly rigorous and old-fashioned. Ornamentation was a crucial aspect of improvisation. Bach’s scores leave much to the choices and tastes of performers.

Last year, a recording of the “Goldberg” Variations by the elegant French pianist Alexandre Tharaud was released on Erato, a refreshingly imaginative account. You sense a pianist almost making up embellishments and varying articulations and accents on the spot, often changing his choices dramatically when a section of a variation is repeated. His adventurousness should be an empowering example to young pianists learning the piece, who will doubtless play it quite differently.

Would Gould have been perplexed by the scholarly attention his 1981 recording has attracted? I asked Tim Page, once a critic and now a professor of journalism and music at the University of Southern California (and a good friend). Tim was one of the people the intensely reclusive Gould developed phone friendships with. Now and then, during the last years of his life, Gould would call Tim late in the evening and talk for hours.

Tim was the project consultant for “Glenn Gould: A State of Wonder,” the 2002 Sony release that paired the pianist’s 1955 and 1981 “Goldberg” recordings, and the new Fischer edition has a jacket blurb from Tim praising it as a valuable contribution. In a phone conversation, he agreed that Gould would never have considered any recording of his a settled matter.

“One thing that makes me sad,” Tim said, “is that Glenn never lived to see the internet, which he would have loved.” He almost certainly would have started his own recording website. “I bet, without any interference,” Tim added, “Glenn would have recorded three or four different versions of the same piece and put them all out there for people to listen to and even choose from.”

Indeed, in “The Prospects of Recording,” a 1966 article, Gould explains his unorthodox attitude about the process. He recounts one session in which he recorded eight takes of Bach’s complex Fugue in A minor from the first book of the “Well-Tempered Clavier.” Two of them, number six and eight, were complete takes that needed no editing and were deemed satisfactory. But listening some weeks later, he and the producer agreed that take six was somewhat pompous and take eight rather jubilant and skittish. They decided to combine parts of each in the final edit. Somehow, the juxtaposition of approaches and styles resulted in a dynamic synthesis. Go figure.

Later in that article, Gould spins out his fantasy for recordings of the future, when a listener would be granted tape-edit options. He points to the first movement of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony. If you like Bruno Walter’s recording of the exposition section, but prefer Otto Klemperer’s way with the development, which has a different tempo, by using pitch-speed technology (which allows a tempo to be adjusted while keeping pitch accurate), you could create an ideal personal amalgam. Gould argues: Why not?

Just as I was considering the questions raised by this new transcription, I learned of a radically different project involving Gould’s recordings. With the blessings of the Gould estate, Billy Wild, a young music producer based in Toronto, has been engaged in a project to remix Gould’s output and rebrand him for a new generation. Using excerpts from various albums and film clips of him playing, mixed together with pop riffs, Mr. Wild has created modern hip-hop tracks from the Gould catalog.

Classical purists may be affronted. I find the videos charming and clever, a brash jumble of sound and imagery. My hunch is that Gould would have loved them.


