


The northernmost city in Sweden, Kiruna, was back in the news this week with reports that it would be moving — yes, moving — about two miles east. And, for once, an unusual story from the Arctic Circle had nothing to do with climate change.

Why would a town need to move?

Kiruna’s plan to move has been in the works for a few years now. The city, comfortably within the borders of the Arctic Circle and home to a little more than 18,000 people, is built on a hill above a vast iron ore mine. Founded in 1900 and midwifed by a state-owned mining company, Kiruna has been an industry town for over a century.

Now that industry is simultaneously endangering the city and paying for its relocation. As the mine on Kiruna’s western border has expanded deeper into the ground, ore is being removed from beneath the city’s foundations — literally undermining the ground it sits on.

If the move does not take place, much of the city would collapse into the earth over the next century as the ground subsides, part of a process called ground deformation. Luckily, the mining company, Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara AB (usually abbreviated as LKAB), has dedicated over a billion dollars to relocate Kiruna’s residents.

When is the move happening?

The move will take place in phases, and the first one has already begun. LKAB, which is building the new City Hall, broke ground in September 2014, and construction began a year later.

LKAB and Kiruna’s government are jointly coordinating the move, and in a short documentary released by Sweden’s government on Tuesday, residents seemed uninformed about when much of the move would take place. But Erika Lindblad, a spokeswoman for LKAB, said that many people would be moving “within a few years.” She confirmed that while much of the move was planned out, there were plenty of arrangements yet to be made. Some 400 families have already moved.

Will the entire town be relocated?

Some buildings, including the Kiruna Church, which in 2001 was voted by Swedes to be the country’s most beautiful building, will be moved to the new city’s center, as will the beloved clock tower of the current City Hall.

But the vast majority of buildings will be demolished and rebuilt in the new location, with plenty of new housing added. According to the documentary, LKAB will buy homes from residents, paying 125 percent of a predetermined market price.

In a promotional video for the project commissioned by White Arkitekter, a Swedish firm that won a competition to redesign the city, Mikael Stenqvist, an architect at the firm, explained, “Kiruna will be a bit like a walking millipede with a thousand feet, moving, crawling, slowly a couple of kilometers toward the east.”

This must be a first, right?

Nope. Not even close.

Bob Dylan’s hometown, Hibbing, Minn., moved about two miles south of its original location between 1919 and 1921. In a situation reminiscent of Kiruna’s, Hibbing moved to make way for a mining company that was hoping to unearth the iron ore believed to be underneath it. Hibbing was founded within 10 years of Kiruna.

Other cities — including Hill Village, N.H., and Tallangatta, Australia — have been moved to avoid flooding caused by the construction of new dams. A suburb of Louisville relocated after residents were tormented by noise from a nearby airport and, of course, towns around the world are considering moving in response to climate change.

So, this really has nothing to do with climate change?

Apparently not. While climate change threatens populations around the globe, Kiruna is threatened by sinkholes, not rising sea levels. The average annual temperature in Kiruna is about 28 degrees Fahrenheit, or minus-2.2 degrees Celsius, according to Climate-Data.org.

How much will this cost?

Because the project will continue for much of the next century, it’s difficult to predict total costs. But, Ms. Lindblad, the LKAB spokeswoman, said the company had dedicated about 12 billion kronor to the project, or well over $1 billion.

How long will the process take?

White Arkitekter describes its vision for the city as a “100-year master plan,” giving a good sense of the scale of the undertaking. To win the right to redesign the city, it had to present a 20-year plan, which would establish much of the relocation by 2033.

Eva Ekelund, who heads the city’s department of land and development, told The Guardian that “iron is under the new town center, too” — summoning the specter of a re-relocation further down the road. But it is unclear whether the town will ever have to move again.


