


The first bus was to depart Barclays Center in 20 minutes late Wednesday night, but Jaromir Jagr lingered at his locker. The Florida Panthers were not leaving without him, and besides, he had something else he wanted to say.

“I’ve scored enough goals,” said Jagr, who has not scored in his last 35 postseason games. “If I don’t score any ever, I’ll be happy with my hockey career.”

He went on.

“I don’t worry about it. To be honest with you, do you remember who scored goals 10 years ago? I don’t. I don’t even remember who won the Cup, to be honest with you. So it’s everything about a Cup. Who cares who scored? I want to help, of course, but nobody remembers next year who scored. Only the champions.”

Jagr, 44, has spent more than half his life chasing a third Stanley Cup. He won his second at 20, the age of the center on his line, Aleksander Barkov, and the Panthers’ best defenseman, Aaron Ekblad.

Jagr’s other linemate, winger Jonathan Huberdeau, is 22, while center Nick Bjugstad is 23 and defenseman Alex Petrovic, whose third-period goal Wednesday propelled Florida to a 2-1 victory against the Islanders that evened their Eastern Conference quarterfinal at two games apiece, is 24.

When the best-of-seven series resumes Friday night in Florida, Jagr will dress for the 207th playoff game of his career. His aforementioned teammates, who with the injured 25-goal scorer Vincent Trocheck, 22, make up the Panthers’ dynamic nucleus, will prepare for their fifth.

“Some of them hardly played N.H.L. games, let alone playoff games,” said Florida Coach Gerard Gallant. “We tell them: ‘Go play your game. We like what you do. Go play your game.’ It doesn’t matter what the situation is.”

Among the situations Florida encountered while splitting its two games in Brooklyn: blowing a two-goal lead, losing in overtime, having one goal disallowed by a coach’s challenge and another dismissed — twice — by video review, and watching Huberdeau hobble off the ice with what, at the time Wednesday, seemed a troubling leg injury.

“It can change quickly,” Bjugstad said, summing up his impressions from his first playoff week. “From shift to shift, period to period, anything can happen.”

From game to game, there is no momentum — just the ebb of confidence, the persistence of belief. Despite losing twice, Gallant sensed enough positive developments across the first three games not to worry, and the Panthers’ overall performance Wednesday — controlling possession, denying passage into their zone, generating a heavy forecheck — befit a roster loaded with size, speed and skill. They have scored the first goal in all four games and have dominated the Islanders at even strength since Game 2, outscoring them by 7-3.

“That’s what it’s all about,” Gallant said. “When your older guys can work hard and show the kids the way. We’ve been doing that for two years with our club. It’s a lot of fun when you see your young kids the way they’re playing.”

The Panthers are an ascending team, carving a similar path as the Islanders three years ago — returning to the postseason after a lengthy absence, rich with talent, positioned to become a league force. But the Islanders have since lost twice in the playoffs, each time after the series was tied at 2-2. Last year, they lost Game 4 at home by 2-1 — just as they did Wednesday.

The Islanders have always had a strong connection to their past. Their alumni float around the building, the team is introduced as four-time Stanley Cup champions, and players are asked about trying to win the organization’s first playoff series since 1993.

Even though the Panthers have not advanced to a conference semifinal since reaching the Cup finals in 1996, a stretch of futility that included 13 defeats in 14 games, the Islanders’ struggles feel weightier, more pronounced.

Their core — John Taveras, Kyle Okposo, Casey Cizikas and Josh Bailey among them — has yet to have its moment together. The Panthers’ group does not know postseason failure yet.

They are unaffected by circumstance, blissfully oblivious to — or unconcerned with — their forebears. After all, only three current players represented the team ousted by the Devils in 2012.

The following year, Huberdeau, Petrovic and Bjugstad debuted for Florida. Soon came Barkov, and then Ekblad, and a team celebrated for its quirks — a 44-year-old leading scorer; rubber rats tossed at home; the post-victory prize of undisclosed provenance, a hooded sweatshirt embossed with Kevin Spacey’s disembodied head — wound up winning the Atlantic Division and setting franchise records for victories (47) and points (103).

“We know what we can do,” Huberdeau said, and though the Panthers may be ready to do it, they do not want to be late.


