


Google is an adventurous company, but few would ever think of it as a financial regulator.

And yet that is effectively what Google became Wednesday when it said that it would no longer run ads for payday loans, the short-term loans that typically have annual interest rates of over 300 percent. Google’s move will almost certainly hurt the lenders, given that roughly a third of the payday loan market is online, according to the Pew Charitable Trusts. A trade group for payday lenders called Google’s actions “discriminatory and a form of censorship.”

It’s not censorship, because Google is a private company, not the government. But with so much digital advertising running through Google’s extensive network, Google does have huge power to quickly effect change. But is that power akin to the government’s?

Expect the protests to increase if powerful technology companies keep using their clout to advance their causes in society. Facebook was this week accused of suppressing conservative articles in its “trending” list. Last month, PayPal, a major online payments company, announced that it would cancel an expansion in North Carolina, in protest of the state’s new law that limits bathroom access for transgender people.

The companies aren’t always siding with progressive causes. Uber has treated its drivers as independent contractors, which excludes them from coverage of many labor laws.

An interesting pattern is forming, but it’s not a rampant power grab by corporate America. It’s more nuanced than that.

Google could argue that its move is merely tipping the balance back toward the borrower. PayPal could argue that its move was about civil rights. Corporate power is checked to some degree by many kinds of laws and regulations, including those against unfair competition, discrimination and unsafe working conditions. PayPal, for instance, would be in big legal trouble if it fired employees for supporting the North Carolina bathroom law.

Corporate lobbying can seem corrupt and it favors industries with deep pockets, but laws govern lobbying. What is more, lobbying often doesn’t work: The large banks have gotten relatively little as they have tried to undo the post-recession overhaul of the financial sector. And companies may see it in their interest to soften their stances, as Uber seems to have done in certain cases.

More important, though, when there is no clear-cut wrong being done, a crackdown on a corporation could do more harm than good.

The current Facebook debate is a good example of how hard it might be to even diagnose problems, let alone fix them. It is still not clear exactly how widespread the bias in Facebook’s trending list was. The New York Times’s article on the subject cited former employees who said that articles were excluded or included on the basis of their perceived credibility, not their political tilt.

But even if Facebook suppressed every single right-wing article – something that would reduce its credibility, destroy its reputation and undermine its business — this would not be illegal. It is guaranteed the freedom of speech like any news organization. Indeed, trying to make a company’s bias illegal would have negative consequences for society that would far exceed any harm done by Facebook’s trending list.

Still, because the First Amendment protects Facebook, it gets to operate under few external constraints as it helps determine what shows up in users’ streams. Or as Glenn Greenwald, a founding editor of The Intercept, put it on Twitter, “Aside from fueling right-wing persecution, this is a key reminder of dangers of Silicon Valley controlling content.”

Facebook could tweak its own system to guard against bias. But this is tricky, too. How can “bias” ever be conclusively defined on a social media site with 222 million users in the United States with widely divergent opinions? Scouring all those streams for bias would be close to impossible. Still, Facebook could take smaller, more sensible steps like encouraging external monitors to review serious accusations of bias and bring them to the company’s attention.

Google’s ban on payday loan ads gave rise to the same sort of ominous comments that were directed at Facebook. “I dislike payday loans, too, but do we want private media companies deciding what services are available to people?” James Kwak, who has been critical of Wall Street’s power, tweeted on Wednesday.

But in reality Google’s move was not radical. Media companies often decide not to run certain types of ads — like those for escort services. And Google is hardly out of step with the wider financial industry. Mainstream lenders have long stayed away from payday loans, leaving the business to a few firms.

Instead of being an example of untethered corporate power, Google’s ban seems to be aligned with the thinking of democratic institutions. Many states have passed laws that aim to stamp out payday lending, but some lenders evade the restrictions by offering their loans online within those states, Pew researchers found. Google’s ad ban may now make it harder for payday lenders to dodge the law.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a federal agency that regulates consumer lending, has been looking at payday lending for a long time. It plans to issue a proposed rule in a few weeks that aims to make payday loans less onerous for borrowers. The payday lending industry, and its allies in Congress, will fight back hard in the coming months.

The ad ban by Google, in contrast, came fast, a reminder of how effective corporate power can be. You can understand why the payday industry found it unsettling. But the lenders are just one side of this debate.

Google allowed comments under the blog post that announced the ban, and one commenter put it this way: “Great Job!!!! I support this 100%. Google for President. Joke, but serious. … I’m happy that Google is being more progressive and protective of the public in a faster way than some government policies are doing.”


