


LOS ANGELES — Two Democrats will battle each other to become California’s next United States senator, after winning the top two spots in an open primary on Tuesday.

The intraparty fight between Kamala Harris, the state’s attorney general, and Loretta Sanchez, a congresswoman from Orange County, will be the first to shut out Republicans since California approved nonpartisan primaries in 2010.

Ms. Harris and Ms. Sanchez defeated a crowded field that included two former chairmen of the State Republican Party. Ms. Harris, who has received the official backing of the State Democratic Party, captured 40 percent of the vote, and Ms. Sanchez 17 percent, with 55 percent of the precincts reporting.

The campaign to replace Barbara Boxer, a Democrat who was first elected in 1992, is the first for an open Senate seat in California in more than a generation.

In a brief speech to a crowd of her supporters in San Francisco on Tuesday night, Ms. Harris said she was confident that she was attracting “folks of all stripes” across the state.

“Our unity is our strength and our diversity is our power,” said Ms. Harris, the daughter of immigrants from India and Jamaica. She added that the election in the fall would “be about reminding people that we reject those who talk about ‘us versus them.’ We reject those people who speak this anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim rhetoric.”

So far, Ms. Harris has largely shied away from directly engaging Ms. Sanchez, but the fall election could force the candidates to show how they differ on policy.

In public appearances and campaign advertisements, Ms. Harris has presented herself as “smart on crime” and has said she would work to overhaul the country’s criminal justice laws.

Ms. Sanchez has relied on her experience as a member of the House Committee on Homeland Security, saying she best understands how to get things done in Washington.

No matter who wins in the fall, California voters will make history: electing either the Senate’s first Latina or its first black female senator since Carol Moseley Braun, an Illinois Democrat who served from 1993 to 1999.

To help build a coalition, Ms. Sanchez may turn to Republican voters, who despite losses throughout the state retain significant power in her home base of Orange County. She is widely seen as the more business-friendly of the two and has also voted in favor of some legislation backed by the gun industry.

But Ms. Sanchez may also rely heavily on Latino voters. Many analysts predict that Latinos, who make up nearly half of California’s population, will vote in record numbers here in the fall, drawn to the polls in large part by anti-immigrant rhetoric from Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee.

“We’re just going to start working tomorrow toward November,” Ms. Sanchez told her supporters in Anaheim.

Ms. Harris has received the backing of many of the state’s highest-profile Democrats, including Gov. Jerry Brown. Though she received the state party’s endorsement this spring, however, officials have not indicated what resources, if any, they will put into the race.

“It would be new territory, it’s really breaking new ground,” said Michael Soller, a spokesman for the state party. “Nobody really wants to think about it just yet.”

Many of the state’s most generous Democratic donors have yet to give to either candidate.


