


Concerned about paying $849 for premium tickets to “Hamilton”? Wondering how to stretch your entertainment dollar if that’s not how you plan to spend it? We asked the theater critics Ben Brantley and Charles Isherwood for some guidance.

Start off by figuring that if you have a reasonable life expectancy, you can wait for “Hamilton” ticket prices to settle and sink. (This is not, contrary to what you might think, a star-driven show.) In the meantime, it helps to see “Hamilton” with a full knowledge of what you’ll be listening to and — hey, why not? — the book that inspired it.

So:

$16.99 for the MP3 cast recording.

$12.37 for paperback of the Ron Chernow biography.

Then go to see a musical — a revival but it feels brand-new — that’s stirring up its audiences in the way that, among current shows, only “Hamilton” does as well:

“The Color Purple,” $145 (full-price orchestra, totally worth it)

Before July 19, you must — and I mean it, you must — catch a play that, like “Hamilton,” transforms a fraught slice of American history into a pulsing present-tense event. That’s Ivo van Hove’s genuinely scary, genuinely brilliant reinvention of Arthur Miller’s “The Crucible,” for which you can obtain an orchestra seat for $150 (though you can probably find it for less).

Another unorthodox and compelling reclamation of a historical chapter from the American past: “Men on Boats,” Jaclyn Backhaus’s spirited all-female retelling of an all-male expedition into the Grand Canyon in the 19th century, is being brought back (after its debut last year) at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater. $50.

And if you feel the need to pay deference to the country from which we are liberated in “Hamilton,” for Anglophiles: the New York premiere of Alan Ayckbourn’s latest, “Hero’s Welcome,” directed by the author with the imported British cast, at 59E59 Theaters: $75. At the same theater, for only $35, you can see the iconoclastic British playwright Philip Ridley’s new dark comedy, “Radiant Vermin.”

Then there’s the revival of the marvelous Conor McPherson ghost story, “Shining City,” starring Matthew Broderick, which gives you a chance to check out the newly renovated Irish Repertory Theater, $70.

And though seats are scarce, you can still probably nab a V.I.P. ticket ($120) for the great enduring leading lady of the American musical, Barbara Cook, who will be performing at Feinstein’s/54 Below on June 21.

Be adventurous, and try out the remaining two offerings from Clubbed Thumb’s summer festival of experimental theater: “The Tomb of King Tot” and “Tumacho,” $18 apiece (which is what you would have paid if you’d seen “Men on Boats” last year).

I figure that leaves you with well more than a C-note, which should be spent on post-theater (not pre-, please) martinis at classic Broadway watering holes like Joe Allen, Bar Centrale or if you’re feeling nostalgic for the days when the top ticket price was strictly double-digits, Sardi’s.

BEN BRANTLEY

The news that standard orchestra tickets to “Hamilton” are now being offered for a wallet-busting $849 stirs mixed feelings in me. It seems a scandalously high price for tickets that, until now, have been going for several hundred dollars less — officially at least. But as is well known, the resale market for this show has established outrageous limits for prices, with tickets going for more than a thousand dollars — if not two or three times that. And none of that extra money goes to the producers who brought the show to Broadway and, more important, the artists who created it. Should you prefer to resist the offer to spend such a sizable chunk of change on a single show, here are suggestions about how you might spread the wealth around.

“Chicago” — in Japanese! This season, Lincoln Center Festival presents a rare visit from the famed all-female Japanese performance troupe Takarazuka. A renowned attraction in its home country, this company was established more than a century ago and has been dazzling audiences with its shows, mostly revues but also adaptations of Western and Japanese shows and movies, ever since. This time, it will be performing this John Kander-Fred Ebb musical in its entirety, using the traditional Bob Fosse choreography. ($150 for prime orchestra seats, David Koch Theater, July 20-24.)

Have you heard, the 1980s are back? Or do you still feel you’re living in them? For those with a fondness for the pop music of the era, you could check out the final tour of the New Wave girl group the Go-Go’s. Hard to believe the band has been together for, gulp, 38 years, but this is its final bow. ($50 at SummerStage in Central Park, Aug. 13.)

The long-established City Center Encores! series has recently been presenting a summer series featuring more offbeat — meaning Off Broadway — shows in small runs. This summer, it is presenting Elizabeth Swados’s “Runaways” and the almost inordinately obscure “Kurt Vonnegut’s God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater.” But I’m particularly intrigued by a one-night-only event, a concert featuring the Broadway veterans Sutton Foster and Jonathan Groff singing a selection of songs from Off Broadway shows, with Jeanine Tesori at the piano. ($150 for grand tier and mezzanine seats at City Center, July 16.)

For a little more than half of a single “Hamilton” ticket at the new price, you could buy a three-performance subscription, in prime seats, for New York City Ballet’s fall season. As always with this great company, the offerings are rich. I’d recommend, offhand and obviously without having seen it, the latest from the choreographer Justin Peck, who has a new ballet receiving a premiere. And if you haven’t seen a classic all-Balanchine/Stravinsky program, you don’t know how decades-old ballets can feel freshly minted. ($477 for top tickets at the David Koch Theater, with the season running Sept. 20 to Oct. 16.)

And for just $18 you can see the Target Margin Theater’s “The Iceman Lab,” a radical reworking of Eugene O’Neill’s “The Iceman Cometh” — or rather, one part of it. The company has commissioned artists from various disciplines to tackle the play’s acts. One is a song cycle, another is dance-based and another involves puppetry. Take your pick! ($18 each at Here Arts Center, through June 25, with marathon performances — which, at $60, would combine with all of the other offerings to push you about $40 past the $849 “Hamilton” price — on Saturday and again on June 18.)

CHARLES ISHERWOOD


