


LONDON — President Obama urged a roomful of young people in London on Saturday to support a new trade deal between the United States and the European Union, arguing that it can be written in a way that does not undercut the interests of unions, workers and the environment.

At a town-hall-style meeting during the second day of his visit to Europe, Mr. Obama said the trade deal negotiated with Asian nations last year should serve as proof that a freer flow of commerce could be achieved without the damage that opponents of trade deals often warn about.

“Part of the argument I’m making in the United States is that the answer to globalization and income inequality and lack of wage growth is not to pull up the drawbridge and shut off trade,” Mr. Obama said.

He said trade deals like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership being negotiated between Europe and the United States should embed “values that help lift workers’ rights and help lift environmental standards.”

Negotiators are working to complete the trade pact by the end of the year. But it has largely stalled in the face of intense opposition, particularly in Germany, where critics predict that it would favor the interests of large corporations and cause a loss of jobs.

Aides say Mr. Obama will press his case for the trade deal during a visit to Germany on Sunday and Monday. But he eagerly seized on a question about the deal from a young woman in the forum on Saturday.

“If we are able to get this deal done, it is estimated that it will create millions of jobs and billions of dollars in benefits on both sides of the Atlantic,” the president said.

He also joked that it might finally mean that light sockets in all European nations and the United States would finally be the same.

“Those light sockets are really irritating,” he said.

The trade question was one of 10 that Mr. Obama took from the audience at the Royal Horticultural Halls. The president has held similar events in most of the countries he has visited during trips abroad, viewing them as a way to connect with a younger generation and an antidote to the cynicism he often confronts with his peers.

On Saturday, Mr. Obama took questions about Northern Ireland, social justice campaigns, his legacy, Somalia and transgender rights.

The president appeared to take offense at one questioner who suggested that the United States — and Mr. Obama’s administration — had not taken seriously the issue of racial profiling, especially at airports.

“Before everybody starts applauding that question, let’s make sure we are on the same wavelength on facts,” Mr. Obama said, waving his hands for the clapping to stop as he answered the question. He said he had been adamant in opposing racial profiling at airports.

He also repeated an indirect critique about the Black Lives Matter campaign, suggesting that the activists in that movement should be more willing to sit down and work with politicians to solve problems rather than just criticize them from the outside.

“Once you’ve highlighted an issue and brought it to people’s attention and shined a spotlight, and elected officials and people who are in positions to start bringing about change are ready to sit down with you, then you can’t just keep on yelling at them,” the president said after mentioning the Black Lives Matter movement.

“You can’t refuse to meet because that might compromise the purity of your position,” he added. “The value of social movements and activism is to get you at the table, to get you in the room.”

Earlier in the day, Mr. Obama toured the Globe Theater, which sits near where the original was built in 1599, to mark the 400th anniversary of William Shakespeare’s death.


