


NEW DELHI — The authorities in Bangladesh were braced for violence on Wednesday after the execution of a senior opposition leader convicted of atrocities dating from Bangladesh’s 1971 war for independence from Pakistan.

The opposition figure, Motiur Rahman Nizami, who was hanged early Wednesday morning, led Jamaat-e-Islami, Bangladesh’s largest Islamic party. A prison official said Mr. Nizami would be buried in his home village in northwestern Bangladesh.

In October 2014, Mr. Nizami was convicted of leading a paramilitary group that sided with the army of West Pakistan against pro-independence forces.

Bangladesh’s Supreme Court upheld the verdict last week, and Mr. Nizami did not submit a plea for mercy to the president, said the country’s home minister, Asaduzzaman Khan.

Past executions have set off street protests, and thousands of police officers were deployed around the central jail in Dhaka, the capital, and elsewhere.

In 2009, the Bangladeshi authorities began conducting war crimes trials intended to hold people accountable for acts committed during the 1971 struggle for independence from Pakistan.

The trials have widened a split in Bangladesh between those intent on defending the secular identity asserted by the 1971 independence movement and those who want to introduce a government based on Islamic principles.

That rift has become a dangerous one in recent years, as Islamist extremist groups have carried out a campaign of killings, singling out intellectuals who have defended atheism and argued for a secular state. Recently, militant groups have expanded their attacks to include foreigners, gay rights activists and members of religious minorities, like Hindus, Shiite Muslims and Christians.

International organizations have criticized the war crimes trials, saying the accused leaders had little opportunity to defend themselves. A statement last week by a bipartisan human rights commission of the United States House of Representatives noted that defendants were allowed only a handful of witnesses and were not allowed to cross-examine prosecution witnesses.

“While many in Bangladesh believe Nizami to be guilty and want him punished, justice is only served through fair trials,” Brad Adams, the Asia director at Human Rights Watch, said last week.

Prosecutors identified Mr. Nizami as the leader of Al Badr, a force that used torture and committed extrajudicial killings of civilians to crush pro-independence strongholds in the 1971 war.

He was sentenced to death on charges of committing genocide in the deaths of pro-nationalist intellectuals; murdering 22 unarmed civilians during a raid, and conspiracy, murder, rape and deportations of civilians. He also received two life sentences.


