


The San Antonio Spurs swept their way into the Western Conference semifinals after an almost perfunctory yet very physical test against the Memphis Grizzlies, perhaps the most injury-depleted team ever in the N.B.A. playoffs.

Kawhi Leonard scored 21 points as the Spurs routed the Grizzlies, 116-95, on Sunday in Memphis, sweeping the best-of-seven first-round series.

“It wasn’t a fair fight,” Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said of playing a team that set an N.B.A. record with 28 Grizzlies playing this season.

“Whoever was available came out and played, and they executed to the best of their ability. They played with a lot of heart and a lot of fortitude.”

The Spurs finished off their ninth sweep of a postseason series in franchise history, their third against the Grizzlies. San Antonio also swept Memphis in the first round in 2004 and the 2013 Western Conference finals.

“They play very physical, so it’s a good test for the next round,” Spurs guard Tony Parker said.

The only thing that delayed the Spurs advancing was a power surge that knocked out the lights, stopping the game for about 20 minutes in the second quarter.

San Antonio now awaits the winner of Oklahoma City-Dallas, a best-of-seven series that the Thunder lead by three games to one.

LaMarcus Aldridge scored 15 points and grabbed 10 rebounds for the Spurs. Parker finished with 16 points. David West had 11.

Lance Stephenson scored 26 points off the bench for the Grizzlies. Zach Randolph and Matt Barnes each had 15 points and Vince Carter added 14.

CAVALIERS 100, PISTONS 98 Kyrie Irving scored 20 of his 31 points in the second half, and Cleveland finished off a four-game sweep of Detroit.

The Cavaliers will play Atlanta or Boston in the second round.

LeBron James had 22 points for Cleveland, but it was Irving who made the biggest shots all night. His midcourt buzzer-beater put the Cavs up, 81-78, after the third quarter, and with Cleveland clinging to a 1-point lead with 42 seconds remaining, he calmly sank a 3-pointer from the right wing.

Detroit still had a chance at the end, but Reggie Jackson’s wild shot at the buzzer was off the mark.

CELTICS 104, HAWKS 95 Isaiah Thomas scored 28 points, hitting a corner 3-pointer with 30 seconds left in overtime and then adding two clinching free throws, as host Boston beat the Hawks, sending their first-round playoff series back to Atlanta tied at two games apiece.

Game 5 of the best-of-seven series is Tuesday night.

Paul Millsap scored 45 for the Hawks — a career playoff high — and added 13 rebounds.

Marcus Smart scored 20 points and Jonas Jerebko had 10 rebounds for Boston.

The Celtics led by 4 with under a minute to play in regulation when Jeff Teague hit back-to-back 3-pointers to give Atlanta the lead. But Thomas drove for a layup to tie it, 92-92, with 15 seconds left.

The Hawks had a chance to win in regulation before Teague dribbled out the clock without getting off a clean shot.


