


The world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, is poised to receive $22 million in financial aid from Connecticut in an effort to keep it from moving its headquarters out of the state.

The financial commitment to Bridgewater, the $150 billion fund founded by the billionaire Ray Dalio, is occurring as Connecticut is fighting to keep companies from leaving the state after a tax increase last year. In January, General Electric announced it would move its Fairfield, Conn., headquarters to Boston after 41 years.

The money will go toward the expansion of Bridgewater’s headquarters in Westport and facilities in Wilton and Norwalk, according to the State Bond Commission. A commission meeting on Friday approved the funding, which includes $2 million for employee training and a $17 million loan. If Bridgewater creates 750 jobs over the next five years the loan will be forgiven.

An earlier proposal by Bridgewater to build a $750 million campus in Connecticut was withdrawn in 2014 because of public opposition to the project, according to a local news report.

Bridgewater is popular with public pension funds and sovereign wealth funds and has grown rapidly in recent years. Its success in bringing in new investors has helped to enrich its top executives, as have years of big gains.

However, while many of its funds made profits for its investors last year, Bridgewater’s All Weather fund, which is popular among pension funds, lost 7 percent.

Mr. Dalio, 66, has topped the list of top-paid hedge fund chiefs for years, making $1.4 billion in 2015 alone, according to Institutional Investor’s Alpha magazine. That year, two other top Bridgewater executives, Robert Prince and Greg Jensen, each brought home $250 million.

Across the industry, investors are voicing frustration over disappointing hedge fund performance and the high fees managers earn. On average, investors pay 2 percent of total assets under management and 20 percent of any gains.

A spokesman for Bridgewater did not return calls seeking comment.

Connecticut’s decision to finance Bridgewater’s expansion in the state is part of Gov. Dannel P. Malloy’s “First Five” program to encourage large companies to move their headquarters to Connecticut and motivate companies already there to expand.

But the governor’s latest move has drawn some criticism. During the meeting on Friday, representatives raised questions on whether Bridgewater lacked the capital to expand its headquarters.

On Monday, Themis Klarides, a Republican state representative, said in a statement that “to make the world’s largest hedge fund a priority, I find it dubious.” She emphasized other projects that would not be financed as a result of state funding going toward the grant to Bridgewater.

The debate follows a budget shortfall in Connecticut based in part on its shrinking financial sector.

In a statement after the meeting Friday, Kevin Lembo, the state comptroller, said: “Despite my general reluctance about the state picking winners and losers, I have been willing to cautiously support economic assistance to private companies. But the size, scope and nature of this particular proposal stands out and meets a new threshold that compels me to vote against it.”


