


For Radiohead, untraditional album releases are nothing new, but the band can still surprise: On Friday morning, after teasing fans with online clues for months but having never announced an official release date, the British group said that its ninth album would be out on Sunday.

The album — its title has still not been confirmed — will be available on digital music services at 2 p.m. Sunday and in physical formats on June 17. The announcement also came with a new song, “Daydreaming,” and its video, a collaboration with the director Paul Thomas Anderson, that is streaming on Radiohead’s website. The song is being sold in the band’s online store and on iTunes, and is streaming on Spotify and Apple Music.

An unexpected album from a major act, while owned in the popular imagination by Beyoncé thanks to back-to-back sneak attacks, including last month’s “Lemonade,” was in some ways prefigured by Radiohead: In 2007, the band independently released “In Rainbows” with a pay-what-you-want model online just days after announcing the album. “King of Limbs,” from 2011, came with even shorter notice, and Thom Yorke, the band’s lead singer, has also experimented with digital releases for solo projects.

Other acts with loyal fan bases, including Drake, D’Angelo and Kendrick Lamar, have since used variations on the sudden drop, skipping the monthslong promotional lead-up that has long come with big-name albums. On Thursday night, with little notice, the British singer James Blake, who is featured on Beyoncé’s “Lemonade,” released his third studio album online.

Radiohead’s obsessive listeners perked up their collective ears for a fresh project in January, after the band created a new independent company, as it did before its previous two albums. (The band had also been seen recording in photos posted to social media.)

Last week, the band began cryptically wiping its online presence clean, again stirring rumors of an imminent release, before returning with some mysterious clips on Instagram and eventually a new single and clay animation music video for the song “Burn the Witch,” which has been viewed more than 8.2 million times in its first few days.

The band had also announced a slate of tour dates for 2016 — its first live shows since 2012 and another clue that new music was on its way.

After eight warm-up shows in Europe, Radiohead is to appear at summer festivals including Primavera Sound in Barcelona on June 3, Secret Solstice in Reykjavik on June 17 and Lollapalooza in Chicago on July 29. The band is also scheduled to play two nights at Madison Square Garden, July 26 and 27, along with a handful of other summer dates in North America and Japan.


