


Red Sox Manager John Farrell’s top two relievers were wild in the same inning.

Russell Martin’s two-run single against Craig Kimbrel capped a four-run eighth on Monday, and the Blue Jays held on to beat the Red Sox, 4-3, in Boston’s annual Patriots’ Day game.

“We missed the strike zone a little bit in that eighth inning,” Farrell said. “I’d say that’s maybe an understatement.”

Koji Uehara was charged with four runs after he gave up two walks while getting just one out. Kimbrel also gave up a walk.

“When you’re facing Uehara and those guys at the end, it’s tough to do,” Toronto Manager John Gibbons said. “You see the end result. It was big.”

Clay Buchholz, who had allowed five runs in each of his first two starts, allowed none in six and two-thirds scoreless innings Monday. He was helped by four double plays by his infield and a diving catch by center fielder Jackie Bradley Jr.

Drew Storen got three outs for his first save despite allowing two runs, earning Toronto a split of the four-game series.

With Toronto trailing by 1-0 in the eighth, Kevin Pillar reached second against Uehara after Josh Rutledge’s throwing error on his infield hit. Pillar advanced on a passed ball and scored on Michael Saunders’s groundout.

Kimbrel entered with one out and the bases loaded and struck out Edwin Encarnacion. He walked Troy Tulowitzki on a 3-2 pitch, forcing in the go-ahead run, and Martin singled.

CUBS 5, CARDINALS 0 John Lackey struck out 11 in seven innings of four-hit ball against his former team and had a run-scoring single in St. Louis.

Dexter Fowler homered for the second time in three days for the Cubs, who are a major-league-best 10-3.

ROCKIES 5, REDS 1 Trevor Story’s solo homer broke a tie in the eighth inning in Cincinnati, and Jordan Lyles got his first victory in nearly a year.

Story added to his incredible rookie start, connecting on the first pitch from Ross Ohlendorf for his National League-leading eighth homer in 13 games. Ben Paulsen finished the rally with a three-run homer off Jumbo Diaz.

ANGELS 7, WHITE SOX 0 Hector Santiago matched a career high with 10 strikeouts over seven crisp innings in Chicago.

Kole Calhoun, Andrelton Simmons and Geovany Soto hit consecutive run-scoring singles during a five-run first. Carlos Rodon got only one out before he was replaced by Jake Petricka.

MARLINS 6, NATIONALS 1 Jose Fernandez overcame early wildness in Miami, throwing 54 pitches in the first two innings but not allowing a hit until the fifth.

He improved to 18-1 at Marlins Park, and his victory was the first this season for a Marlins starter.

Giancarlo Stanton hit his third homer of the season, while Bryce Harper, who had homered in his previous four games, went 0 for 2 with a sacrifice fly.

CARDINALS ACTIVATE TEJADA Cardinals shortstop Ruben Tejada was activated from the 15-day disabled list. He had strained his left quadriceps in spring training.

St. Louis signed Tejada, 26, on March 19 after he was released by the Mets. He figured to start in place of Jhonny Peralta, who is recovering from surgery to repair a torn thumb ligament.

GARDENHIRE REJOINS TWINS The Minnesota Twins hired the former manager Ron Gardenhire as a special assistant to General Manager Terry Ryan. His responsibilities include traveling to all minor league affiliates as an instructor and evaluator.

The Twins fired Gardenhire, their manager for 13 years, in 2014 after finishing 70-92.


