


Gabriel Byrne was 8 years old the first time he saw a play. He was awe-struck by what happened at the end — “when the people I believed had been real showed themselves to not be real,” he recalled.

“What they were doing was shrugging off unreality and becoming real by way of their bows,” he continued. “And the difference between their faces during the performance and their faces during the bows fascinated me. Since then I’ve always watched the way people bow.”

For loyal theater audiences — as well as Tony Award nominees like Mr. Byrne, starring in “Long Day’s Journey Into Night” — there’s a lot to watch, from the solo bow taken by leading performers to the group bow emphasizing the ensemble nature of the enterprise. (Among this year’s Tony-nominated shows, see: “Hamilton,” “Shuffle Along,” “The Crucible.”)

Solo variations include the head bow — the kind favored by Mr. Byrne who, frankly, would prefer to skip the whole thing; and the bend from the waist so that the body forms a right angle (think human tabletop). For both, hands are laced, pressed together prayerfully, pressed to the heart or perhaps extended to the audience. And then there is the deep curtsy, as if greeting royalty rather than a subscription audience.

There’s the aerobic bow, wherein an actor dashes out from the wings and bends, head almost touching the stage; the weary bow (Message: You folks are lucky I’m still standing); and the artfully startled, carefully unstudied bow, the one that seems to say: “Oh my God, is this applause for me? I’ve been so transfixed by my performance I didn’t realize there was anyone else here.”

The bow to beat, according to many Broadway veterans? Yul Brynner’s at the end of “The King and I.” His Majesty would thrust his arms to the heavens like an excited referee signaling the winning touchdown, pause, look around and take in the applause. Then, and only then, would he begin to bend, the downward swoop stopped only by the floor.

The far more simple bend-at-the-waist bow, feet together, legs straight, took its cue from the 19th-century gentleman, said Marianne Kubik, an associate professor of movement at the University of Virginia.

“Because the head is bent, it’s a way of reaching out to the audience with humility and thanks,” she explained. “It’s the only bow I encourage.”

A curtsy, meanwhile, “demonstrates the flexibility and balance required of a performer, but it takes longer to execute, indirectly asking the audience to applaud longer,” Ms. Kubik said.

Laura Benanti, a Tony nominee this season for “She Loves Me,” was 19 when she played Maria in the 1998 Broadway revival of “The Sound of Music.” Bowing was not one of her favorite things. “I became very anxious and would do this sort of apologetic little dip,” she said.

Appearing with Chita Rivera in the revival of “Nine” five years later, “I’d scurry out onto the stage, tip my head for one second, then walk backward to my place in line and turn my face from the audience,” she recalled.

“Chita was like, ‘You look crazy.’ And she explained that bowing wasn’t about saying to the audience, ‘You’re welcome,’ it was saying ‘Thank you,’” Ms. Benanti continued. “She told me I needed to be in the tabletop position for three whole seconds. She’d stand in the wings during my bow and yell ‘One one thousand, two one thousand, three one thousand! Release!’ ’’

Ms. Rivera can’t direct everyone. Here, along with Ms. Benanti, six other current Tony nominees share their philosophies of the right way to handle a curtain call.

“Dee Hoty, my mother in ‘Bright Star,’ said, ‘Can I just give you some suggestions on your bow?’ My curtsy was kind of apologetic and subdued; it may have come from spending 14 years in Great Britain, where there’s a vibe of: ‘Bowing! We shouldn’t have to do this. It’s about art, and no one should have to clap at us.’ Dee said: ‘You don’t need to be embarrassed by your bow. Go out there as the leading lady that you are, take in the audience, look at them and smile in a way that says, ‘Didn’t we all have a good time?’ So now I stand there for a moment and smile and do a proper waist bow with my hands interlaced.”

“I get on out there, smile, look at the audience, bow once from the waist and blow a kiss to them for being there and then move on. I’ve seen a lot of crazy bows. And I’m like: ‘Calm down. All you did was a musical.’”

“The bowing hierarchy is something you are always aware of as an actor — not in a good or bad way — but you are aware of it. My favorite bows are group bows, when the entire cast bows at the same time. That’s when you know you’re in a real ensemble. There’s a moment when you’re bowing, and you see the patrons who want to get out before the bows end, and you have to negotiate those emotions internally. There are literally people walking out or, more accurately, running out. It doesn’t mean they hated the show, but it does serve to crystallize exactly where you are on the food chain, between sharing the final moment of the show and getting on the West Side Highway first.”

“A bow is all about the energy. I jump down off the step, and greet the audience with a great big smile. I look up, put my hands together and bow at the waist and mouth the words ‘Thank you.’ Sometimes I’ll touch my hand to my chest. I’ve worked hard for this moment.”

“If ever there were a show I’ve done that could do without a bow, it’s ‘Blackbird.’ We stand there. We’ve got nothing left. We don’t have any energy for bows, standard or otherwise. So to bounce out there with a bow and a smile and do something that says: ‘Oh, my God, thank you. No, thank you’ — it just doesn’t fit. I’m happy not to do anything, but a friend who’s been in the theater longer than I has said: ‘You’ve got to let the audience thank you. You need to give them that.’ That’s why Michelle [Williams] and I go out there. It’s not us saying, ‘Do you love me as much as I love me?’ It’s out of respect for the audience. But simplicity reigns. You bend but not much, because at this age it’s about getting back up again. I bow. Michelle bows. We bow one last time and go offstage.”

“I don’t know that I have a bowing style. I certainly don’t practice. I just try to go out and do what feels right. I just know that my bow is not flashy. For me, it’s more important for the work to get the recognition than the actor.”

“In the back of my mind, it seems like I’m asking for gratitude or approval, and I don’t like asking for either. I just bow my head, and hope I’m not shortchanging the audience.”


