


LOUISVILLE, Ky. — Lani, Japan’s long-shot hope to win the 142nd Kentucky Derby on Saturday, can be heard before he is seen.

A gray colt set to become the second Japan-based starter in the Derby’s history, Lani whinnied for all he was worth as he came into view while exiting Barn 17 on Tuesday morning at Churchill Downs. Wide-eyed and seemingly miffed by the rush of people and horses passing by, he all but stomped to the main track in the latest exhibition of how temperamental he can be.

After digging in and giving the exercise rider Eishu Maruuchi every indication he was unwilling to complete the five-furlong work scheduled for him, Lani eventually traveled the distance in 1 minute 1 second. The time, while not overly impressive, represented a positive step after a series of misadventures since his arrival at Churchill Downs on April 3.

On April 20, he was so unresponsive that a five-furlong drill took 1:06, barely fast enough to qualify as a public workout. A week later, after the jockey Yutaka Take flew in from Japan to give him a five-furlong breeze, Lani was willing to accelerate to top speed for only three furlongs, timed in 37 2/5 seconds.

He added to his bad-boy reputation when Maruuchi took him to the starting gate on Monday as part of their pre-Derby preparations. Lani, the son of Tapit, another notoriously strong-willed horse, dug in and kicked for several minutes before reluctantly entering.

Maruuchi, with Atsushi Koya of the Japan Racing Association acting as an interpreter, said of his relationship with Lani, “He is the king, and I am the servant.”

Most horses can be persuaded to do what a rider wants. Not Lani.

“He likes to get into a strong gallop by himself,” Maruuchi said. “He doesn’t want the rider to push him forward.”

Can such a mercurial 3-year-old, one who often exhibits studdish behavior whenever a filly is near, upset the heavily favored Nyquist, who was undefeated as a 2-year-old champion, and also withstand pressure from 18 other starters on Saturday?

Take, Japan’s pre-eminent rider, made note of how unclear their prospects were when he said after the failed five-furlong work on April 27, “If he wants to run on Derby day, we have a big chance.”

Lani qualified for the Kentucky Derby, the opening leg of the Triple Crown, by earning the 100 points awarded to the winner of the 1 3/16-mile U.A.E. Derby on March 26 at Meydan Racecourse in Dubai. That race, too, was anything but routine. After stumbling out of the gate, he rallied from last to prevail by three-quarters of a length.

The Kentucky-bred Lani has three victories in six starts for earnings of $1,366,618 for his owner, Koji Maeda, with all of his wins coming on dirt. Of the 20 projected starters, he is one of the few whose bloodlines suggest that — if nothing else — he will handle the mile-and-a-quarter distance with aplomb. Heavenly Romance, his dam, was sired by Sunday Silence, the 1989 Kentucky Derby winner.

“He’s as well bred as anyone in the race,” Steve Haskin, a longtime horse racing journalist, said. “In fact, if I ranked by pedigree, he’s the top horse in the race. There’s tons of class and stamina.”

Lani has enough to overcome. His globe-trotting began March 15 when he journeyed almost 5,000 miles to Dubai, from Japan. On April 1, he boarded another flight, which carried him about 7,200 miles to Chicago. He was quarantined at Arlington Park near Chicago for two days before being taken by van to Louisville.

“I know I’m giving him a tough task,” Mikio Matsunaga, his trainer, said through an interpreter.

The history is daunting. Ski Captain, Japan’s only previous Derby starter, finished a distant 14th in 1995 with Take aboard. Seven other starters who raced exclusively outside North America before the Derby all fared poorly. China Visit produced the best finish, winding up sixth in 2000. Mubtaahij, the winner of last year’s U.A.E. Derby, never threatened in taking eighth.

Mike Watchmaker, national handicapper for Daily Racing Form, questioned whether 3-year-old thoroughbreds who prepared outside the United States would ever overcome the grueling travel and be properly equipped to meet the sternest challenge of their young racing careers.

“The Kentucky Derby is a uniquely American race,” Watchmaker said. “It is a race very much geared to an American horse on an American schedule. I say that because it’s a dirt race and no other country has a racing schedule like our racing schedule to prepare a horse for the Kentucky Derby with races increasing in distance, spaced out properly, and all on dirt.”

Watchmaker said of imports, “They’re always going to be up against it in this race.”

Even though Lani, who will break from the No. 8 post, was given odds of 30 to 1, his presence is creating keen interest in Japan.

“Good trainer, good jockey, good colt in the biggest race in the world,” Koya, of the Japan Racing Association, said. “We are very interested in how Lani can compete against very strong American horses.”

Watchmaker doubts that Lani is in the mold of the Venezuelan horse Canonero II, a seemingly impossible long shot who won the Derby in 1971. He described the misbehaving Lani as “the rankest of outsiders.”

Matsunaga, the trainer, clings to the hope that Lani will stay composed before a massive crowd, enter and break from the starting gate without issue, and run the race of a lifetime.

“I’ve got big ambitions for this weekend,” he said.


