


Two new ads from Donald J. Trump running on television stations in Pennsylvania and Indiana show a more refined, controlled message from a presidential candidate who has shown an aversion to staying on script.

In one, his son Donald Jr. attests to Mr. Trump’s toughness as a father, suggesting that as children, he and his siblings had to know their stuff before “bringing him any kind of proposal.”

In this ad, Mr. Trump himself addresses the camera for the entire length of the commercial — a first for his campaign, and perhaps a sign that he is heeding new aides’ advice to adopt some of the conventions of politics. Then again, the ad is not entirely conventional.

Message Mr. Trump stands inside Trump Tower, his back to a window that opens onto midtown Manhattan, and walks toward the camera. “Washington is broken,” he says. “The truth is, too many politicians are totally controlled by special interests and lobbyists. That’s going to change quickly.”

Sounding much like an infomercial pitchman on late-night television, gesturing with both hands, and practically shouting over a trumpet-blaring soundtrack, Mr. Trump rattles off his promises. Nine, to be exact:

“We’ll cut taxes for the middle class, negotiate new trade deals, bring back jobs, save Social Security and Medicare without cuts, end illegal immigration, build the wall, strengthen our military, knock out ISIS and take care of our great veterans.”

And yes, he’ll “Make America Great Again,” too.

Impact Mr. Trump’s willingness to run commercials in Pennsylvania, where he holds a wide lead in the polls, and in Indiana, where the race is murkier, reflects his desire to lock up the delegates he needs to avoid a contested convention.

Takeaway Until now, Mr. Trump’s commercials have featured ominous narrations, shadowy images and attacks on his rivals. Here, he turns decidedly upbeat. It is a significant stride toward becoming the familiar sort of politician he likes to deride. Then again, if the sound were off, a viewer might well mistake the ad for the kind Mr. Trump used to run for his mass-market business ventures.

The Club for Growth “super PAC” trying to derail Mr. Trump’s march to the nomination is running an ad in Indiana saying “the math won’t work” to vote for Gov. John Kasich as a way to defeat Mr. Trump; only a vote for Senator Ted Cruz will do the trick. But with Mr. Cruz’s wipeout in the New York primary, he has been mathematically eliminated from clinching the nomination before the convention — putting him in the same boat as Mr. Kasich.

As the debate over the North Carolina “bathroom bill” spilled into the presidential election, Mr. Cruz voiced his support for the measure, which bars people from using bathrooms that do not correspond to their biological sex. “Common sense: grown men shouldn’t be in bathrooms w/ little girls,” Mr. Cruz tweeted. And his campaign released a 20-second digital ad showing two closed bathroom stalls, side by side, with the legs of a grown man, jeans at his ankles, in one, and the dangling legs of a little girl in Mary Janes in the other.

The production values are nearly worthy of HBO, the look-alike actors good enough to draw double-takes. A new digital ad from the Cruz campaign imagines the war room of Hillary Clinton’s campaign, where the candidate is assured that “the plan is coming together: Donald Trump is paving the way for you to win the White House.” A sinister-looking Mrs. Clinton grows increasingly concerned, however, as her team warns her about the Republican who can’t be “stopped”: Mr. Cruz.

$1.2 million Amount spent by Republican candidates in New York.

$3.8 million Amount spent by Democratic candidates so far in Pennsylvania.


