


Less than 48 hours before the Whitney Museum’s show on portraiture opened last week, Scott Rothkopf was urging an art handler to rotate a hanging Calder wire head “45 degrees to the left.”

It might seem surprising for a chief curator to concern himself with such minutiae, but intense attention to detail is one of the qualities that catapulted Mr. Rothkopf from an art magazine editor to the top ranks of one of the leading cultural institutions in the country at just 38 years old.

There were eyebrows raised when Mr. Rothkopf was appointed last May, given that he had not risen through the curatorial ranks — the Whitney, where he arrived as a curator in 2009, was his first museum job (not counting his stint as a summer intern there in 1998).

And he replaced the much-beloved Donna De Salvo, a longtime curator who is now the Whitney’s deputy director for international initiatives.

But in his first year, Mr. Rothkopf has already been making an impact, largely by championing emerging artists and shaping the museum’s future. He has promoted three young curatorial assistants and hired a fourth. He elevated Dana Miller — with whom he curated the current show “Human Interest: Portraits From the Whitney’s Collection” — to director of the collection, and helped woo Christopher Y. Lew from MoMA PS1, making him and Mia Locks curators of the next Whitney Biennial.

“He has really reinvigorated the contemporary program,” said Adam D. Weinberg, the museum’s director. “What he’s doing is recognizing young talent and people who work hard and moving them up. It’s important for a museum devoted to contemporary art not to just have curators who are over 60.”

Mr. Rothkopf has a boyish presence that is accentuated by his compact height, energetic cadence and gregarious personality. In an interview in his office overlooking the Hudson River, he said one of his first goals was to re-energize the Whitney’s tradition of supporting emerging artists. “The connective tissue between biennials wasn’t as strong as I wanted it to be,” he said.

To this end, he encouraged the inclusion of Lucy Dodd, a rising talent, in a recent rotating series on the wide-open fifth floor. He is set to announce that the Whitney will feature an outdoor windmill installation by Virginia Overton, a prominent commission for a lesser-known artist.

“We have to keep close to that lively and experimental spirit,” Mr. Rothkopf said. “Just because we seem like a more grown-up museum doesn’t mean that we’re not going to take risks.”

In the Whitney’s new downtown building, Mr. Rothkopf is helping lead an interrogation of what it means to be the museum of American art — how much should the institution include artists from other countries who have done significant work in the United States? How much should the collection reflect the other geographical Americas?

“I think what you’re going to see is a great expansiveness in terms of the kinds of artists we feature in the program,” Mr. Rothkopf said.

The portraiture exhibition that opened last week, which the critic Holland Cotter of The New York Times called “immediately engaging,” exemplifies this integrated approach, with works by African-American artists, female artists and younger artists alongside established names.

The exhibition looks at portraits through the prism of social media even as it draws on the Whitney’s figurative tradition. This appears to be Mr. Rothkopf’s sweet spot — knowing how to attract crowds with shows that feel relevant and accessible (and sometimes whimsical), while at the same time undergirding them with intellectual heft.

“It will be pleasing to larger audiences, but there’s a lot of scholarship beneath the surface,” Mr. Weinberg said. “While there might be a larger chronological or thematic idea, there are also surprises. He understands that exhibition is also storytelling.”

Mr. Weinberg evaded the question of whether he is grooming Mr. Rothkopf to be his successor: “I think that Scott someday will be a great director, whether it’s at the Whitney or someplace else,” he said.

Mr. Rothkopf clearly has big ambitions. One only had to watch him work a room full of trustees at a recent Whitney gala to see that he is deft with the donor crowd. But many say Mr. Rothkopf, who is also deputy director of programs, made it this far this fast largely through hard work. “Human Interest” is the 10th show he has curated solely or collaboratively in seven years.

Four of these involved surveys of major artists: Jeff Koons, Wade Guyton, Glenn Ligon and Mary Heilmann, each of whom remarked on Mr. Rothkopf’s meticulousness, from the marketing to the catalog.

“It was like brain surgery without anesthesia,” Mr. Ligon said. “I’ve never had someone really think about every component of a show like that.”

Mr. Ligon said that Mr. Rothkopf suggested they go to see every piece they wanted to borrow for the exhibition, in person. “If a show is a kind of poem, every word matters,” Mr. Ligon said. “And you can’t pick those pieces from transparencies. You’ve got to go look at them.”

A fan of Mr. Koons’s work for 20 years, Mr. Rothkopf organized the 2014 retrospective, the last exhibition in the Breuer building, and used the catalog to put forth “an elaborate if somewhat defensive argument for the way Mr. Koons self-consciously exposes the mechanisms of money and publicity in his art, in essence having his cake and eating it, too,” the critic Roberta Smith wrote in The Times in a tempered review of the show.

(Mr. Koons said that Mr. Rothkopf “would come across with ideas that were very fresh,” like the idea of concentrating Mr. Koons’s “Banality” series of kitsch figurines on a large pedestal.)

Growing up in Dallas, the son of an amateur painter and a doctor, Mr. Rothkopf recalls making “a menu of museums” he wanted to visit on his annual trips to visit his grandparents in New York. They included the Whitney (to see Calder’s “Circus”), the MoMA (for the Picassos) and the Guggenheim’s Frank Lloyd Wright building.

As an art history undergraduate at Harvard, Mr. Rothkopf impressed his thesis adviser, Yve-Alain Bois, with his paper on Surrealism in America in the ’60s. “One of the readers sent it to Yale University Press and they wanted to publish it right way,” said Mr. Bois, who is now an art history professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J. “It’s graduate-student quality.”

Just after college, Mr. Rothkopf organized a comprehensive survey of Mel Bochner’s late-60s photographs at Harvard Art Museums. “It comprised an important body of work by an influential artist little known for photography,” said James Cuno, who was then director of the Harvard museums and now is president and chief executive of the J. Paul Getty Trust.

“His subsequent work at Artforum and the Whitney has proved that he is the leading contemporary art curator of his generation,” Mr. Cuno added.

The Bochner show, which drew national attention, also caught the eye of Ms. De Salvo, who was instrumental in bringing Mr. Rothkopf to the Whitney.

As to whether she felt unfairly supplanted by Mr. Rothkopf’s ascendance, Ms. De Salvo said: “I never thought of it that way. I’m taking on some big initiatives for the institution. I’m really happy he’s here doing what he’s doing.”

In the new Whitney hierarchy, Mr. Rothkopf, who used to report to Ms. Miller, is now her boss.

It could have been awkward, but Ms. Miller said the two have remained friends. “He’s coming at it from a warmhearted, generous place,” she said. “He immediately took steps to empower younger staff members in the department, he gave them travel budgets, he invited them to meetings and openings. He’s definitely trying to be as inclusive as possible.”


