


Ondrej Palat scored with 2 minutes 59 seconds left in the third period, lifting the Tampa Bay Lightning to a 3-2 win over the host Detroit Red Wings on Tuesday night and a three-games-to-one lead in the teams’ N.H.L. Eastern Conference first-round playoff series.

Game 5 in the best-of-seven series is Thursday at Tampa Bay.

Ben Bishop stopped 26 shots for the Lightning, and Petr Mrazek made 30 saves for the Red Wings.

Palat was in a perfect position in front of the net to make the most of Jonathan Drouin’s pass on the game-winning goal. Drouin had three assists.

Nikita Kucherov had power-play goals in the first and second periods to give Tampa Bay a 2-0 lead late in the second, but Detroit’s Darren Helm and Gustav Nyquist scored late in the period to tie the score.

The Lightning struck first by scoring at 5:41 of the first on a power play. Brian Boyle won a face-off, sending the puck back to Victor Hedman, and he skated toward the front of the net. Hedman carried the puck from left to right and passed it to Drouin, who pushed the puck through the left circle to Tyler Johnson, whose diagonal pass perfectly set up Kucherov for a one-timer nine seconds into the power play.

Tampa Bay took advantage of another power play for its second goal when Jonathan Ericsson failed to clear the puck and it ended up in the net on Kucherov’s shot from the slot off a slick pass from Drouin.

The Lightning, the defending Eastern Conference champions, scored three times on the power play. And, they prevented Detroit from scoring with a man advantage. Over the first three games of the series, the Lightning were 1 of 14 on the power play, and Detroit was 1 of 17 with at least one extra skater.

Detroit rallied from two goals down when Helm stuffed a shot into the net from the right side off a pass from Luke Glendening with 5:07 left in the second.

The Red Wings seemed to skate faster and hit harder after pulling to one goal down, and Nyquist went charging up the ice to get to a puck chipped ahead by Justin Abdelkader.

His pressure led to the puck getting turned over to Riley Sheahan, who flipped it to Nyquist for the goal.

Ericsson was called for cross-checking with 4:42 to go, giving the Lighting a chance to score their third power-play goal of the game, and they took advantage to move a step closer toward eliminating Detroit in the first round for the second straight year.

DUCKS 3, PREDATORS 0 Frederik Andersen made 27 saves as Anaheim cut host Nashville’s lead to two games to one in a first-round series.

The Ducks have not lost three straight to open a postseason series since the 2006 Western Conference finals, and they did not come close to dropping a third straight this year.

Andersen, who started in net after John Gibson took the first two losses in Anaheim, posted his second postseason shutout despite taking Shea Weber’s slap shot off his head.

Chris Stewart had a goal and an assist, and Jamie McGinn and Rickard Rakell each scored their first goals of the series.

Game 4 is Thursday night in Nashville.

BLUES 4, BLACKHAWKS 3 Vladimir Tarasenko scored on two impressive wrist shots, Brian Elliott made 39 saves, and St. Louis won in Chicago to take a three-games-to-one lead in their first-round series.

Jaden Schwartz scored a tiebreaking power-play goal in the third period for the second straight game as the Blues moved to the verge of their first appearance in the Western Conference semifinals since 2012. The Blues were eliminated in the opening round in each of the past three years.

Game 5 is Thursday night in St. Louis.

Duncan Keith had two goals for Chicago, which has lost consecutive home playoff games for the first time since 2012.

Andrew Shaw had a goal and two assists, and Corey Crawford finished with 16 saves after getting into a fight with the Blues rookie Robby Fabbri in the second period.

FLYERS CRITICIZE FANS The Flyers condemned disgruntled fans who threw promotional light-up bracelets on the ice during a playoff game against the Washington Capitals on Monday night.

The wristbands were used as part of a pregame light show. Fans started tossing them onto the ice in the third period as Washington turned the game into a rout, eventually winning 6-1 to take a 3-0 series lead.

“Fans have the right to voice their displeasure vocally or by not watching or attending games, but when displeasure is expressed in a way that embarrasses or endangers others, it cannot be condoned or tolerated,” the team said.

COYOTES-SUNS ARENA SOUGHT Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton is pushing for a downtown arena shared by the N.H.L.’s Arizona Coyotes and the N.B.A.’s Phoenix Suns.

Stanton called for the shared arena during his state of the city address, adding that funding for it would come from Maricopa County’s existing sports facilities fund and not new taxes.


