


VILLENEUVE-D’ASCQ, France — An early flurry of memorable goals at the European Championships has been overshadowed by disturbing scenes of fan violence in multiple cities, leading the police to ask for greater resources, the tournament’s organizers to open disciplinary proceedings and the French government on Sunday to ban alcohol sales near stadiums for the duration of the event.

The most disconcerting clash came late Saturday in Marseille, in southern France, when Russia fans appeared to storm en masse into sections filled with England fans just after a 1-1 tie between those teams had ended. But several days of violence involving both sets of fans, as well as local residents and the police, had preceded that melee, and clashes between Germany and Ukraine fans were caught on video before Germany’s 2-0 victory Sunday evening at the Stade Pierre-Mauroy just outside Lille.

While fan violence was not the foremost concern ahead of this tournament — fears of terrorism, heightened after the Paris attacks in November, remain high — the ugly nature of the fighting has forced national agencies and soccer officials to scramble. And there are related worries, such as how some fans have managed to take firecrackers or smoke bombs into stadiums.

In a statement, UEFA, which governs European soccer, expressed its “disgust” at the fight involving the Russia and England fans and threatened that any instances of in-game violence by fans would bring harsh punishments, “including the potential disqualification of their respective teams from the tournament.”

Video of the fight in Marseille was startling. Almost immediately after the final whistle, a sea of fans from the Russian section surged into an English section while stewards vainly tried to intervene. (Fans at most high-level soccer matches, including games at the European Championships, are segregated by which team they support.) Many of the Russia fans were seen with shirts or scarves over their faces, and others were reported to be wearing mixed-martial-arts-style gloves. It also appeared that at least one fan fired a flare gun during the fracas.

Some England fans confronted the onrushing fans while others tried to run away. Many simply tried to protect themselves or the children in the area. More than 40 people were injured during the confrontation, the police said, with one England fan said to be in critical condition at a hospital.

Vitaly Mutko, the Russian sports minister and a senior executive with FIFA, which oversees world soccer, initially tried to play down the actions of the Russian fans, saying that “everything is fine.” Later, however, he acknowledged the gravity of the situation and said: “It’s clear that some people didn’t come here to watch football. They’ve covered their faces and then brought shame on their country.”

This is not the first instance of crowd trouble involving Russian fans. Russia was disciplined after fan disturbances at the 2012 European Championships, and apprehension about Russian fans — who have been punished several times for violence, as well as racist behavior — is particularly notable because Russia is set to host the 2018 World Cup.

After the fight, UEFA said it would open an investigation to determine whether the Russian soccer federation deserved blame for failing to control its fans. The results of that investigation are expected to be made public Tuesday.

England’s federation is not under investigation by UEFA, but its fans are not blameless, the police said. While UEFA’s remit is limited to in-stadium problems, several England fans were arrested and many more questioned by the authorities after a series of clashes in the city center during the days and nights leading to the Russia match.

In some of the fights, the fans faced off with law enforcement, and the police used tear gas — a not-uncommon technique in Europe.

While not as graphic, video footage of fights between Germany and Ukraine fans on Sunday was similarly jarring. The atmosphere in Lille ahead of the game, each team’s tournament opener, was largely genial, particularly around the stadium as kickoff approached. But a nasty, frantic confrontation on the streets of the city continued a trend that has also included more minor episodes in Nice, which involved local fans and fans of Northern Ireland and Poland, and in Paris, which involved fans of Turkey and Croatia.

The fighting has dimmed the beginning stages of a tournament that French officials had hoped would be solely about brilliant soccer. France’s late goal and thrilling victory in the tournament opener at the Stade de France on Friday was quickly marred by Saturday’s events in Marseille, and France’s interior minister said Sunday that bans on alcohol near stadiums and fan zones would be enacted.

The minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, called on the local police to expel “all foreign supporters whose behavior disturbs public order” and said the fighting in Marseille was “unacceptable for the authorities, unacceptable for society, unacceptable for football lovers.”

The scrutiny on fan violence and security does not figure to ease anytime soon, even as the players have done their best to provide memorable moments, including Gareth Bale’s free-kick goal for Wales, Luka Modric’s stunning volley for Croatia and, here on Sunday, Bastian Schweinsteiger’s cool finish in stoppage time.

Excellent as those goals were, the larger focus will now very likely shift to northern France, with both Russia and England fans on the move. England is set to play Wales on Thursday in Lens, a city of about 30,000 that had already instituted strict restrictions on alcohol consumption because of its small size and the expected influx of visitors.

Given the relative paucity of hotels in the area, many England fans are expected to stay in Lille — a bigger city about 25 miles away. That could be troublesome, however, because of the schedule:

Russia is set to play Slovakia near Lille on Wednesday night.


