


The list includes ramshackle old stadiums, scented and scarred with century-old reminders of English soccer’s storied past, but also the gleaming cathedrals that testify to the Premier League’s rich new present.

The City Ground (Nottingham Forest) and the County Ground (Swindon Town). Elland Road and White Hart Lane, but also Villa Park and Craven Cottage. Turf Moor and Deepdale and Ashton Gate.

And when the final whistle blows at Saturday’s match between Manchester City and Stoke City, Martin Weiler, a 61-year-old soccer fan with no affiliation to either team, will leave the Etihad Stadium having seen a match in every one of them. In doing so, he also will become eligible for membership in one of soccer’s most distinctive supporters groups: the 92 Club, a small and exclusive fellowship made up of individuals who have watched a competitive league or cup match at the stadium of each of the 92 clubs in England’s top four divisions, which includes some teams from Wales.

Saturday’s trip to Manchester will mark the end of a journey that has taken Weiler more than a half-century to complete. It started, unknown to him, when he attended his first soccer match, between Brentford and Shrewsbury Town on the cold-stone terraces of London’s Griffin Park, as a 10-year-old in 1964.

Since that game, soccer has taken Weiler to 213 stadiums, at home and abroad. Anfield and Old Trafford, but also the Valley and the Hive and the Hawthorns. St. Mary’s Stadium and St. James Park (twice, since there’s one in Newcastle and another in Exeter that he has visited hundreds of times as a fan of Exeter City F.C.). The Etihad — officially the City of Manchester Stadium — is the last empty box on his list, and seeing this weekend’s game will allow him to say that he has seen a match at every place soccer is played in the Premier League and the three tiers below it known as the Football League.

“I think the journey is definitely the most important part,” said Weiler, who estimated that he has been to almost 2,000 matches. “One of the things I love about going to football grounds is that often it’s taken me to places I would have never gone otherwise.”

Though the number 92 is set in stone, the chameleonic nature of the Premier League and Football League’s stadium list makes doing the 92, as the challenge is known, extremely difficult. Since the 92 Club was founded by a Bristol Rovers fan, Gordon Pearce, and 38 other members in 1978, only 1,240 individuals have been accepted — a microscopic subset of the millions of fans who attend soccer matches every season in England and Wales.

One difficulty is that, unlike American sports, England’s soccer pyramid features a promotion-and-relegation system, a structure in which teams move between divisions and two new teams join the Football League’s lowest tier, League 2, every season. That means that a fan trying to do the 92 might have checked off the lowest finishers in League 2 long ago only to be faced with new arrivals from the National League as they approach the magic number.

The rules for membership in the 92 Club have some quirks. If a fan has been to the stadium of a team that has been relegated but then returns to League 2, that team can be counted on an application. But friendly matches and testimonials cannot. The rules state that applicants must have visited every club’s current home, meaning that a fan who watched Arsenal decades ago at its longtime home, Highbury, must return for a match at its new arena, the shiny new Emirates Stadium, before being eligible to join.

Steve Wilson, a Blackpool fan who said he once attended close to 70 matches a season, claims visits to more than 300 stadiums at home and abroad. He said that he had completed the 92 eight times; Wilson, though, includes preseason friendlies from his summer vacations in his counts, which meant that he has never been eligible for the club.

“Whether I am counted as being in the club or not is irrelevant,” said Wilson, 65. “I know I’ve been to the grounds, I’ve seen the game, and that’s all that matters. You know what the rules are, and it’s up to you if you want to abide by them.”

As well as abiding by such rules, doing the 92 requires the sheer willingness to travel long distances and appreciate the game at a range of levels. As a result, many members complete the challenge alone.

“Ultimately, it doesn’t matter to anybody that you’ve been to all these grounds except you,” Mike Kimberley, the club’s secretary, said.

Kimberley, 56, estimated that since 1967, he had seen his club, Crystal Palace, play at more than 50 stadiums before deciding to complete the 92 in the mid-1990s. Weiler, through spells living in London and Exeter on England’s southwest coast, built up a base following Brentford, Tottenham Hotspur and Exeter City. He decided after his retirement in 2014 to visit the 16 stadiums he had remaining to complete his 92.

“Some people tend to run out of steam around the 50s mark and think, you know what, it’s taken me 10 years to get here — it’s going to be a concerted effort to do the rest,” said Pat Bristow, 55, a Charlton Athletic fan who has visited more than 80 of the current 92 but has never completed the list. “I think that’s why so few people manage it; you have to be quite dedicated to get around all 92.”

Bristow runs a website, DoingThe92.com, which caters to fans looking to complete the challenge, whether on their own terms, like Wilson, or by following the 92 Club rules. DoingThe92.com currently has 9,337 member profiles. Of those, 129 have completed the current 92; 42 have completed the 92 at some point; and 19, including Weiler, stand on 91.

To be accepted into the club, fans must submit a form detailing one match at each current stadium: date, opponent, competition, score and attendance. (The club relies heavily on the honor system, since there is little to gain by cheating.) If verified, that fan receives a package of items that includes a tie, a lapel pin, a membership card and a list of other members. Membership is for life, meaning that once accepted a fan remains in the club even as the list of 92 stadiums evolves. (Visiting new stadiums season after season is not compulsory, but it is encouraged.)

Chris Wathen, a Bristol Rovers supporter who watched his first game in 1976, used to keep notes on the stadiums he visited in a high school textbook. He completed the 92 in 1990, but said he has visited over 50 more in the years since, just to keep current.

“I just like watching football,” said Wathen, 49. “So if I have to accommodate a new situation — like, for instance, Coventry playing at Northampton a few seasons ago — I will take the night off from the Rovers and watch that game.”

Next season offers at least one guaranteed new venue: West Ham is moving from the Boleyn Ground, its home in London’s East End since 1904, to the nearby Olympic Stadium this summer.

Weiler will add it to his list as soon as he can. There are also the possibilities of trips to Braintree and Dover, who are in contention for promotion from the National League.

“It’s not that the 92 will last that long,” Weiler said. “As soon as the season ends, it all starts changing and there’ll be some new ones to do. I don’t think I can stop now.”


