


Millions of migrants have fled war and poverty in their homelands. But two reports released on Tuesday highlighted the perils they face as they seek refuge and a better life in other countries.

In one of the reports, the International Organization for Migration said that thousands of migrants had died trying to cross seas and deserts. Many of their bodies were not found, and those that were recovered were often impossible to identify. Along one of the busiest sea routes to Europe, a third of the dead were children. In the second report, the United Nations Children’s Fund warned of growing threats of abuse, exploitation and death for unaccompanied minors fleeing to Europe.

Here are a few conclusions of the International Organization for Migration report, “Fatal Journeys”:

Counting the dead A grisly record was set last year, with 5,400 migrants worldwide dying in their attempts to cross national borders, up from 5,000 in 2014. In the first five months of 2016, 3,100 people died.

Where they are dying The Mediterranean was especially treacherous: 3,770 died trying to reach the shores of Europe, and 130 more died on European soil, including 71 who suffocated in the back of a truck in Austria. They were among more than a million migrants and refugees who crossed the Mediterranean in 2015.

Southeast Asia recorded 800 migrant deaths, mostly in the turbulent Bay of Bengal.

On the United States-Mexico border, an estimated 300 people died. From 1998 to 2015, 6,571 bodies were found on the American side of the border.

How many people have died in the vast Sahara remains a mystery because there are no official search and rescue efforts there. In June 2015, the remains of more than 30 migrants were found in the desert in Niger, “their bones revealing just a small tip of the iceberg,” the report said.

The nameless Increasingly, the dead cannot be identified, either because they are not found, because their bodies have badly decomposed, or because they were not carrying identification papers. “This means that tens of thousands of families of missing migrants are living in limbo, not knowing the fate of their loved ones,” the report said.

The young As many more families tried to cross the Aegean Sea from Turkey to Greece, children accounted for a third of the dead. Most were under the age of 10, and at least 40 percent were younger than 2.

Much is still unknown “It is still a struggle to arrive at basic estimates of the number of migrants who die — lost bodies, bodies buried in unmarked graves, left in deserts, or washed under the waves make the task of counting a daunting one, and one that will never be complete,” the report said.

The Unicef report told of the many threats faced by vulnerable young people:

Alone among strangers More than 90 percent of refugee and migrant children who arrived in Europe via Italy this year were unaccompanied. At least 7,009 unaccompanied children made the crossing from North Africa to Italy in the first five months of this year — twice as many as in all of last year.

Victimized twice An unknown number of migrants were sexually abused and exploited. Based on information from Italian social workers, the report said that both girls and boys had been sexually assaulted and forced into prostitution in Libya, and that some of the girls were pregnant when they arrived in Italy because they had been raped.


