


Since North Carolina passed a bill in March limiting bathroom access for transgender people, many musicians have canceled shows in the state in protest. However, Moogfest, an electronic music and technology festival set to take place in Durham next weekend, is taking the opposite approach and refocusing the event as a demonstration against the law, which is commonly referred to as House Bill 2.

Moogfest will feature a keynote address from Martine Rothblatt, a transgender woman who is the chief executive of United Therapeutics, a biotechnology company, and a founder of Sirius Satellite Radio, now SiriusXM. United Therapeutics has an office and manufacturing facility outside of Durham.

“I would rather be part of a protest festival than basically just be a silent voice walking away from it,” Dr. Rothblatt said in an interview.

Festival organizers plan to provide gender-neutral bathrooms, raise money through clothing sales and help register voters for the November election.

Late last month, Dr. Rothblatt and several Moogfest artists, including Laurie Anderson, Reggie Watts and Blood Orange, explained their rationale in an open letter: “We oppose HB2 and support justice and equality for everyone. We will use the podium, the stage and the dance floor to manifest a world of inclusivity and compassion,” referring to the law.

In her speech, Dr. Rothblatt, who commissioned the creation of the social robot Bina48, will talk about the law as well as focus on the future, including how robots will play a larger role in society and why she believes the United States should provide free college education.

Dr. Rothblatt said the effects of the law on United Therapeutics were immediate. “Candidates are beginning to ask, ‘Is the cultural environment in North Carolina going backwards or forwards?’ It’s hurting recruitment,” she said.

However, Dr. Rothblatt said the company had no plans to move out of the state: “We are totally convinced that this is a short-term detour and that HB2 is going to be overruled in the very near future.”


