


Jason Hammel raised his record to 4-0 and Anthony Rizzo hit two doubles on Monday night as the visiting Chicago Cubs beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 7-2.

Hammel’s E.R.A. rose to 1.24 after he began the game at 0.75, which led the National League. He gave up two runs and five hits in five-plus innings, with three strikeouts and a walk. His streak of five straight starts allowing one run or fewer ended.

Rizzo hit a run-scoring double and scored in the third inning as the Cubs went ahead, 2-1. Then he doubled again during a four-run fifth that pushed the lead to 6-1.

Chicago improved to 18-6, the best record in the major leagues, and avoided losing a second consecutive game for the first time this season.

GIANTS 9, REDS 6 The Reds roughed up Johnny Cueto in his return to Cincinnati, but San Francisco rallied against the Reds’ bullpen, riding Brandon Crawford’s three-run homer to victory.

Joey Votto hit a three-run homer as Cincinnati scored six runs in the third inning off Cueto, who received a warm welcome from his former teammates and fans before the game.

RANGERS 2, BLUE JAYS 1 Nomar Mazara hit a tiebreaking home run in the eighth inning, and visiting Texas beat Toronto for its fifth win in six games.

In the bottom of the eighth, Mazara preserved the one-run lead by throwing out Michael Saunders at home plate to end the inning.

Tony Barnette worked one inning for the win, and Shawn Tolleson finished for his ninth save.

BREWERS 8, ANGELS 5 Jimmy Nelson pitched seven strong innings and drove in the go-ahead run, and Milwaukee defeated Los Angeles at home.

Nelson retired 15 of 16 batters before giving up a solo home run to Mike Trout in the sixth. He allowed two runs and four hits in seven innings.

Ryan Braun reached base four times for the Brewers.

ORIOLES LOSE SHORTSTOP Baltimore shortstop J. J. Hardy will be sidelined for at least a month with a hairline fracture in his left foot.

The injury occurred Sunday when Hardy fouled a ball off his foot in the fourth inning against the Chicago White Sox.

The Orioles were off Monday. Manager Buck Showalter said he expected Hardy to miss four to six weeks.

Hardy was expected to be placed on the 15-day disabled list on Tuesday, before the Orioles opened a three-game series against the Yankees.

SURGERY FOR RED SOX PLAYER Boston third baseman Pablo Sandoval will have surgery on his left shoulder in the next few days.

The team said the procedure would be performed by Dr. James Andrews in Florida. The team did not say how long Sandoval was expected to be sidelined.

Sandoval is in the second season of a five-year, $95 million contract. He has been on the disabled list since April 13 with a strained shoulder.

DODGER IS SUSPENDED Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Josh Ravin was suspended for 80 games after a positive test under Major League Baseball’s drug program.

Ravin is the eighth player to be suspended this year under the big league program and the fourth in three weeks. He tested positive for Growth Hormone Releasing Peptide 2, the commissioner’s office said.


