


Jeff Hornacek was introduced on Friday as the Knicks’ 28th head coach. That may have been the team’s first upset victory of the season.

Phil Jackson, the team president, is famously wedded to a network of disciples who coach, or at least adhere to, his signature triangle offense. Hornacek, a head coach with the Phoenix Suns and a veteran of 14 N.B.A. seasons, is outside Jackson’s circle.

“Probably the only words I ever said to him: ‘Congratulations on the championship again’ when they beat us two times,” Hornacek said, referring to Jackson’s Chicago Bulls, who defeated the Utah Jazz twice in the N.B.A. finals. “I’d never talked to him a lot prior to that.”

This could be a good thing if the same forces that compelled Jackson to go beyond his tight circle get him to rethink his attachment to the triangle.

It’s fascinating to have witnessed the Knicks’ drama and dysfunction and ever-revolving cycle of coaches. My first encounter came in 1987 when Bob Hill was fired as head coach and Scotty Stirling was ousted as the general manager. Richard H. Evans, the chief executive of Madison Square Garden, proclaimed his intention to turn the Garden back into a caldron of winning. He said the firings were necessary “to bring a fresh approach to management and coaching, and to bring winning back to the Garden.”

The Knicks hired Al Bianchi as general manager and Rick Pitino as head coach. In his introductory news conference, Pitino gushed about his new job. Acknowledging that he would never play for the Knicks, he said that “the next best thing was to coach the Knicks.” Pitino said his goal was to “bring the Knicks back to where we once were.”

Two years later, Pitino, who had been feuding with Bianchi, left to become the coach of the Kentucky Wildcats. (In an interesting twist, in June 1989, Pitino, asked who should succeed him as Knicks coach, said the team should hire Phil Jackson, at the time an assistant in Chicago.)

The Knicks hired a Jackson, but it was Stu Jackson, Pitino’s assistant, who said he “jumped in the air, kicked my heels and screamed for joy.” After his first workout, Jackson, at the time the N.B.A.’s youngest head coach, proclaimed that the Knicks would be among the teams to beat in the Eastern Conference. The Knicks never were, and Jackson was fired in December 1990 and replaced by John MacLeod, whom Bianchi described as “a proven winner.”

MacLeod left after a season for Notre Dame.

I was present in May 1991 when Pat Riley was introduced as Knicks coach, in one of the most hyped news conferences I had ever attended. Riley had coached the Lakers to four N.B.A. titles and was expected to bring Showtime to the Garden.

At his news conference Riley invoked the memory of exciting days at the Garden he experienced as a kid growing up in upstate New York. “As a player and as a coach, coming to Madison Square Garden was always special,” Riley said. “It was an event. Whether it takes a year or two to get to that point, we want that atmosphere to come back to New York.”

The Knicks reached the N.B.A. finals once under Riley but lost to the Houston Rockets in 1994. Riley left in June 1995 after a nasty feud with the Garden president, Dave Checketts.

Then Don Nelson was hired, vowing to bring a title back to the Garden. “I’ve never won a title as a coach,” Nelson said. “That burns inside of me. It’s the one thing I want. And this organization is ready for it.”

Knicks fans were starved for it. But Nelson was fired in March 1996 and replaced by Jeff Van Gundy, who led the Knicks to the second round of the playoffs that season. Van Gundy unexpectedly resigned in December 2001 and was replaced by Don Chaney.

“He’s the guy that we want coaching this team, and his leadership both on and off the court has shown us that he’s the right guy to lead our team,’’ said Scott Layden, the team’s general manager.

Layden and Chaney were fired by the team president Isiah Thomas and replaced by Lenny Wilkens in January 2004. “He’s the perfect person to lead us in this environment of change,” Thomas said.

Wilkens resigned in 2005 and was replaced by Larry Brown, who also invoked the spirit of the Knicks’ past in the person of Red Holzman. “Growing up, I had a lot of heroes in my life,” Brown said. “But walking into the Garden and seeing 613 and Coach Holzman’s name up there, that’s always meant a lot to me. Because when you talk about playing the right way, nobody did it any better than him.”

On Friday, Hornacek was sitting under the banner of Holzman’s 613 victories.

Brown was fired in 2006; Thomas took over as coach and was fired in 2008 and replaced by Mike D’Antoni. D’Antoni promised — and delivered — a wide-open offense. There were no titles. Not even close. He was fired in 2012 and replaced by Mike Woodson, who promised a lion’s den defense. The Knicks played better defense but did not win enough games to suit Phil Jackson, who fired Woodson in 2014, replacing him with Derek Fisher, Jackson’s former player and a triangle devotee. Fisher was fired last February, and Kurt Rambis, a Jackson disciple, became interim coach.

During Friday’s news conference Jackson was asked whether he thought the task of rebuilding the Knicks would be so difficult; did he think he would already be on his third head coach?

“Who’s counting?” he responded. “You hope to have a guy that comes in, has success and is able to continue for a duration of time. I don’t know if that’s harder or getting players is harder.

“Here we are,” Jackson concluded, ”Doing what we have to do to move forward. That’s the important part.”

Here we are, indeed.

Playing for the 76ers at the end of his career, Hornacek heard a rumor that he was being traded to the Knicks. The trade never materialized, but Hornacek always wondered, “What if?”

Soon, Hornacek, like a dozen predecessors, will find out.


