


In “Being a Beast: Adventures Across the Species Divide,” the English writer Charles Foster describes his experiences living underground with badgers, swimming with otters and skulking overnight in alleyways with the foxes of East London, all in an effort to “know what it is like to be a wild thing,” as he puts it. We spoke with him by telephone about what he calls his adventures in “literary shamanism.” Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.

In regular life, you’re a researcher in bioethics at Oxford. How much time did you spend trying to be a beast?

I’ve really been doing it all my life. But for literary purposes, I compressed lots of episodes into readable chunks. For the badger chapter, I probably spent about six weeks altogether living underground.

That chapter opens with a vivid description of eating live earthworms, which you describe as “a good argument for cremation.” Were you worried it would put people off?

Everybody asks me about the worm thing. It was intended to shock people, to make them ask: “I think this is disgusting, but why do I think it’s disgusting? Is it really different in principle from a lot of other things I do?”

Your book got good reviews in Britain, though most of them used some variation on the word “bonkers.” Were there any moments when you wondered if you had gone a little crazy?

I get slightly irritated by the word “bonkers.” What I want to do is make people reflect on whether their own viewpoint on the world is the only one humans should have. If people simply label this weird or eccentric, I’ve failed. This is really a travel book. It’s an attempt to visit parts of the landscape that we see all the time but that are usually invisible to us.

Which of the beasts in your book did you most enjoy being? You seem to have special affection for the foxes who haunt the alleyways of East London.

They inhabit the inner city as effortlessly as they inhabit a wild wood. They taught me that if we use all our senses all the time, we are able to inhabit any place more satisfactorily. Apart from my children, the foxes have been my great tutors.

You’re much more down on otters, which you describe as relentless killing and eating machines, taking in the equivalent of about 88 Big Macs a day. Being an otter, you write, “is like being on speed,” and not in a good way.

They have this frantic requirement to get their calorie intake up, leaving little room inside their heads for anything other than the craving. They do seem to be mere circuit boards in the way other species aren’t.

Judging from your chapter on trying to paraglide with swifts, birds do seem to have more fun.

This morning, I’ve been watching a chimney swift diving around. A lot of that is just for the sheer hell of it. They’re generally rejoicing in flight, wasting calories. You don’t see that in otters.

You’re pretty hard on human beings in the book, especially of the urban variety. Is there anything about being human that your adventures in beast-being made you appreciate?

Our cognitive abilities can be a tremendous advantage, if they are informed by all of our senses. But I’m angry at humans who act towards the natural world with a lack of empathy which, if displayed towards other humans, would be seen as frankly psychopathic. We have this ability to engage the natural world on so many more levels than we actually do. I’m incredibly happy being a human being, but I’m much happier having learned the lessons about being human that these other species have taught me.


