


In 1962, as a child from Phoenix vacationing in Manhattan, Keith Peterson knew that someday he wanted to live in the city. It just took a lot longer than he expected.

After Amherst College brought him to the East Coast, Columbia Law School brought him to New York City for a time. But after living in the dorms, Mr. Peterson moved to a large one-bedroom in Brooklyn. When he married, his wife, who was from Warsaw, joined him there.

By 1992, they had a baby girl, and they moved into “the nicest place I could afford,” said Mr. Peterson, who is now 61 and works as a trusts and estates lawyer in the financial district. The three-story rowhouse in the historic Hamilton Park neighborhood of Jersey City was $155,000.

A few years later, his wife received a diagnosis of late-stage cancer. Although they tried an experimental stem-cell treatment, she died 18 months later. And because the treatment wasn’t covered by insurance, it took years for Mr. Peterson to dig himself out of the ensuing debt.

He eventually remarried, in 2008, shortly before his daughter left for college, and his new wife, a high-school friend who was also widowed, joined him in Jersey City. They renovated the house, traveled and spent freely, he said.

“There were certain differences we didn’t take into account,” Mr. Peterson said, including “our understanding of household finances.”

About two years ago, concerned about retirement, Mr. Peterson reviewed their finances. That was when he confirmed that, despite good salaries, “we still managed to spend it all,” he said.

Not long after, Mr. Peterson began caring for an elderly friend in Chelsea who was terminally ill. “I was one of a team of people who looked after him,” he said. He visited daily, and in the process got to know and like the neighborhood.

Within a year, Mr. Peterson’s wife had moved out, and he was making plans to sell the Jersey City house to fund a divorce. He sought help from a neighbor, an agent at Keller Williams Realty, who listed the house for $1.05 million. After one open house, he received several offers.

Mr. Peterson realized that he could finally do what he had been wanting to do for as long as he could remember: move to Manhattan.

He wasn’t quite sure what he could afford, but was hoping for a one-bedroom apartment in Chelsea, preferably in a small, spartan co-op with few amenities — no elevator, no doorman, no dishwasher.

“I’ve always preferred washing my own dishes; it’s therapeutic for me,” said Mr. Peterson, who enjoys writing his own lyrics to popular tunes. “I write my song lyrics while I am washing dishes. I think them through and sing them to myself.” Think: “Pretty sane am I, according to my therapist; And, after all, I think a doctor should know,” sung to the tune of the Beatles’ “Penny Lane.”

His Jersey City agent referred him to a colleague, Dawn McCloud, an agent at Douglas Elliman Real Estate, and she provided a list of open houses in Chelsea, taking Mr. Peterson to two he was interested in.

On West 22nd Street, they climbed five flights of stairs — all the way to the top floor — to see a one-bedroom for $595,000, with a maintenance of just over $800. The space was charming, Mr. Peterson said, but “once I got to be 90, I wouldn’t be able to climb those stairs, so I would be housebound and that really was impractical.” The apartment sold for $575,000.

On West 20th Street, in another beautiful six-story co-op building, there was a one-bedroom available on the second floor. It was $615,000, with maintenance of a little more than $1,000. The layout was narrow, but it had “a clever design,” Ms. McCloud recalled. “The seller did some smart things with custom cabinets.” The price, however, was too high, so Mr. Peterson passed on that one as well. It sold for $585,000.

“I reassured him that we could look in a lower price range,” Ms. McCloud said. “All you ever read about in the news is $20 million apartments. But there is real estate here that is reasonable” — or, at least, reasonable by New York standards.

Next up were several apartments in the East Village. Mr. Peterson picked an appealing ground-floor one-bedroom to visit, because he liked the idea of “the street noise and the passing traffic,” he said. “I want life around me.” The apartment had plenty of wall space for his many bookcases, and no dishwasher. It was listed at $525,000, with a maintenance of $570.

“I liked everything about it,” Mr. Peterson said. But he couldn’t make an offer until his Jersey City house closed. He was pleased when it sold for $1.125 million to “a nice young couple with a 2-year-old girl, cute as a bug’s ear,” he said. “I thought they would be good neighbors to my neighbors, who were always good neighbors to me.” He calculated “a gross appreciation of 9 percent a year over the lifetime of my ownership.”

Returning to the East Village, Mr. Peterson found himself charmed by “all the strange shops selling strange things.” Not far from the apartment he liked was a hair salon called Twigs, “with a jackalope in the window,” he said. “I’ve never seen a jackalope east of the Mississippi.”

That clinched the deal, particularly as he had no interest in looking further. He offered $490,000, settling at $510,000. And last winter, he moved in, thrilled to be living in the city at last.

In his new bohemian neighborhood, Mr. Peterson said, “I feel ancient.” Even so, he added: “I don’t mind if they don’t mind. I’ve been walking around Manhattan all my adult life, but always as a commuter. I was never a resident.”


