


The films of female directors working in genre cinema (including film noir, horror, action and sexploitation) will be celebrated in “Genre Is a Woman,” a series at Film Forum running June 3-16. The series includes the 2000 horror film “American Psycho,” based on the novel by Bret Easton Ellis and directed by Mary Harron. That film, about an investment banker (Christian Bale) with serial-killer tendencies, satirized masculinity and social climbing in a pitch black way. The film inspired a Broadway musical and helped propel Mr. Bale’s Hollywood career.

In an interview, Ms. Harron discussed a scene in which colleagues look at, and obsess over, one another’s business cards. Here are excerpts from that conversation.

Tell me a little bit about this scene.

This scene comes fairly early in the movie, where all the main male members of the cast are gathered together in a world of intense masculine competition. Christian Bale, as Patrick Bateman, his anxiety is the engine of this scene.

Are there any key moments to look for?

I had a fantastic art department, but not so good at spelling. I also did not notice, and no one on set noticed that “acquisitions” is spelled wrong on the business card.

But one of the things that’s subtle in the scene is the sound design. We used the sound of Japanese dueling swords. There’s a “swoosh” every time a business card comes out because there is this element of classic masculine ritualized aggression. There’s also very crisp sounds of card cases opening and the “thwack” of the cards being laid down. It’s if it’s a military exercise but it’s being played out in business cards.

It’s one of my most favorite [scenes]. Although people think of “American Psycho” as this violent film, I think that what I and most people like best about it are the comic scenes. This has been much parodied. There’s a great Dutch jeans ad where it’s hipsters and denim instead of business cards. And there’s another one where people are comparing Sloppy Joe sandwiches.

As a woman director, what was it like to direct this scene that is so charged with masculine energy?

I think that one of the things I loved about the book and what Guinevere Turner and I liked when writing the script was that “American Psycho” is a great parody of masculinity. It’s a sendup. It was accused of being sexist, but to me it was always an attack and satire of sexism and of male ego. And I think this scene is a perfect example of it.


