


Carl Hagelin was apparently too focused on carrying the puck up the ice for the Pittsburgh Penguins in the opening minutes of Tuesday’s playoff game at Madison Square Garden to notice that he was being booed — as if he were a villain.

“They’re allowed to do whatever they want,” Hagelin said Wednesday after practice.

It was only a year ago, on April 24, that Hagelin had ended the Penguins’ season with an overtime goal at the Garden that moved the Rangers into the second round. Afterward, Hagelin stood in the Rangers’ dressing room and said it was one of the happiest moments of his life.

“I’ve been through a lot this year,” Hagelin said Wednesday. “I’ve been all over the world. I’ve been on the West Coast, the east side — it definitely feels like a long time ago.”

Hagelin, a 27-year-old forward who played his first four N.H.L. seasons in New York, has helped the Penguins to a two-games-to-one lead in this best-of-seven series by doing many of the same things that had made him so valuable to the Rangers — foremost, killing penalties.

The Rangers were 0 for 4 on the power play in a 3-1 loss Tuesday and are 1 for 12 in the series. The Penguins scored a critical power-play goal at the end of the second period on Tuesday and are 4 for 13 in the series.

“I would say to you that specialty teams are going in their favor,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said Wednesday.

Hagelin helped the Rangers advance to the Stanley Cup finals two years ago and the Eastern Conference finals last year with his speed and savvy on the penalty-kill unit. Now he is on the Penguins’ top penalty-killing unit.

He does not have a point in the series, but by persistently buzzing the goal, Hagelin drew the hooking penalty on Rangers defenseman Marc Staal that led to Pittsburgh’s crucial power-play goal on Tuesday.

“He’s fast; he’s smart; he’s a good two-way player,” Pittsburgh forward Phil Kessel said of Hagelin, his linemate. “I think when he’s out there, he creates space and makes plays. Whenever you can add a piece like Haggy, it’s important. He’s been a good fit for our team. And, obviously, he’s a great person, a great guy.”

His Rangers teammates had said the same things about Hagelin. But he became a restricted free agent at the end of last season, and the Rangers could not keep him and stay under the salary cap. So they traded him to Anaheim.

Hagelin signed a four-year, $16 million contract, flipped his sweater number from 62 to 26 and played 43 games for the Ducks, including a 3-2 overtime loss to the Rangers on Dec. 22 at the Garden. He scored only four goals, and the Ducks traded him on Jan. 16 to Pittsburgh.

He flipped his sweater number back to 62 and scored 10 goals in 37 games. The Penguins had made a coaching change in December, promoting Mike Sullivan from their Wilkes-Barre/Scranton farm club. Sullivan had coached Hagelin as a Rangers assistant under John Tortorella.

“That’s sports,” Rangers center Derick Brassard said. “Everybody has a different contract situation. Guys are leaving left and right all of the time.”

But Brassard acknowledged that the Penguins were a different team under Sullivan, and it was not a surprise to him that Hagelin had benefited.

“I think they’ve changed the way they play,” Brassard said. “Now they have guys who can move and make plays.”

Before a game against the Devils last month, Sullivan said of Hagelin: “He understands what his strengths are, how to play to those strengths. I think everyone benefits from experience, and he’s not different, and I think he’s a better player for it.”

Brassard’s line, which included J. T. Miller and Rick Nash for most of Tuesday’s game, was often matched against the Penguins’ line of Hagelin, Nick Bonino and Kessel. “He fit in seamlessly when he got here,” Bonino said of Hagelin. “He brings a lot of speed. He’s good on the P.K. He’s good chasing down pucks. He’s good with the puck, and he’s fun to play with.”

Hagelin attempted to play down his team’s success, especially killing penalties.

“For us, it’s important to stay humble, stay aggressive,” he said. “All it takes for them is one good power-play shift, and they score a goal. I try not to think about it too much, but I think aggressiveness is the key.”

Game 4 on Thursday will be Hagelin’s fifth at the Garden since he left the Rangers. The visitors’ dressing room, which trainers have festooned with dozens of Penguins logos and motivational sayings, has become a familiar place to him.

“Obviously, playing at Madison Square Garden in a playoff game was a different experience, for sure,” Hagelin said. “But I think tomorrow will feel like a normal game again.”

SLAP SHOTS

Pittsburgh defenseman Kris Letang will not face punishment from the N.H.L. for clipping Rangers forward Viktor Stalberg in the face with his stick late in Tuesday’s game. The hit was not penalized, and Stalberg lost three teeth. Letang said after practice Wednesday that it was an accident. Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said, “We might feel that it seems deliberate, but the N.H.L. doesn’t see it that way, and the referees on the ice didn’t see it that way, so you’ve just got to deal with it and focus on the next game.”


