


Elinor Elizabeth MacPhail and Alexander Daniel O'Neal were married May 28 at Redtail Ridge Farm in Johnstown, Ohio. Bruce Mandeville, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated.

The bride, 25, and groom, 24, are professional riders in three-day equestrian events, and they train horses and riders at their facility in Reddick, Fla.

The bride is the daughter of Sally Crane Cox of Columbus, Ohio, and Angus N. MacPhail of Portland, Me., and the stepdaughter of Cary L. Cox. The groom is a son of Stephanie Linné O'Neal and Daniel K. O’Neal of St. Charles, Ill.

Ms. MacPhail and Mr. O’Neal met in January 2010, at a riders’ party in Ocala, Fla., to celebrate the beginning of the equestrian season.

“I was incredibly interested in her but a bit intimidated,” said Mr. O’Neal, who was 18 at the time and competing in his first year on the circuit in Ocala. “I had seen her around at horse shows and thought that she was an incredible rider, and quite beautiful. But when we got to talking, I realized that she was far less intimidating than I thought she’d be.”

Ms. MacPhail, who was 20 at the time and had already been named twice to a development program for young riders run by the United States Olympic team, said that while she was “pretty interested,” in Mr. O’Neal, the age difference between them was a problem. “He was a talented rider and very mature for his age, but he was just a little too young for me,” she said.

The next day, Mr. O’Neal learned that Ms. MacPhail was dating another rider. “I was completely bummed out,” he said. “But I kind of looked at it as ‘Well, I guess it was too good to be true.’ ”

Soon, Ms. MacPhail moved to a training base in Middleburg, Va., which was also where her boyfriend lived, and Mr. O’Neal stayed in Ocala to ride and train.

In May 2013, they crossed paths again in Fairburn, Ga., where she was competing in her first international three-day event at the Olympic level. During the event, Ms. MacPhail was thrown from her saddle while attempting a water jump, and her horse began galloping back to the stable area about a mile away. Ms. MacPhail, her riding outfit drenched, took off in pursuit and eventually ran into a very concerned Mr. O’Neal, who was there to compete in another event and had caught her horse and returned it to its stall.

“I was really worried that maybe she had been hurt.” he said. “But then I saw her running back in full gear and I knew she was all right.”

By July, Ms. MacPhail was unattached, and said that she had begun seeing Mr. O’Neal “through a different set of eyes.”

“Unlike many of the other riders I knew, he didn’t have an ego,” she said, and now older and more mature, too. So in October 2013, with her mother and his parents in attendance at an event in Lexington, Ky., they decided it was time to declare — to themselves and to the world — that they were officially dating.

They celebrated by winning in their respective age groups, he in the 21-and-under division, and she in 22-and-over.

“He won the young rider division,” Ms. MacPhail said, laughing, “and I won the cougar division.”


