


RIO DE JANEIRO — The effort to oust President Dilma Rousseff of Brazil was thrown into chaos on Monday when the new speaker of the lower house of Congress annulled a vote to impeach her, immediately upending the power struggle gripping Latin America’s largest country.

The surprise move came just two days before the Senate is expected to decide on whether to suspend Ms. Rousseff, replace her with the nation’s vice president and put her on trial.

Senate leaders vowed to defy the decision on Monday, promising to decide the president’s fate this week anyway. Lawmakers on both sides of the issue said they would rush to the Supreme Court, hoping for an answer on whether the impeachment proceedings would move forward as planned.

And Brazilians were left, yet again, trying to make sense of the maneuvering by their scandal-plagued leaders.

“Do you know what the world is now thinking of us Brazilians?” Joaquim Barbosa, a former chief justice of Brazil, asked in a Twitter message. “Many must be seeing us as a laughingstock.”

The battle over impeachment is happening at a time when Brazil is reeling from multiple crises, including its worst economic downturn in decades, the Zika epidemic and an enormous corruption scandal engulfing the national oil company.

At the same time, the nation is preparing to hold the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, a city grappling with a brutal crime wave and doubts over the safety of infrastructure projects built around the Games.

But for months, the main fight in the nation has focused on Ms. Rousseff, who faces accusations that she borrowed money from state banks to plug budget holes, masking the depths of Brazil’s economic troubles to bolster her re-election prospects. Before the decision on Monday, few expected her to survive the vote in the Senate.

Now politicians are scrambling to determine how the decision might affect the president’s fate.

“Dilma’s government was on its deathbed, so anything like this that creates a mess could be positive for her,” said Thiago de Aragão, a political risk consultant in the capital, Brasília.

Mr. de Aragão cautioned that legal scholars and opposition figures were already mounting a formidable challenge to Monday’s decision.

“Nothing is settled right now,” Mr. de Aragão said. “The Supreme Court or the Chamber of Deputies itself will likely say this is invalid. But that doesn’t mean that chaos isn’t the word of the day.”

On April 17, lawmakers in the lower house of Congress chose overwhelmingly — with 367 lawmakers voting for impeachment, 137 voting against and seven abstaining — to send Ms. Rousseff’s case to the Senate, which will decide if she should be suspended and go on trial.

But that process was thrown into question on Monday by Waldir Maranhão, a previously obscure lawmaker who took the helm of the Chamber of Deputies last week after the Supreme Court ordered his predecessor to step down to face a graft trial.

Mr. Maranhão contended that procedural rules had been broken in the impeachment vote against the president last month. He said the lower house should hold a new one.

Leaders in the Senate signaled that they had no plan to reschedule their vote on whether to suspend Ms. Rousseff on Wednesday. Raimundo Lira, the senator at the helm of that body’s impeachment commission, said that Mr. Maranhão’s decision had no “practical effect.”

Similarly, Renan Calheiros, the leader of Senate, called Mr. Maranhão’s move a “joke with democracy.” He said he would disregard it.

“The decision has no value whatsoever,” said Ronaldo Caiado, a senator from the conservative Democrats Party. “It’s just an act of the government’s desperation and five minutes of fame for the guy in charge.”

Ms. Rousseff responded to Monday’s decision by urging “caution,” saying that she did not know what the impact would be, while some of her supporters embraced it.

“We know that the impeachment process wasn’t done in the right way,” said Benedita da Silva, a lawmaker from Ms. Rousseff’s leftist Workers’ Party. “We hope that Maranhão will stay firm in his decision.”

Many of the nation’s leaders were already preparing for Ms. Rousseff’s suspension.

Michel Temer, the vice president who broke with Ms. Rousseff and is the country’s leader in waiting, has been seeking to assemble a cabinet in recent weeks, drawing potential ministers largely from his centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement Party and the opposition Social Democrats.

Now, many are trying to decipher the motivations of Mr. Maranhão. He was known as an ally of Eduardo Cunha, the scandal-plagued politician who oversaw the effort to impeach Ms. Rousseff. Last week, Mr. Cunha was removed as speaker of the Chamber of Deputies by the Supreme Court, putting Mr. Maranhão in the driver’s seat.

“Friends, I have a doctorate in this business, but I don’t have the faintest idea about what’s going on,” Maurício Santoro, a prominent political scientist in Rio de Janeiro, said in a Facebook post.

Some questioned whether Mr. Maranhão was seeking to shore up political support in his home state in northeast Brazil, which is governed by an ally of Ms. Rousseff. Others questioned whether Mr. Cunha had played a role in Monday’s decision.

Mr. Cunha, the deposed speaker, said on Monday that he disagreed with Mr. Maranhão’s decision. Referring to Brazilian news reports speculating about whether he had a hand in the move, Mr. Cunha said, “I condemn the insinuations of any nature published by unscrupulous journalists about any role of mine in this episode.”

Mr. Maranhão has faced claims that he was not fit to take the helm of the lower house, which would place him next in line for the presidency if the vice president takes over. Like Mr. Cunha and dozens of other high-ranking politicians, Mr. Maranhão is facing claims that he took bribes in the enormous graft scheme surrounding the national oil company, Petrobras.

“You’re going to be surprised by me,” Mr. Maranhão told fellow lawmakers last week.

Ronaldo Macedo Jr., a law professor at Fundação Getúlio Vargas, an elite university, said he expected Mr. Maranhão’s decision to be struck down.

“I don’t think that this decision by Maranhão will prevail,” he said, pointing to previous decisions by the nation’s highest court. Mr. Macedo emphasized that justices had already approved the impeachment proceedings carried out in the lower house.

In a speech to the lower house on Monday, Mr. Maranhão defended his decision, calling it an effort to “save democracy.”


