


BALTIMORE — In the wrenching drama that has engulfed this city since the death of Freddie Gray, one figure seems caught in the middle: Marilyn J. Mosby.

Ms. Mosby, as Americans learned when riots broke out after Mr. Gray, a 25-year-old black man, was fatally injured in police custody, is Baltimore’s state’s attorney, its top prosecutor. Her impassioned speech announcing charges — including murder — against six Baltimore officers was widely credited with helping to keep the peace, as armored National Guard trucks still rumbled through the streets.

But when a judge acquitted Officer Edward M. Nero of all charges against him on Monday, it was Ms. Mosby’s second trial without a conviction. That puts the prosecutor, a 36-year-old daughter and granddaughter of police officers who once so captivated the national imagination that she was featured in Vogue, in a tough spot.

In a majority black city where race is often a proxy for residents’ feelings about the police, Ms. Mosby — who was notably absent from the courtroom when Officer Nero was acquitted — has emerged as a kind of Rorschach test.

Her critics, many of them white, say the acquittal on Monday, coming on the heels of a hung jury in the case of Officer William G. Porter last year, is proof that she had no business bringing charges in the first place. Her supporters, many of them her fellow African-Americans, give her an E for effort, but are growing impatient.

Hal Riedl, who is white, worked as an investigator for Ms. Mosby’s predecessor, and has been deeply critical of her. “I’d say it’s a new low in her career,” he said after the verdict. “In my judgment, it was a totally political prosecution. I don’t know why she was persuaded that she needed to bring the disorders to an end by charging the police.”

Tawanda Jones, an African-American preschool teacher whose brother, Tyrone West, died after a 2013 encounter with the police in Baltimore, worked to help elect Ms. Mosby in 2014. “It doesn’t change my feeling,” Ms. Jones said of the acquittal on Monday. “At the end of the day, I just look at the fact that she did something.”

Yet in the next breath, Ms. Jones also made clear that she and other critics of the police wanted more from Ms. Mosby. They accuse her of not being aggressive enough in prosecuting police misconduct in cases that have not gripped the city as Mr. Gray’s has.

Ms. Mosby’s office drew the ire of activists recently when it announced it would not reopen Mr. West’s case. Ms. Jones, who said she was having her brother’s body exhumed to gather more evidence for a civil suit, is unsatisfied.

“I don’t want to hear none of her foolishness,” Ms. Jones said. “I want her to go forward and do her job, and at the end of the day, if she don’t do her job, I’m going to be very upset.”

Ms. Mosby, barred by a judge’s order from talking to the news media about the Gray cases, ran for office in 2014 vowing to combat police misconduct. That year, in a speech at Tuskegee University in Alabama, she had sharp words for prosecutors who had not indicted officers in the high-profile deaths of other black men, including Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner on Staten Island. Mr. Gray’s death in April 2015 gave her a platform to make good on her promises.

“To the people of Baltimore and the demonstrators across America: I heard your call for ‘No justice, no peace,’” she said then, in a nationally televised news conference on the steps of the War Memorial. “Your peace is sincerely needed as I work to deliver justice on behalf of this young man.”

The spotlight, though, has had its challenges. Ms. Mosby is married to City Councilman Nick Mosby, who ran for mayor this year. He withdrew after failing to gain traction; many said Baltimore did not need two Mosbys in high offices. Their home has been picketed by protesters, who recently shouted down Ms. Mosby at a public meeting.

“As a mother of a 5- and a 7-year-old, I would appeal to them to stop coming to my house, because it’s scaring my children,” The Baltimore Sun quoted her saying at the meeting.

Legal experts have long said it will be difficult to obtain convictions against the six officers; the Nero case posed particular challenges. Prosecutors used it to test a novel theory: that the arrest of Mr. Gray was a crime. And the state’s star witness, Officer Garrett E. Miller, who is also facing charges and was compelled to testify, provided the evidence that in the end exonerated Officer Nero. All that raised questions about the prosecutors’ strategy.

In pursuing officers so aggressively, Ms. Mosby has risked her relationship with an important constituency: the Police Department itself, whose cooperation she needs to win convictions.

David Jaros, a law professor at the University of Baltimore, said there was a “significant moment” in the Nero trial when the prosecutor, Jan Bledsoe, spoke of officers’ “jacking up citizens” — a provocative comment for a representative of the state’s attorney’s office to make.

“So we have to ask,” Mr. Jaros said, “what does this mean for her relationship with the police?”

Reaction to the Nero verdict was measured. On Tuesday, three police officers stood in the sunshine at the Penn-North Metro station, a center of the violence of a year ago. Down the street, a passer-by pushed a toddler in a pink toy car, in front of a Nick Mosby campaign sign. At the West Baltimore intersection where Mr. Gray was arrested, a bouquet of deflated balloons fluttered in the breeze.

Ms. Mosby remained out of public view; a spokeswoman said she had no public appearances planned this week.

It is an open question whether Ms. Mosby will seek re-election in 2018 — and, if she does, whether she will win. Her supporters note that there are five trials to go (Officer Porter will be retried), and say it is unfair to render judgment on her until they have all concluded.

“Time will tell whether folks were overcharged, undercharged, whatever,” said City Councilman Brandon M. Scott, one of her supporters.

The next trial, of Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., scheduled to begin June 6, will be a critical test. Officer Goodson drove the transport van in which, prosecutors say, Mr. Gray was injured, and faces the most serious charge: second-degree depraved-heart murder.

“That’s the one everyone is going to be looking at,” Mr. Scott said.


