


It took 14 games for the Mets to encounter extra innings this season and when they did, on Wednesday night, the result was not a happy one. They lost, 5-4, in Philadelphia, with reliever Hansel Robles surrendering the winning run in the bottom of the 11th on a two-out infield hit by Peter Bourjos.

With runners on second and third, Bourjos hit a hard grounder down the third-base line that David Wright made a fine play to grab. But he then had to spin and throw off-balance to first, on a bounce, and Bourjos was clearly safe. Earlier in the same at-bat, Bourjos hit a foul pop behind third base that Wright chased hard and just missed grabbing as it fell into the first row of seats. Given another chance, Bourjos came through.

The frustrating defeat evened the Mets’ early-season record at 7-7 and prevented them from pulling off a three-game sweep of the Phillies, a team they treated like a punching bag in 2015 as they stormed to their first division title in nine years. Not so this season. So far the two National League East rivals — well, at least geographically — have split six games. Last season, the Phillies did not win their third game of the season against the Mets until late September.

For a while Wednesday, it looked as if the Mets would use their new weapon — the home run — to keep rolling along. They had hit 17 in their previous five games, four of which they had won, and when Yoenis Cespedes and Lucas Duda went back to back in the top of the fifth inning to put the Mets ahead, 4-3, that made it 19 in six.

Those are pretty heady numbers for a team that is expected to lean on its starting rotation as it tries to get back to the postseason for the second year in a row. And on Wednesday, the starter, Bartolo Colon, was his old, reliable self, pitching six competent innings and handing over a 4-3 lead to the bullpen, which could not hold it.

Jerry Blevins and Addison Reed combined to surrender the tying run in the bottom of the seventh. Antonio Bastardo, a former Phillie, pitched well in the eighth and ninth innings and Jim Henderson followed with a scoreless 10th. But in the 11th, Robles gave up a one-out double to Freddy Galvis, who had earlier hit a two-run homer. An intentional walk, followed by a wild pitch, put runners on second and third with one out and, with the infield in, pinch-hitter Emmanuel Burriss fouled off a suicide-squeeze attempt before popping up to short center field, with the runner on third holding.

It looked, at that point, as if the Mets might escape. But they did not.

WHITE SOX 2, ANGELS 1 Chris Sale became the major leagues’ first four-game winner, allowing two hits in seven innings to lead Chicago over visiting Los Angeles.

Sale (4-0) allowed two singles by Mike Trout and an unearned run.

David Robertson got four outs for his sixth save in six attempts.

The White Sox are now 10-5. Last year, they did not record 10 victories until May 26. (AP)

REDS 6, ROCKIES 5 Cincinnati took advantage of two base-running blunders to beat visiting Colorado.

Dustin Garneau had apparently scored to tie the game in the seventh, but he missed third base. He was called out on appeal and the call was upheld after a video review.

Colorado tied the score in the eighth, but that inning ended when Mark Reynolds was caught off third by Tucker Barnhart, the Reds’ catcher, after Barnhart quickly retrieved a pitch that bounced off the bricks behind home plate and caromed back.

Barnhart drove in the game-winning run in the ninth. (AP)

RED SOX 7, RAYS 3 Mookie Betts hit a two-run homer, David Ortiz drove in three runs with two doubles, and host Boston beat Tampa Bay to end a three-game losing streak.

Xander Bogaerts and Chris Young had run-scoring singles for the Red Sox.

Rick Porcello (3-0) allowed three runs and six hits in seven innings, striking out nine and walking one. (AP)

ORIOLES 4, BLUE JAYS 3 Caleb Joseph doubled with two outs in the 10th inning and scored on a passed ball by Josh Thole to give the Baltimore a win at home over Toronto.

After Joseph reached against rookie Joe Biagini (0-1), Joey Rickard got an infield hit and Manny Machado walked. With Adam Jones at the plate, a pitch from Biagini got past Thole and Joseph sprinted home.

NATIONALS 3, MARLINS 1 Bryce Harper doubled in a run and Yusmeiro Petit pitched four innings of relief to help Washington win at Miami.

Petit (1-0) allowed one run after Washington starter Joe Ross departed in the third inning because of a blister on the middle finger of his pitching hand.

Five Washington pitchers combined on a five-hitter, and Jonathan Papelbon pitched around a two-out single in the ninth for his sixth save. (AP)

CARDINALS 5, CUBS 3 Matt Holliday homered, Carlos Martinez threw seven strong innings, and St. Louis beat visiting Chicago to avoid a three-game sweep.

Martinez (3-0) allowed a run on three hits. He struck out five, walked three and also drove in a run with a bloop hit in the second.

Trevor Rosenthal struck out the side in the ninth for his fourth save of the season and the 100th of his career. (AP)

MARINERS 2, INDIANS 1 Taijuan Walker allowed just an unearned run over six innings, Norichika Aoki had a two-run triple, and Seattle beat host Cleveland.

Aoki hit a hard grounder past Cleveland first baseman Mike Napoli and into the corner to score Adam Lind and Chris Iannetta in the second inning.

Walker (1-0) held Cleveland to three hits and struck out six.

TIGERS 3, ROYALS 2 Jordan Zimmermann made his third straight scoreless start, Victor Martinez drove in the 1,000th run of his career and Detroit held on to win at Kansas City.

Detroit closer Francisco Rodriguez gave up back-to-back homers to Alex Gordon and Salvador Perez in the ninth before striking out Mike Moustakas to end the game with runners on first and second. It was his fourth save of the season and 390th over all, matching Dennis Eckersley for sixth on baseball’s career list. (AP)

DODGERS 5, BRAVES 3 Justin Turner gave visiting Los Angeles the lead with a 10th-inning double to end Atlanta’s four-game winning streak.

The Braves rookie center fielder Mallex Smith, charging toward left field, made a diving attempt for Turner’s sinking drive off Jason Grilli (1-1) but the ball bounced off his glove.


