


Yordano Ventura settled down after a shaky first inning, Eric Hosmer homered to continue his hot streak, and the Kansas City Royals crushed the visiting Baltimore Orioles, 6-1, on Sunday.

Alex Gordon also hit a home run before the Royals strung together a series of hits in a four-run seventh inning that broke the game open. Hosmer finished 2 of 4 to push his on-base streak to 26 games, which leads the American League.

Ventura allowed his only run and two of his three hits in the first inning. He went seven innings, striking out four and improving to 11-1 since he returned from Class AAA last July.

“He’s matured,” the backup catcher Drew Butera said of Ventura. “Now he’s the same game. He’s understanding himself. He’s more relaxed.”

NATIONALS 6, TWINS 5 Bryce Harper tied the game with a pinch-hit home run in the ninth inning, pitcher Oliver Perez laid down a bunt in the 15th that kept it going, and Chris Heisey homered in the 16th, allowing host Washington to edge Minnesota.

At 5 hours 56 minutes, it was the longest regular-season game in the Nationals’ history.

CUBS 9, REDS 0 Anthony Rizzo drove in four runs with his 10th career two-homer game, Jason Hammel pitched six scoreless innings, and visiting Chicago routed Cincinnati to improve to 14-5 for the first time in 47 years.

Tommy La Stella hit two doubles and his first homer of the season, and Jason Heyward had four hits and three R.B.I. for the Cubs.

WHITE SOX 4, RANGERS 1 Mat Latos pitched six solid innings for his fourth consecutive win, and host Chicago defeated Texas.

Latos, who signed a one-year, $3 million deal with the White Sox in February, gave up one run on seven hits.

CARDINALS 8, PADRES 5 Jedd Gyorko homered, tripled and singled, the rookie Aledmys Diaz had a homer among his three hits, and St. Louis rallied to beat San Diego on the road.

The Padres’ bullpen imploded for the second straight game. Kevin Quackenbush allowed consecutive homers to Gyorko and Diaz in the sixth to tie it, and Brandon Maurer gave up three runs in the eighth.

BLUE JAYS 6, ATHLETICS 3 Jose Bautista hit a two-run homer, Ezequiel Carrera added a solo shot, and Toronto earned a home win over Oakland.

Josh Donaldson scored twice for the Blue Jays. Toronto has scored at least five runs for a season-best three games in a row.

DODGERS 12, ROCKIES 10 Chase Utley drove in the go-ahead run with a double in Los Angeles’s five-run ninth, and the Dodgers rallied to top Colorado in Denver.

Trailing, 10-7, in the ninth, the Dodgers got to Rockies closer Jake McGee, with Trayce Thompson scoring the tying run on a wild pitch. Utley followed with a run-scoring double.

PIRATES 12, DIAMONDBACKS 10 Arizona pitcher Shelby Miller played left field and chased after Sean Rodriguez’s go-ahead double in the 13th inning before striking out to end the game, and Pittsburgh beat the Diamondbacks in Phoenix.

Miller had to play in the outfield after shortstop Nick Ahmed was ejected in the 12th for arguing balls and strikes.

INDIANS 6, TIGERS 3 Francisco Lindor got three hits, and Cleveland overcame an early injury to starter Carlos Carrasco to win in Detroit, completing a three-game sweep.

Carrasco and Tigers starter Shane Greene both left the game with injuries in a span of about 15 minutes. Carrasco hurt his right hamstring, while Greene opened a blister on his pitching hand.

Trevor Bauer picked up the win.

BREWERS 8, PHILLIES 5 Scooter Gennett and Alex Presley homered in a six-run sixth inning, backing starter Wily Peralta in Milwaukee’s home victory over Philadelphia.

The Brewers also hit four doubles in the sixth, when they chased Phillies starter Jerad Eickhoff.

MARINERS 9, ANGELS 4 Wade Miley overcame a shaky first inning that included a home run by Albert Pujols to win in Los Angeles, his first victory in a Seattle uniform.

Kyle Seager, Leonys Martin and Seth Smith hit home runs for the Mariners.

Miley allowed four runs and six hits in seven and a third innings.

MARLINS 5, GIANTS 4 J. T. Realmuto matched his career high with four hits, including a tiebreaking home run in the eighth inning, and Miami avoided a three-game sweep in San Francisco.

Giancarlo Stanton also homered and reached base four times, Christian Yelich drove in two runs, and Dee Gordon and Marcell Ozuna had two hits apiece for the Marlins.


