


In the house in Queens that morning, a telephone rang.

A stranger with a gun stood nearby, his face hidden behind a ski mask. He pointed the gun at one of the men who lived there.

“Pick up the phone,” he said, according to a criminal complaint. “Speak in English. Anything other than English, I’ll shoot you.”

The hostage answered.

The events on that March day last year, with police officers arriving in droves to an armed robbery in one home and a standoff in another, rattled the predominantly Bangladeshi block in Jamaica, a block that breathed a collective sigh of relief when the suspect surrendered that afternoon.

But that relief disappeared last week with the disclosure by prosecutors of a far more sinister scheme in connection with that day, one meant to ensure that the suspect’s trial would end in his favor. The addresses of both homes and the names of people inside had been jotted on a list. The list was for a hit man, the police and prosecutors said, with instructions to kill everyone on it so they could not testify.

A young man outside one of the homes brushed off a reporter on Wednesday.

“It’s still going on,” he said, before driving away.

It all began on March 16, 2015, a Monday, around 8 a.m. A man in a ski mask knocked on the front door of an attached house on a block of 168th Street, one of several nearly identical homes in a row. But the door was not chosen at random.

The man’s name was Edward Leasure, 35, the police said. He had been in prison twice after convictions for theft and robbery. A woman answered his knock, and Mr. Leasure stepped inside, according to the criminal complaint. He led the woman and her husband into a bedroom.

“Where’s the safe?” he asked the husband, according to the complaint. “You had a big party Saturday night. I know you have a safe. Show me the safe or I’ll shoot your wife in the foot.”

The woman grabbed some cash, $300, and handed it to Mr. Leasure. Then he left, not through the front door, but through an exit that led to the roof, said a neighbor, Arman Hossain, 37. He climbed over the short partitions that separated the rowhouses, passing over one house, then another and another, stopping at the fourth.

The police were coming. The couple from the first house had called 911, and officers arrived in cars and vans and, from above, a helicopter.

Mr. Leasure entered the second home and punched a woman in the shoulder, according to the complaint. He gathered her and two other people in a room at gunpoint. “Be calm. Don’t scream,” he said, according to the complaint. “I’m just going to wait until the police leave.”

That is when the phone rang. It was the hostage’s brother calling, at the urging of the police. Officers, suspecting that Mr. Leasure was hiding inside, had instructed the brother about what to say on the phone.

Speaking in their native Bengali, the brother asked, “Is there a man in there with a gun?” the complaint states. “If there is, say, ‘O.K., see you for dinner.’”

The hostage, careful to obey his captor, answered in English. “O.K., O.K., O.K.,” he said. “Yes. Dinner.”

The call ended. Mr. Leasure took a pair of pants from the house and stashed his own in a pile of laundry, the complaint states. He also hid his ski mask, jacket, boots and, in a dresser drawer, his gun.

Two floors below, in the basement, Mr. Hossain, the neighbor, was unaware of the situation upstairs and why the police were outside. “I hear ‘boom, boom boom’ on my door,” he said last week. “SWAT team.” Officers hurried him outside to a van.

The standoff lasted about four hours. Mr. Leasure surrendered.

His trial was set for next month. Last week, prosecutors announced the arrests of Mr. Leasure’s girlfriend and his father and described the murder-for-hire plot.

One month ago, the father, Eddie Marcus, 53, approached a man in Jamaica, the same neighborhood the standoff was in, and offered to pay him to kill witnesses who would be testifying against his son, according to another criminal complaint. Mr. Marcus gave the man the list of names, the complaint states.

A few days later, Mr. Marcus introduced the man, who is not identified in the complaint, but who cooperated with the Queens district attorney’s office, to his son’s girlfriend, Latisha Larrymore, 31. Ms. Larrymore said she knew someone who would sell him a gun and a silencer, the complaint states.

On May 12, in a telephone call monitored by the police, Ms. Larrymore told the man she had asked a friend for money, but the friend had refused, the complaint states. She discussed forms of collateral.

The plot ended there. Ms. Larrymore and Mr. Marcus were arrested on May 23 and charged with conspiracy and solicitation to commit murder. Ms. Larrymore, according to the complaint, said that Mr. Leasure, from jail, had instructed her to meet his father because his father had found “a lawyer who will take care of the situation,” which she said was code for a hit man

The account of Ms. Larrymore’s actions is difficult to reconcile with her public persona in recent months. Ms. Larrymore, who poses atop her motorcycle in Facebook photos, was in an accident in July and lost a leg. Her recovery and rehabilitation have been the subject of Facebook videos applauded by her friends, as well as the focus of an online fund-raising effort.

“I can’t believe it, because she’s a churchgoing person,” her grandfather, Wendell Larrymore, 81, said on Friday. “She got mixed up with the wrong person.”

Mr. Leasure has not been charged in the conspiracy. His scheduled trial date in June — and its list of witnesses — remains unchanged.


