


In the restaurant business, breakfast is fast becoming lunch and dinner, too.

On Friday, the McDonald’s Corporation reported a 35 percent increase in profits in the quarter that ended March 31, an unexpectedly large gain propelled by its decision last fall to sell some breakfast items all day. It was the third consecutive quarter of positive results for the company, suggesting that it may have turned the corner after a painful slide.

Sales in its stores open at least a year grew 6.2 percent across the country, and the important American market increased such sales at a better rate than Wall Street expected.

Revenue remained mostly flat, falling 1 percent to $5.9 billion, though revenue was up 3 percent when adjusted for currency swings. Profits grew to $1.1 billion from $811.5 million in the period last year.

Steve Easterbrook, chief executive of McDonald’s, said the company’s decision to offer some of its most popular breakfast items, like Egg McMuffins and hash browns, throughout the day had paid off beyond its expectations.

And promotional deals that the company offered this year, like McPick 2, also propelled sales, he said in a conference call with investment analysts.

But he also said operational changes, such as retooling the company’s organization to have better insight into individual markets and its decision to commit to sourcing cage-free eggs, were also helping draw customers back to the restaurants and in a way that would stick. “We have a restless energy here, and we’ve just got going,” Mr. Easterbrook said.

Other restaurant chains keenly watch McDonald’s, and its actions have kicked off activity at Wendy’s and Taco Bell and concern among less direct competitors like Brinker International, which runs the full-service restaurants Chili’s and Maggiano’s.

In a conference call with investment analysts on Tuesday, Wyman Roberts, chief executive of Brinker, said that Chili’s was “re-evaluating” its “2 for $20” promotion, which allows customers to choose one appetizer and two main meals from a menu.

McDonald’s started the battle when it replaced its Dollar Menu with a limited time McPick 2 for $2 menu in January. Consumers were excited by the three-piece mozzarella sticks on that menu, but franchisees were less wowed.

So in late February, the company changed the menu and terms of the deal, offering a choice of two items for $5 — and it took mozzarella sticks off the menu, inciting a protest on social media.

That started a proliferation of so-called bundled deals. Burger King responded with a two-for-$5 deal that included a popular chocolate chip cookie, and Wendy’s introduced a 4-for-$4 promotion.

Not to be outdone, Yum Brands stepped up with a $5 Flavor Menu that at least temporarily has helped jolt its Pizza Hut restaurants out of the doldrums. At KFC, Yum offered a $20 Fill Up dinner, and Taco Bell has begun offering a $1 breakfast menu.

“These bundled meals seem to be resonating with these chains’ customers and drawing more traffic to their stores,” said Mark Kalinowski, an investment analyst at Nomura Securities.

Mr. Kalinowski said McDonald’s breakfast program also contributed to its better-than-expected performance in the quarter. “Consumers love it, and it’s driving incremental sales for them,” he said. “The only challenge is operational, but since it’s improving sales, franchisees aren’t complaining about it.”

Other restaurant chains with a big breakfast business say they also like what McDonald’s has done. “We welcome the attention it’s brought to breakfast all day, which we’ve been doing for 50 years,” Darren Rebelez, IHOP’s chief executive, said during an interview at the company’s Harlem restaurant on National Pancake Day in March. “Some people would rather sit down and eat breakfast.”

IHOP’s same-store sales grew 4.5 percent last year, but the pace of growth slowed in the fourth quarter, after McDonald’s began selling breakfast throughout the day.

Taco Bell tacked breakfast onto its menu a couple of years ago to better compete with McDonald’s, which gets roughly a quarter of its sales from Egg McMuffins and other breakfast items.

Breakfast still accounts for only 6 percent of sales at Taco Bell. In a conference call to announce Yum’s first-quarter earnings on Tuesday, Greg Creed, its chief executive, said he was pleased with growth in Taco Bell’s breakfast.

“I’m very happy with 8 percent transaction growth in breakfast with one of our competitors doing all-day breakfast,” Mr. Creed said to analysts. “So let me just say that.”


