


Swizz Beatz and Usher performed at the Bad Boy Family Reunion in Brooklyn last weekend, and the ’90s nostalgia concert featured outfits designed by Maxwell Osborne and Dao-Yi Chow, the founders of Public School.

On Tuesday night, the four reunited for another remembrance, the Gordon Parks Foundation’s 10th annual awards dinner. “I’m still recovering,” said Swizz Beatz, who is the foundation’s co-chairman and, as he put it, “a secret weapon for bringing in artists.”

The crowd at Cipriani 42nd Street drew heavily from the world of music, fashion and art (red carpet walkers like Janelle Monáe, Gayle King and Victor Cruz) and spent the night honoring Mr. Parks, the photographer and multidisciplinary artist who died in 2006. After cocktails and jazz, men in tuxedos and women in gowns wedged into tables beneath the restaurant’s towering columns.

Mr. Chow and Mr. Osborne, wearing black suits from their own collection, were humbled to be among the honorees. “It was kind of undeserving in a way,” said Mr. Osborne, who wore his customary dark shades. “Putting your name in the same sentence as Gordon Parks just doesn’t make sense. We need to work even harder.”

After inquiring about the score of a playoff basketball game, Mr. Chow talked about the 1971 blaxploitation film “Shaft,” which Mr. Parks directed. “We try to capture a certain attitude in our clothes, what some people would call ‘swag,’” he said. “That movie pretty much invented the term.”

Usher, who wore a light gray Thom Browne suit, merrily posed for photos with the foundation’s young scholarship winners, who hailed from places like the Fashion Institute of Technology and Ghetto Film School. “The students are really, really intelligent and mindful,” Usher said, while admirers circled. “I’m very pleased.”

Mr. Parks’s dedication to civil rights was often mentioned at the dais.

Bryan Stevenson of the Equal Justice Initiative delivered an impassioned speech about mass incarceration. Leonard A. Lauder, the chairman emeritus of Estée Lauder, was honored for his philanthropy. And Kathleen Cleaver, the former Black Panther who was once married to Eldridge Cleaver, described being photographed by Mr. Parks in 1970.

“He was brilliant and charming,” Ms. Cleaver said. “And, of course, he was handsome.”

Miso-glazed sea bass was served, and several of Mr. Parks’s iconic photos were auctioned off. Bidding for his portrait of the Cleavers in Algeria escalated to $65,000.

Ms. Monáe was wearing a black Barbara Bui dress, with her hair in a curly trapezoidal bob. She was also honored by the foundation, and was tempted to join the bidding on a photo from Mr. Parks’s “A Man Becomes Invisible” series. “I loved the one with the young man coming out of the sewer,” she said. “It was very visceral.”

After a performance from Jon Batiste, the bandleader from “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” the gala concluded with subdued dancing to jovial songs like “Cheerleader” and “Get Lucky.” But for some scholarship winners, it felt like a beginning.

“This has been incredible,” said Danielle Siminerio, an F.I.T. student from New Jersey with a green streak in her hair. “I’ve known Gordon Parks’s work since I first picked up a camera.”


