


NEWARK — Hillary Clinton on Wednesday seized upon revelations about Trump University, the for-profit institution started by Donald J. Trump, calling him a “fraud” who wants to rip off the country he is running to lead.

In the first minutes of her speech at a rally here, Mrs. Clinton brought up newly released testimony by former employees of what she called “the so-called Trump University,” telling the crowd, “You can’t make this up.”

The testimony, released on Tuesday, portrayed Trump University as an unscrupulous business that used high-pressure sales tactics and deceptive marketing to lure thousands of people to enroll in classes. In many cases, the employees said, customers were persuaded to purchase classes they could not afford, by opening credit cards or borrowing the money.

Speaking at the Newark campus of Rutgers University, Mrs. Clinton told the crowd that employees had testified “that Trump U. was a fraudulent scheme where Donald Trump enriched himself at the expense of hard-working people.” She said that Mr. Trump and those who worked for him “took advantage of vulnerable Americans.”

“This is just more evidence that Donald Trump himself is a fraud,” Mrs. Clinton added. “He is trying to scam America the way he scammed all those people at Trump U.”

On the campaign trail, Mrs. Clinton has unleashed attacks against Mr. Trump on a variety of subjects, including his views on foreign policy, his failure to release his tax returns and his stated hopes, before the Great Recession, that the real estate market would crash.

“It’s important that we recognize what he has done, because that’s usually a pretty good indicator of what he will do,” she told the crowd on Wednesday.

Mrs. Clinton campaigned here ahead of next week’s primary; New Jersey is among the six states that vote or caucus on Tuesday. She was joined by the musician Jon Bon Jovi as well as Senator Cory Booker, the former Newark mayor and a possible vice-presidential candidate.

“I hate to contradict Bon Jovi,” Mr. Booker said in referring to one of his biggest hits from the 1980s, “but dear God, Hillary Clinton, you give love a good name.”


