


PORTLAND, Ore. — The story of the Los Angeles Clippers could be told through the misshapen face of Austin Rivers and through the hobbled gait of DeAndre Jordan, who punctuated his playoff experience with X-rays on his right ankle. More injuries. More frustration. It was the only way the Clippers’ season could have ended.

“This one hurts,” Rivers said Friday night at Moda Center, the left side of his face the color and consistency of an overripe plum.

The Clippers, a perennial pick to surmount the misfortune of their sad-sack and sometimes salacious past, are out of the N.B.A. playoffs again, knocked out this time by the overachieving Portland Trail Blazers, who needed six games to advance through the first round and into the Western Conference semifinals against the Golden State Warriors.

Perhaps the Trail Blazers can make things tough on the Warriors, who are still without Stephen Curry, his sprained right knee another indication of the postseason’s rigors. But it was supposed to be the Clippers — a team with the same core group of stars and the same expectations as in recent seasons, and now coping with the same disappointment.

“You have to be willing to get your heart broken to be a champion,” Coach Doc Rivers said, “and you have to do it over and over again.”

The Clippers are getting good at that. For the third straight year, they made a hasty exit from the playoffs. In 2014, amid the noise of the Donald Sterling fiasco and with an opportunity to take control of their conference semifinal series against the Oklahoma City Thunder, the Clippers lost a 7-point lead in the final 49 seconds of Game 5. They bowed out one game later.

Last season, the Clippers took a three-games-to-one lead against the Houston Rockets in the conference semifinals — and then lost the next three games.

So perhaps nothing about the team’s latest postseason fizzle should have been surprising, except that the Clippers truly did seem capable of doing some damage. Blake Griffin was back after breaking his hand punching an assistant equipment manager outside a Toronto restaurant. Chris Paul was playing exceptionally well at point guard.

Sure enough, the Clippers won their first two games against the Trail Blazers. But after losing Game 3, the Clippers absorbed back-to-back blows in Game 4 when, in a matter of minutes, Paul broke his hand and Griffin reinjured his quadriceps. With both stars gone from the lineup, the Clippers had little chance of getting past the Trail Blazers.

Before Game 6, the players talked among themselves about returning to Los Angeles for Game 7, as if trying to convince themselves that it was possible.

“We really had high hopes,” Austin Rivers said. “You see your leader go down, and then you see your second leader go down — it’s tough.”

Considering the circumstances, the remaining players who were healthy enough to make the trip to Portland for Friday’s game had reason to feel proud of themselves. One late-game lineup featured Austin Rivers, Jamal Crawford, Paul Pierce, Jeff Green and Cole Aldrich, who was summoned from the bench after Jordan twisted his ankle.

Rivers, meanwhile, had returned in the second quarter after taking an accidental elbow to the face. He finished the game with 21 points and 11 stitches as the Clippers fell short, 106-103. Nobody on the team had been subject to more scrutiny than Rivers, the coach’s son, and he had trouble keeping his composure at his postgame news conference.

“A lot of people doubted me when I came to L.A. a year ago,” he said, his voice cracking. “People thought I was just getting a chance because of my father. Jamal was the one who — Jamal believed in me, man. We’ve come a long way.”

In defeat, and without their usual cast of stars, the Clippers somehow became more appealing to a broader audience of basketball fans. Widely known, fairly or not, for whining at officials and crumbling in critical moments, these Clippers played with resolve and uncommon toughness. By the end of the game, Rivers could hardly see out of his left eye.

“It looked like he was in a boxing match,” Crawford said.

“He was bleeding every timeout,” Doc Rivers said.

“I don’t know what happened,” Austin Rivers said.

It was also another reminder of just how difficult it is to win a title. When the Warriors were looking to wrap up their first-round series against the Houston Rockets last week, Coach Steve Kerr pointed to the Clippers’ bad luck as an example for his own team. Make the most of your opportunities, Kerr recalled telling his players, because obstacles are unavoidable.

The Clippers face an uncertain summer. While Paul, Griffin and Jordan remain under contract for next season, Crawford, Green and Luc Mbah a Moute are among the players who are set to become free agents. (Austin Rivers has a player option.) Crawford said he would prefer to remain with the team, and Doc Rivers said he would like to keep the group intact.

“I like our team,” said Rivers, who is also the team’s president of basketball operations. “The problem is, we have a lot of free agents on our team, and I think a lot of them are going to be attractive. So we have to fight for our own first and then try to build from that point. But we’re going to have a difficult time. It’s going to be tough.”

If nothing else, the Clippers are familiar with tough situations. Few teams in the league have dealt with more. They can only hope they continue to get better at navigating them.


