


The NY Phil Biennial — the New York Philharmonic’s answer to contemporary art stalwarts like the Venice Biennale, Art Basel and the Frieze fairs — can be hard to get a handle on. Running this year from May 23 to June 11, the event sprawls from Lincoln Center to Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and includes a wide range of artists and ensembles playing an explosion of new and recent music. How do you know what to listen to?

Well, do you like food? Books? The aerial acrobatics of Cirque du Soleil? Here, critics and reporters for The New York Times offer suggestions to link your interests to the offerings that might be just right for you.

ZACHARY WOOLFE

If you relive high school performing triumphs through episodes of “Glee” — or, for those whose class notes seem to fall ever farther back in alumni newsletters, the film “Fame” — check out the only high school orchestra playing at the Biennial: Michigan’s Interlochen Arts Academy Orchestra, which will perform on June 5 at David Geffen Hall.

This ensemble, made up of talented students between the ages of 14 and 18 who attend the fine arts boarding school at Interlochen, will give a concert called “Young Americans,” featuring New York premieres by Jennifer Higdon and Nico Muhly and the world premieres of works by Hannah Lash and Ashley Fure, two rising composers whom only these players could make seem old. The Muhly piece, “So Far So Good,” will feature dancers from Interlochen’s dance company in new choreography by Christopher Williams. MICHAEL COOPER

If you need a quick fix for your craving, take the L train to National Sawdust in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where the fierce and poised violinist Jennifer Koh performs bite-size solo works written for her by more than 30 composers on May 24 and 31. A bonus: The space’s icy-chic interior, with its textured white walls cut by jagged black lines, will keep your design-junkie date engaged as he or she contemplates your post-concert dinner options in the neighborhood. (Cafe Mogador? Reynard?)

The short pieces featured on Ms. Koh’s program, called “Shared Madness,” are inspired by the fiendishly gymnastic caprices for solo violin by Paganini. But with composers as diverse as the National’s Bryce Dessner; the jazz pianist and MacArthur “genius” grant recipient Vijay Iyer; and the grandmaster of American Minimalism, Philip Glass, chances are no two morsels will taste the same. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM

Then clearly displays of sheer virtuosity excite you. You should check out the technical skills of the brilliant soloists who will be featured in performances of Gyorgy Ligeti’s daunting concertos for piano, cello and violin on, respectively, June 3, 4 and 5 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

These concertos present enormous difficulties, but it’s safe to say that the dazzling pianist Conor Hanick, the dynamic young cellist Jay Campbell (who organized this trio of concerts) and the formidable violinist Pekka Kuusisto should dispatch the challenges commandingly. Alan Gilbert, the Philharmonic’s music director who spearheaded the development of the Biennial and leaves the orchestra next year, conducts the Lucerne Festival Alumni ensemble in the Ligeti works, which share the programs with music by Unsuk Chin, Gérard Grisey, Alexandre Lunsqui, Marc-André Dalbavie, Dai Fujikura and John Zorn.

On one level, Ligeti used these pieces to explore the nature of virtuosity, the avant-garde musical equivalent of Serena Williams’s slashing serves. In the Cello Concerto (1966), scored for a large chamber ensemble, the soloist is like the first among equals. An atmospheric, mysterious first movement is followed by a fitful, squirrely second. The Violin Concerto (1992) unfolds in an episodic, teeming rush of colors, effects and techniques, with echoes of plaintive Transylvanian folk song and bouts of pulsing wildness. In the Piano Concerto (1988), Ligeti explores polyrhythms and the extremes of the piano, from bristling highs to thumping lows. Mr. Hanick, who played Milton Babbitt’s 12-tone Second Piano Concerto at the Juilliard School in January, is becoming the soloist of choice for such thorny works. ANTHONY TOMMASINI

The Biennial event that might soothe the college nostalgist in you is an immersion in the faculty and alumni of the Yale School of Music on May 25 at the Greene Space in Lower Manhattan. Distinguished students of the school’s past (Charles Ives) and present (Hilary Purrington) share the program with works by Martin Bresnick, Aaron Jay Kernis, David Lang, Hannah Lash and Christopher Theofanidis, who teach there. ZACHARY WOOLFE

If you’ve ever braved a gallery opening of some unknown artist just for the wine and cheese, but walked away pleasantly surprised by the work on display, you might check out what the Philharmonic is calling “Play Dates,” select concerts followed by cocktails with the composers and performers.

The disadvantage over those boozy gallery openings of yore: There will be a cash bar. The advantage: The plonk is less likely to be headache-inducing. (The last Biennial featured special cocktails, including the “Phizzharmonic,” made of St. Germain and sparkling wine.) You can check nyphil.org/biennial for dates, which are helpfully marked with a red martini-glass icon. MICHAEL COOPER

The elevation isn’t quite as airy, the air perhaps not quite so clear, but you can get a whiff of the Rockies in spring when the Aspen Music Festival and School’s Aspen Contemporary Ensemble, a student septet, arrives at the Whitney Museum of American Art on June 8. Like the Yale School of Music concert, this one features a mixture of works by alumni (Thomas Kotcheff, Nina C. Young and Christopher Stark) and faculty members, including Stephen Hartke and Steven Stucky, who organized the program and was scheduled to conduct it before his death in February. (Timothy Weiss takes over conducting duties.) Esa-Pekka Salonen’s “Catch and Release,” which the group played in Aspen last summer, rounds out the evening. ZACHARY WOOLFE

Head to the shape-shifting National Sawdust on June 3, when the string quartet Brooklyn Rider will celebrate New York City’s downtown music scene with a lively program — and drinks afterward.

The musicians of downtown New York in the 1970s ignored genre boundaries and instead opted for uninhibited experimentation through collaboration. Brooklyn Rider has continued that tradition, albeit, as its name implies, across the river: The members have dabbled in jazz, folk and world music, and recently released an album with the polymathic singer-songwriter Gabriel Kahane.

The Biennial program showcases the group’s breadth and nerve: It will perform John Zorn’s recent composition “The Alchemist”; Tyondai Braxton’s “Arp Rec 1”; and a world premiere from one of the group’s founders, the violinist Colin Jacobsen. Afterward, the composers and musicians will be on hand at National Sawdust’s bar. If you see them, buy them a drink! ANDREW R. CHOW

If you’re intrigued by all things Wilde, especially now that Rupert Everett is playing him in “The Judas Kiss” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, try the Irish composer Gerald Barry’s opera based on “The Importance of Being Earnest.” It is having its first staged production in the United States from June 2 through 4 at Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Rose Theater.

This work — which translates into music the cucumber sandwiches, the wit and the formidable Lady Bracknell (played, to delicious effect, by a bass) — is the second installment in the new opera collaboration between the Philharmonic and Lincoln Center, following the success last summer of George Benjamin’s “Written on Skin.” Wilde has long intrigued opera composers, from Richard Strauss, who had a scandalous success with “Salome,” to Theodore Morrison, whose “Oscar,” about the great writer’s final years, had its premiere in 2013 at the Santa Fe Opera in New Mexico. And in 1954, “Lady Windermere’s Fan” was turned into an operetta called “After the Ball” by none other than Noël Coward. MICHAEL COOPER

For those who like their art award-blessed, the Biennial concludes with a major (and belated) New York premiere on June 11: the Second Concerto for Orchestra by Mr. Stucky, who won the 2005 Pulitzer Prize in Music for the piece.

With Mr. Gilbert conducting the Philharmonic at David Geffen Hall, the concert also features another work by a major composer who died recently — Pierre Boulez’s seven-cello miniature masterpiece “Messagesquisse,” a showcase for the orchestra’s superb cello section — and the American premiere of Per Norgard’s Symphony No. 8. ZACHARY WOOLFE


