


At a time when more chefs are interested in food policy, the environment, health and leadership, a group of them descended on the Yale campus in New Haven this week to talk about food issues.

Called the MAD Yale Leadership Summit, the gathering is an outgrowth of MAD, the Copenhagen-based nonprofit organization — spearheaded by the chef René Redzepi of Noma — that holds events around the world.

For this event, which began with a dinner June 13 but is not open to the public, chefs like Mr. Redzepi, David Chang, Kylie Kwong, Jessica Koslow, Alex Atala, April Bloomfield and Rosio Sanchez are attending lectures and salon-like discussions on topics including fermentation, law, food security, agriculture and gender.

“A few years back, I called up one of the professors at Yale and told him I have this crazy idea: Why don’t MAD and Yale together create an annual gathering for cooks at Yale, to learn about the world of food in a way that we don’t get to learn normally?” Mr. Redzepi said. “The idea was that we’d come together once a year and challenge ourselves to become better, to understand the world of food more, to get inspired in a different way than we usually get visiting a farm or going fishing.”

Paul Freedman is the history professor (and the editor of a collection of essays called “Food: The History of Taste”) who received that original approach from Mr. Redzepi. He and Mark Bomford, the director of the Yale Sustainable Food Program, are leading the event with Mr. Redzepi.

Dr. Freedman pointed out that academia has a lot to learn from chefs, too, since they confront food issues hands-on and day to day. Studying food is a useful lens through which to understand history and culture at large, he said. “Only recently have historians recognized the crucial importance of taste, even frivolous taste, in driving historical change,” Dr. Freedman said.

The event, which will end with lunch June 17, includes topics like “Women, Food and Culture,” “The Ethnic Restaurateur and the American City,” “Soil and Fermentation,” “Nurturing Growth and Leadership” and “Culinary Fight or Flight: Why Stress Leaves a Bad Taste.”


