


BEIJING — Two longtime members of China’s beleaguered democratic opposition each received prison sentences of over a decade on Friday after being pronounced guilty of subversion by a court in Hangzhou, an eastern city that will host a gathering of world leaders later this year.

The court gave a sentence of 11 years to Lu Gengsong after declaring him guilty of subversion for publishing pro-democracy essays on overseas websites and promoting the banned China Democratic Party, and it handed down a sentence of 10 and a half years to Chen Shuqing, another supporter of the party, for the same charges, said Fu Yonggang, a lawyer for Mr. Chen. Mr. Fu said that Mr. Lu’s main defense lawyer could not be in court for the verdict because of another trial.

“Chen Shuqing didn’t say much after the verdict,” Mr. Fu said by telephone from Hangzhou. “But before the verdict hearing, he said that he’d appeal if he was found guilty, no matter how short or long the sentence was.”

The heavy sentences for the relatively obscure activists came after a trial in September in which prosecutors dwelt on essays by the men that were published on overseas Chinese websites and on their support for the China Democratic Party, a small but determined group that a wave of arrests and trials in the late 1990s largely extinguished.

Their defense lawyers challenged the view that these activities amounted to subversion, one of the most serious charges that can be used against political dissent in the country.

Patrick Poon, a researcher on China for Amnesty International in Hong Kong, said the rulings indicated that President Xi Jinping was even more determined than his predecessors, including most recently Hu Jintao, to stamp out anti-Communist sentiment.

“My take is that the sentence is unusually heavy,” Mr. Poon said by email. “These two people were also imprisoned for similar charges during the Hu Jintao era, but they were only sentenced to four years at that time.”

The punishments may also send a warning to other dissidents and liberal activists around Hangzhou, the prosperous capital of Zhejiang Province, which will hold the Group of 20 summit meeting of global leaders in early September. The city, like the Chinese government, has gone to great lengths to make the gathering a showcase for the success of government policies.

Mr. Lu, 60, and Mr. Chen, 50, have been stalwart supporters of the China Democratic Party, despite past detentions and imprisonments. Both were detained on the most recent charges in 2014.

Mr. Lu, a former teacher at a police academy, was sentenced in 2008 to four years in prison on charges of inciting subversion. He was released in August 2011. As a student, Mr. Chen took part in the pro-democracy protests that swept China in 1989, and in 2007, he received four years in prison on charges of inciting subversion. He was released in September 2010.


