


CHICAGO — The Chicago Cubs dress, eat, train and party in a subterranean fortress of attitude. The old home clubhouse at Wrigley Field never hosted a championship celebration. Within the new complex — 20 feet below ground and more than twice the size of its predecessor — is a room devoted to joy, apart from the locker room, where players congregate to bask in their victories.

“It exists, oh yeah,” Manager Joe Maddon said, though he would not disclose many details. “Well, really, that’s sensitive and classified information, what we do in there. But it’s a fun thing. It includes laser lights and disco balls. I’ll give that much.”

Welcome to the bold new era of baseball’s best team, which does not care that it is also the most historically tortured. The Cubs, as their T-shirts say, embrace the target.

They won 97 games last season and vanquished the rival St. Louis Cardinals in the National League playoffs. Losing the league championship series to the Mets was almost immaterial. The Cubs made tangible progress toward their first World Series title since 1908.

This season will be defined by their performance in the fall. In the meantime, the Cubs are turning the regular season into its own compelling theater. While they wait for their next chance at glory, they might just be the game’s next superteam.

At 25-8, the Cubs are off to their best start since 1907, a year that ended with a championship. The last team before the Cubs to go so deep into a season without consecutive defeats was the 1929 Philadelphia Athletics, another World Series winner.

“It’s strange, because we hadn’t done it this year — and that’s a great thing,” second baseman Ben Zobrist said after the Cubs dropped a doubleheader to San Diego on Wednesday. “Here we are in May, and it’s the first time we’ve lost two in a row. It speaks volumes to how we’ve played so far.”

The Cubs’ hitters are on pace to set a major league record for walks. Their starters have gone at least five innings in every game this season. The team has scored more than twice as many runs as its opponents. The Cubs are making history, and it surrounds them.

“It’s hard not to see it, because it’s on all these TVs,” third baseman Kris Bryant said, pointing to one of the nine huge flat screens visible from every part of the circular dressing room.

“It’s been blown out a little more than we’d want it to — the whole run-differential thing seems to be big — but we don’t pay attention to it. We know we have a good record so far, but our mind-set is just to continue our hot start and hopefully separate ourselves early on. That’s kind of what Joe preached at the end of spring training: Get off to a good start, because it’s a lot harder to climb back uphill.”

The Cubs are building a mountain of victories. The major league record for wins in a season is 116, shared by the 1906 Cubs, who did it in 155 games (there were three ties), and the 2001 Seattle Mariners, who did it in 162. To break it, these Cubs would have to go 92-37, a .713 winning percentage that would be just slightly below their current mark.

It seems far-fetched, and the Cubs already lost some of their depth last month with the season-ending knee injury to left fielder Kyle Schwarber. But the Golden State Warriors just set the wins record for the N.B.A. regular season. Sports fans can dream.

“I am not going to answer any question that mentions the Chicago Cubs and the Golden State Warriors,” said Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations. “Seriously, it’s absurd. We’ve had a good month. They just set the all-time wins record, and they’re working on back-to-back championships. We haven’t won in 108 years.”

Epstein built two World Series winners with the Boston Red Sox but is too smart to forecast a title this fall for the Cubs. Considering the nature of the sports, a fan of the best basketball team should be more optimistic than the fan of the best baseball team.

“If you do have the most talented basketball team — a dominant collection of talent — you can just about pencil them in for a No. 1 or No. 2 seed and, barring something silly, they’re going to show up in the finals with a chance to win,” Epstein said. “In baseball — in this era and with this playoff format — it just doesn’t work that way. In basketball, you can maybe push your chances to like 65 percent of winning a championship. In baseball, maybe you can push yours to 20 percent. It’s a totally different exercise.”

Yet optimism reigns at Wrigley, making this a rare moment for a team best known for heartbreak. This version of the Cubs — Epstein and Maddon, Bryant and Anthony Rizzo, Jake Arrieta and Jon Lester — has not let anyone down. It is still full of promise, a blend of productive imports and rising young stars. The stands seem full of hope, not dread.

“Probably because that’s how we feel,” Maddon said. “We don’t have a fatalistic method about us whatsoever. I don’t think our jobs are impacted or affected by the history of the Cubs in any way, shape or form — other than the fact that it’s a great tradition.”

The Cubs honor that tradition in the hallway leading to their dressing room. A giant photo near the door is a close-up of Ernie Banks and Ron Santo, youthful and vibrant, during Hall of Fame careers that never included a trip to the World Series. Next to that is a replica of the white “W” flag that flies from the scoreboard after wins.

Zobrist wears “W” socks after every victory. No matter how many times he does, though, the Cubs can assure themselves of only so much. The 2001 Mariners did not even reach the World Series, falling to the Yankees in the second round of the American League playoffs.

Jamie Moyer, a former Cub who won 20 games for those Mariners, said the team was never motivated by gaudy win totals.

“We were enamored by ourselves, by the way we were playing,” Moyer said by phone Wednesday. “We worked hard and played hard, but respected that, hey, there’s a chance this isn’t going to last, so let’s enjoy it and appreciate it while it’s here.”

The 1998 Yankees, who won 114 games on their way to a championship, did chase a memorable record, said David Cone, who earned 20 of the wins. But it took a late-season meeting to refocus the team.

“Once we hit the 100-win mark early enough, we started to think: We could probably add on here,” Cone said. “But it’s easy to drift when you have that big of a lead.”

The Cubs lead the Pittsburgh Pirates, who visit Wrigley this weekend, by seven games in the N.L. Central Division, and the fallback of wild-card spots makes their postseason lead much bigger. But even a team that starts hot, like the vaunted 1984 Detroit Tigers, can go cold. After a 35-5 beginning to their season, the Tigers let their division lead dwindle to three and a half games by early June.

They recovered, storming through the summer, going 104-58 and winning the World Series with a self-assurance that still resonates.

“With the ’84 Tigers, when you walked out, you knew what the outcome was going to be, and you were going to win,” said the Kansas City first-base coach Rusty Kuntz, a reserve who drove in the go-ahead run of the Tigers’ World Series clincher. “It wasn’t a cockiness; it wasn’t a swag; it was just a confidence that the bottom line was, ‘We’re going to win,’ and the secondary question was: ‘Who’s going to do it?’ ”

Depth is also a hallmark of the Cubs, who used theirs after Schwarber went down. They had re-signed another outfielder, Dexter Fowler, during spring training, and now Fowler has a .458 on-base percentage. Infielders Tommy La Stella and Javier Baez have been productive in semiregular roles, with Bryant often starting in the outfield.

The Cubs’ rotation is less equipped to handle an injury, but for now the starters have a 2.29 E.R.A. Arrieta has allowed three earned runs or fewer in his last 27 regular-season starts, the longest streak since 1893 — the year the pitching rubber was moved to 60 feet 6 inches from home plate.

Arrieta said he spends no time reflecting on the majesty of those feats, or his numbers in those 27 starts: a 22-1 record, a 0.92 E.R.A., two no-hitters. Like his team, he is essentially breaking the game. But it is all just an entertaining sideshow.

“It’s nice; all that stuff’s great,” Arrieta said. “It would be even nicer if we’ve got a ring on our finger at the end of the season.”

The Cubs are sheepish about their start, but not about their goal. Any team with a dedicated party room is comfortable broadcasting its mission. To eliminate all doubt, the Cubs sponsor a billboard on the elevated train tracks above Addison Street, a few blocks from Wrigley Field. Its message is, “This story needs a title.”

It is a clever slogan, and surely it is true. But getting there, and seeing how high the Cubs can go as they try, should be savored. Just don’t expect the players to know the major league record for wins.

“No idea — and we don’t care,” right fielder Jason Heyward said. “We know we need to be in the playoffs, and you’ve got to be in it to win it. We know we’re trying to win every game.”

They know they cannot do that, but they might come pretty close.


