


Under fire from the governor and many Republican legislators, the state Department of Education now says it will not follow new federal guidance on use of bathrooms and locker rooms by transgender students. State Superintendent Carey Wright announced Wednesday that the department would “follow the lead of state leadership” and take no action until the state Board of Education could discuss the situation. The move comes as Republicans in a number of other states have opposed the guidance, with some seeking to join legal challenges. Mississippi education officials had said Friday they would follow the guidance by federal authorities calling for transgender students to be treated consistently with their gender identity. They cited a need for a “safe and caring school environment.” The State Board of Education chairman, John Kelly of Gulfport, said that board would have a special meeting within the next two weeks to discuss the issue. The move came as opposition to Ms. Wright’s earlier announcement that she would comply turned into a landslide. Wednesday, 27 Republican state senators among the 32-member Republican supermajority sent a letter to her and the Board of Education calling for “swift and decisive action on this urgent matter.” (AP)

Gov. Doug Ducey has signed legislation repealing a pair of laws targeting abortion because they appeared to be indefensible in court. The Republican governor also signed another bill that opponents say is designed to make it easier to cut off abortion providers from Medicaid funding. Tuesday’s action repeals a law he signed in March that locked in outdated federal guidelines covering the most commonly used abortion drug. It also repealed a 2015 law he approved requiring providers to tell patients the effects of an abortion drug are reversible. That law had been on hold pending a court challenge. The Medicaid payment law Mr. Ducey signed allows the state to cut off funding to providers that fail to segregate taxpayer money from funds used to provide abortions. (AP)

The four homes planned for an Aspen affordable housing complex will cost upward of $1.3 million each. The City Council decided Tuesday against subsidizing the homes as the city has done with other affordable housing. Councilman Adam Frisch said selling the homes at cost is still less than the $2 million price they would carry on the market. The Land Title Guarantee Company says the average single-family home price in Aspen was almost $5.9 million last year. Housing lottery eligibility will extend to applicants who do not meet requirements for subsidized housing but earn too little to purchase on the open market, among other criteria. (AP)


