


It’s safe to say that Leicester City’s triumph in England’s Premier League this season was unlikely.

But there’s unlikely, and then there’s unlikely. Before the season started, you could get 5,000-to-1 odds that Leicester would win the title.

Now that we know miracles happen, are there other long shots on the horizon that might rival Leicester’s improbable win?

We checked the British legal bookmaker Ladbrokes and found some other unlikely events, listed in order of improbability.

33-1

The Nashville Predators to win the Stanley Cup playoffs. Only eight teams remain in the chase for the Cup, but the Predators were in a hole, down by two games to none, against the Sharks entering Tuesday. Nashville tied for 13th in the regular season and has never in its history gone beyond this round. Still, almost anything can happen in the N.H.L. playoffs.

125-1

The Portland Trail Blazers to win the N.B.A. playoffs. Entering Tuesday, Portland trailed the mighty Golden State Warriors, one game to none. An astonishing comeback in that series would still leave the Trail Blazers to face the Thunder or the Spurs and then probably the Cavaliers. A tall order, but still only 125-1.

150-1

The Cleveland Browns to win the Super Bowl. The hapless Browns last made the playoffs in 2002 and last won it all in 1964. Last season, they were 3-13, making them the longest shots to win the next Super Bowl. Maybe Robert Griffin III will make the difference?

250-1

Seven songs in the Eurovision song contest. Russia is the 2-1 favorite in the annual kitschfest, which is being broadcast on American television for the first time this year. Several songs are judged to be bad enough to reward loyalists at 250-1, including Montenegro’s hard rock offering, “The Real Thing” by Highway.

300-1

Northern Ireland to win the Euro 2016 soccer title. Having qualified for a major tournament for the first time since 1986, Northern Ireland is the outsider for this summer’s contest in France. Its group includes Poland, Ukraine and World Cup-winning Germany.

500-1

The Atlanta Braves to win the World Series. Atlanta has started 7-19 after going 67-95 last year. Somehow, the Braves have hit only six home runs all season.

1,000-1

Watford, West Brom and Burnley to win the Premier League in 2016-17. The chance that Leicester City will repeat next season is slight but not outlandish, at 25-1. These three teams have far less of a chance. Watford and West Brom are probably just relieved not to be relegated. Burnley is in the driver’s seat to win the Championship, the tier right below the Premier League, and join the league next season.

1,500-1

Hungary to win the world hockey championship. While Russia, Canada, Finland and Sweden will be in the mix at the worlds this month in Russia, Hungary will be there, too, after being promoted from a lower group last year. With only a handful of N.H.L. players on its roster, it is a lot more likely to be relegated back than to win the title. Hungary did finish in fifth in the championships ... in 1937.

2,000-1

Northern Ireland to win the World Cup. While Northern Ireland has qualified for the 24-team Euro tournament this summer, it will be hard-pressed to be one of the 13 European teams that make it to the 2018 Cup in Russia, much less win it. Ladbrokes does not offer odds on all the minnows, and the likes of Andorra or Liechtenstein would have even longer odds.

3,000-1

Mexico, Senegal and Puerto Rico to win the Olympic men’s basketball gold medal. The United States is a prohibitive favorite, of course. If you bet 12 pounds on the Americans with Ladbrokes and are right, you will get your 12 pounds back plus just one more. To even make the Olympics, these three teams have to get through qualifying tournaments against international powers like Italy, France and Serbia. Then they would have to find a way to the gold without big-name players.

But as Leicester has taught us, it could happen.

So when Gorgui Dieng and Maleye N’Doye lead Senegal past Kevin Durant and Stephen Curry in the final in Rio, you can just shrug your shoulders and say, “Eh, I’ve seen stranger.”


