


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. “If one wanted to get scrod this evening,” the tourist asked the Boston cabdriver, “where might one go?” The cabby turned around and stared at him. “You know, I’ve probably heard that question a thousand times,” he said, “but never in the pluperfect subjunctive.”

Hello? Is this thing on?

We’ve got fish on the brain. We want to make Julia Moskin’s brilliant recipe for pan-roasted fluke in herb butter. We want to make Melissa Clark’s simple, elegant recipe for smoky fish chowder. We want to make Florence Fabricant’s cool-technique recipe for slow-roasted porgy with mustard and dill.

And to celebrate the return of squid to our home waters, we are definitely going to make David Tanis’s exquisite recipe for risotto nero.

But that’s not all we’ll be making in coming days. We’re thinking this may be a good week to cook some after-work fried chicken, off Kim Severson’s recipe for pan-frying, or mine for Coke-brining, or Melissa’s for hot Nashville-style.

We’d like, too, to start nailing down some good weeknight salads. Like perhaps Julia’s awesome and transgressive recipe for kale and romaine Caesar salad? Or Nigella Lawson’s recipe for a salad with ricotta and pine nuts? Is it too early for caprese? Not in some precincts! We’ll call that virtue for dinner and leave room for dessert.

Speaking of: We love Alex Witchel’s recipe for banana everything cookies. We adore Mark Bittman’s recipe for watermelon Popsicles. Edna Lewis’s recipe for rhubarb pie? If we can pull the time out of tonight or tomorrow to make it, we could eat it for breakfast, the whole thing, with about a gallon of coffee, before walking the seven miles to the newsroom.

Lots more recipes to cook this week are on Cooking, of course. Save the ones you like to your recipe box, and get to them as soon as you can.

Now, if you run into trouble with the technology on our site or apps, please ask for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com. And if you have good food jokes, send them to me on social media. I’m on Twitter and Facebook, Pinterest and Instagram. Or if you don’t do that, that social media stuff, you can find me on email: foodeditor@nytimes.com. Clamdiggers, play us off!


