


FRONT PAGE

An article on Tuesday about the inability of the United States and Iran to work together to promote unity in Iraq even though both want to defeat the Islamic State there misidentified the country that backs the Badr Organization, which resists calls to let humanitarian aid into Falluja, an ISIS-held city under siege by the Iraqi Army. That country is Iran, not Iraq. A picture caption with the article misidentified the weapon being fired by Shiite fighters outside Falluja. It is a recoilless rifle, not a rocket.

NEW YORK

An article on Wednesday about the sentencing of Alhassane Ould Mohamed, who pleaded guilty last month to murdering William Bultemeier, a Defense Department attaché assigned to the United States Embassy in Niger in 2000, referred incorrectly to Danni Bultemeier, who addressed the court. She is the second youngest daughter of Mr. Bultemeier, not, as stated in court, the youngest.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Wednesday about the freeing from jail of André Esteves, former chief of BTG Pactual, misstated his history with the bank in some copies. As chief executive, he built the bank into a giant, but he did not found it.

•

A correction in this space on Wednesday for an article about a donation to the University of California, San Francisco from the former Citigroup chairman Sanford I. Weill and his wife misstated her given name. As the article correctly noted, she is Joan, not Jane.

THE ARTS

A theater review on Thursday about “Long Day’s Journey Into Night,” at the American Airlines Theater in Manhattan, misidentified the character who has a climactic drunk scene. He is Jamie, not Edmund. The review also misstated the name of the maid played by Colby Minifie. She is Cathleen, not Bridget. And the review misstated the year Jessica Lange played Mary Tyrone in London. It was 2000, not 2012.

•

An article on Wednesday about upheaval at the Pennsylvania Ballet referred incorrectly to the dancers Sterling Baca and Nayara Lopes, who are joining the company. They are not married.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Wednesday about the actress Madeleine Sherwood misstated the day she died. It was Saturday, April 23 — not last Friday, April 22. The obituary also misidentified the type of headgear worn by Sally Field on the television show “The Flying Nun,” on which Ms. Sherwood was a co-star. It was a cornet, a kind of headdress worn by nuns — not a coronet, a kind of crown.

•

Because of an editing error, an obituary on Thursday about Horace Ward, Georgia’s first black federal judge, misstated the year he graduated from law school. It was 1959 — not 1979, the year he was appointed to the federal bench.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


