


The tech giant Apple will withhold its support from the Republican National Convention in July because of its discomfort with comments by Donald J. Trump, two people briefed on the company’s decision said on Saturday.

Apple is the latest in a string of companies dropping out as sponsors of the Republican convention. Few have attributed their decisions directly to Mr. Trump, the party’s presumptive presidential nominee, but some have privately expressed worries about having their products associated with the candidate and his ideas.

Officials at Apple declined to comment Saturday. But the company’s move, first reported by Politico, was relayed to Republican officials and was described by two people briefed on the decision, who asked for anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss it publicly.

Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, has been a frequent target of Mr. Trump’s because of the company’s use of Chinese manufacturing and its fight with the United States government over the encryption of data on its smartphones. One of those briefed on Apple’s decision said the company objected not only to beliefs Mr. Trump has expressed on trade with China and data encryption, but also to his comments about Muslims and immigrants.

Mr. Trump has promised to build a wall along the nation’s border with Mexico, has characterized Mexican immigrants as criminals and has vowed to stop immigration from Muslim-dominated countries as a counterterrorism strategy.

Asked to comment on Apple’s decision, a spokeswoman for the Republican National Committee said, “We are working with a variety of major tech partners who are focused on being part of the American political process.”

Apple’s withdrawal is not by itself a large blow to the convention. It typically donates equipment; its contribution in 2008, for example, was valued at $140,000, according to federal election records. But it adds to the parade of major companies, including HP and Microsoft, curtailing or eliminating their monetary support of the Republican convention.

Last week, Bloomberg Politics reported that JPMorgan Chase and Ford Motor would not sponsor the convention.

Apple was still expected to provide support for the Democratic convention, though it was unclear Saturday if that decision was final.

For months, activist groups have put pressure on companies to steer clear of the Republican convention, where Mr. Trump is expected to officially become the party’s leader.

Some major technology firms, such as Google, are still planning to support the convention in some fashion.

Mr. Trump’s presence at the top of the Republican ticket has created a seismic split within his party — among down-ballot candidates, who do not want to answer to his frequent controversies, and among donors, many of whom do not want to fund the party as heavily as they have in the past. Last week, Speaker Paul D. Ryan said that his endorsement of Mr. Trump was not a “blank check” and that he could rescind it.

On Saturday, Mr. Trump cited the lack of support among other Republicans and took an unusual tack, threatening to stop raising money for the party and to self-fund his race.

“We’re going to beat Hillary, and it would helpful if the Republicans could help us a little bit,” Mr. Trump said at a rally in Las Vegas, referring to Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee. He continued to criticize his party: “I am raising a lot of money for the Republican Party, and there are a lot of beneficiaries of that. And I like doing it. But we have to have help.”

The Trump campaign is relying heavily on the Republican Party apparatus to support his candidacy, in particular its field and data programs across the country, since he keeps a lean staff. Self-funding would require Mr. Trump to put up hundreds of millions of dollars, something he resisted for much of the primary race.

“If the Republican Party, and I hope they all come together, because I want them to all come together, but if for any reason, they get a little bit like they don’t want to help out as much, then I’ll fund my own campaign,” he said. “I’d love to do that.”


