


Referees, the saying goes, do not want to be seen or heard. It is not ideal, then, when referees are so much in focus that they are seen, heard, talked about, pilloried and — in at least one instance — criticized for how they left the stadium after a game (before enduring, oddly, a public discussion about their taste in music).

This is the state of things, however, in England’s Premier League. As Leicester City motors toward perhaps the most unlikely championship in high-level soccer history, the spotlight seems to be as much on the officials as it is on the Foxes, who are 5 points ahead with four games to play, close to clinching a magical turnaround from near-relegation in 2015 to title winners this spring.

In all likelihood, Leicester will finish the job. But the question of whether the Premier League — and the sport as a whole — is doing enough to help referees will linger. If nothing else, the events of the past week served as the latest call for soccer to integrate video replay as soon as possible.

Some problems are unavoidable. Jon Moss, the referee blistered publicly after sending off Leicester’s Jamie Vardy during a game against West Ham United last week, is a solid-enough official but not one of the Premier League’s elite. Unfortunately, Moss was almost surely working that match because the highest-ranked English referees were at a workshop for officials who will be involved in this summer’s European Championships. Scheduling is always an element of the game, of course, and even if Mark Clattenburg or Martin Atkinson, two of England’s best, were available, there is no guarantee they would not have come under fire as Moss did. Nothing can account for an official having a bad day.

Video, however, can help avoid some of the situations that led Moss into a fire pit: several appeals for penalties that were not assessed; a second yellow and subsequent red card to Vardy for diving; sumo-style grappling in the penalty area and on set pieces, with the sort of hand-to-hand combat in which the aggressor and the aggrieved are typically indistinguishable; and then, in the end, a penalty shot for Leicester. These are among the most difficult situations for a referee to handle in real time, but, with proper restrictions, they could be made significantly easier with video assistance.

But that is obvious. The more important consideration is that the use of video replay would give the officials a far greater base of credibility from the start. Players, coaches and fans would know that the officials have replay backing them up (or, sometimes, correcting them), which would lessen the inherent mistrust of officials. Even if observers do not love a referee’s style, they could at least trust that he has the tape behind him.

That is the biggest reason all the top European leagues need to adopt replay sooner rather than later. The discussion about Moss’s weekend was less about his actual decisions — the late penalty was dicey, to be sure, but the diving call on Vardy was seen by many as courageous and correct — and more about what he wrote in his postmatch report, when he detailed the over-the-top conduct by several players in protest of his calls.

Those reactions, which included a Vardy tirade that could lead to an additional suspension on top of the automatic one-game ban, were emblematic of a culture that perpetually treats referees as piñatas, not important components of the game.

Piling on the referee is commonplace. Some critics shriek for stricter discipline while others shout that red cards “ruin the game” and that officials need simply to “let the players play.” After the Leicester game, the criticisms of Moss covered the entire referee-ragging cliché spectrum: The match was “too much for him,” said the former player Alan Shearer, while Mark Halsey, a former referee turned commentator, said Moss “lost the plot.” Peter Schmeichel, the former goalkeeper and the father of Leicester keeper Kasper Schmeichel, simply wondered if Moss was on drugs.

It was all a bit hysterical, as usual. Yes, there may be the odd instance when a referee is given a game that is over his head, but it happens far more rarely than angry fans might think. A more common problem is that refereeing soccer is hard, and having one person make the majority of the decisions over 90-plus minutes without any replay assistance is absurd.

Rugby, which uses video replay, demands that its players treat referees with respect. A solitary harsh word to a referee can be (and often is) punished with immediate ejection. Much of the reason that works is simply the code of the sport; part of it, though, is the presence of the screen. It makes sense, too: In an age of progress, technology — in refereeing and almost anything else — equals credibility.

Skill still matters, and the top referees in the top soccer leagues are, in many ways, celebrities. Clattenburg certainly knows that, as fans have clamored over the disappearance of his bald spot and clucked when he eschewed the typical postgame departure with his colleagues so he could make an Ed Sheeran concert. (He was disciplined for breaking protocol on that one.) Yet a good reputation is not enough to make anyone immune.

The governing body that oversees soccer’s rules recently voted to institute testing for video review systems, and several national associations are eager to experiment. “We’ve raised our hand and waved it loudly that we want to be one of the test leagues,” the M.L.S. commissioner, Don Garber, said Thursday.

More should follow. At this point, video replay is the only way for the referees to get back to the place where they always want to be: the background.


