


The origin story behind the British pajama brand Desmond & Dempsey is romantic-comedy cute. Its founders, Molly Goddard and Joel Jeffery (she’s a charming, loopy Australian; he’s a composed, soft-spoken Brit) met in a Canadian ski town and fell in love long-distance. When Goddard made the move to London, she brought her collection of “frilly little nighties” with her, but soon switched to wearing Jeffery’s button-ups around the house for the sake of modesty around his flatmates — a practice that soon became a problem, thanks to Goddard’s self-professed clumsiness. “I’d wake up and there are breakfast stains all over them, and I was like, ‘Molly, I have to wear this to work!’” Jeffery says of those shirts.

“And Joel’s like, proper English, never spills anything,” Goddard rejoins, with an infectious giggle. “And one day he was like, ‘I know you moved all the way over here and it’s really nice, but you have to get your own pajamas!’” They went out in search of a pair that fit her specifications — light, breathable cotton, in a cut inspired by men’s wear but tailored for a woman — and came up short. “There’s so many silk brands, and I was like, ‘They’re beautiful, but you can’t wash them,’” Goddard says. “Sorry, that’s not going to work.”

So they made their own, starting with their first hundred sets in Sept. 2014, under the moniker Desmond & Dempsey, which comes from their grandfathers’ names. Gray and navy styles feature smart white piping (“My grandma taught me that when you iron it and you shake it out, the piping holds the structure of the garment,” Goddard says), while pineapple and botanical prints were hand-painted by Jeffery’s brother, a graphic designer for Adidas. Interest soon came in from stockists including Fortnum & Mason in London and Bergdorf Goodman in New York.

Florence has long been a site of special significance for Goddard and Jeffery — they rendezvoused there early on in their courtship — and last summer, a trip there formed the basis for Desmond & Dempsey’s spring/summer 2016 line, called “Dolce Far Niente.” They had stumbled on a YouTube video about Alberto Cozzi, a century-old, fourth-generation bookbinding and restoration shop where the original Cozzi’s descendants painstakingly create intricate marbled paper. Goddard and Jeffery made it their mission to learn the Cozzi techniques. “We’re like, “Schmeasy, this should be easy.’ It’s not,” Goddard says with a laugh. “You have to make up these layers, and the tools that you use, you can only hand-make; you can’t buy them anywhere.” They ended up with six prints in rich, vibrant colors, which they brought back to their mill in London to translate into pajama sets in both trouser and shorts styles.

“That work-life balance thing — I get that we need to one day learn to separate it,” Goddard says, then pauses and giggles again. “Someday. But being able to go to Florence and do that, you couldn’t really come home and tell your boyfriend, ‘Oh, hey, I did this amazing thing.’” To that end, the inspiration for Desmond & Dempsey’s next venture again derives from real-life necessity: It’s a bridal collection called August, which happens to be the month the two are getting married. When the topic comes up, Jeffery looks at Goddard: “We’ve got a lot to do, haven’t we?”


