


Art Briles, the former Baylor coach fired after a university investigation found that university leaders including football coaches and staff members had mishandled allegations of sexual violence, said that he had regrets.

“I have certainly made mistakes, and in hindsight, I would have done certain things differently,” he said Thursday in a statement to KWTX-TV in Waco, Tex.

However, Briles said that the full scope of the situation had not been disclosed and that he was “contractually obligated” to be silent on the matter.

“I can only assume that the report, which is not independent, supports the conclusions that the board has already drawn,” he said.

The report prompted the demotion of the university president, Kenneth Starr, who later stepped down as chancellor, and the resignation of Athletic Director Ian McCaw.

Earlier this week, Baylor hired the former Wake Forest coach Jim Grobe to replace Briles.

HEISMAN HOPEFUL GETS A YEAR BACK Oklahoma quarterback Baker Mayfield will be given back the year of eligibility he lost because of his transfer from Texas Tech under a decision by the Big 12 Conference. Mayfield, who finished fourth in the Heisman Trophy balloting last season, will be eligible to play for the Sooners in 2017.

The boxing great Muhammad Ali was hospitalized with a respiratory problem, but a spokesman for his family said that the former world heavyweight champion was in fair condition.

Bob Gunnell, the spokesman, said that a brief hospital stay was expected for Ali, 74, who has had Parkinson’s disease for more than three decades.

Ali, who lives in Phoenix, has had health problems in recent years and was admitted to a hospital in December 2014 with what was believed to be a mild case of pneumonia. Doctors later determined he had contracted a severe urinary tract infection. (REUTERS)

Javier Baez, Jason Heyward and Kris Bryant each hit home runs off the teenage starter Julio Urias in the Chicago Cubs’ 7-2 win over the visiting Los Angeles Dodgers.

Kyle Hendricks struck out six in eight innings for the Cubs, who have won eight of their last nine.

Urias, 19, was making his second career start. He gave up six runs and eight hits in two and two-thirds innings in his big league debut against the Mets last week.

BALTIMORE BLASTS BOSTON The Orioles slugged a season-high seven homers to beat the visiting Red Sox, 12-7.

Mark Trumbo and Adam Jones each homered twice for the Orioles, and Manny Machado delivered a tiebreaking drive in the seventh inning. Xander Bogaerts extended his career-best hitting streak to 26 games with a two-run double for the Red Sox.

AROUND THE MAJORS Kansas City third baseman Mike Moustakas had season-ending surgery to repair the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee. Zack Greinke struck out a season-high 11 as Arizona beat visiting Houston and Dallas Keuchel, 3-0, in a matchup of A.L. Cy Young Award winners. Madison Bumgarner struck out 11 and hit a two-run homer in San Francisco’s 6-0 win at Atlanta. Bumgarner lowered his E.R.A. to 1.91.

Kumi Yokoyama scored in stoppage time to give Japan a 3-3 tie with the United States in Commerce City, Colo., in an exhibition rematch of the Americans’ victory last year in the Women’s World Cup final.

Alex Morgan scored twice, and Lindsey Horan added a goal in the 89th minuted to help the United States overcome a 2-0 deficit.

Mana Iwabuchi and Yuki Ogimi scored earlier for Japan, which was reduced to 10 players when Ogimi received a second yellow card and was ejected in the 57th minute.

The match featured the finalists from the last two World Cups and the 2012 Olympics. Japan won the 2011 World Cup and the United States won at the London Games.

The Americans dropped to 11-0-1 this year.

Forward Casey Cizikas agreed to a five-year, $16.75 million contract extension that will keep him with the Islanders through the 2020-21 season.

Cizikas, 25, had eight goals and 22 assists last season.


