


(Race/Related is a newsletter exploring race with reporting, essays, art and discussion. You can receive it via email.)

Earle M. Lacey, my father, played an upright bass in a jazz band in the 1950s, and when he listened to jazz he tuned out all the other instruments.

“It’s all about the bass,” he would frequently tell me. “Boom, boom, boom; boom, boom, boom, boom.”

No offense to the trumpeters, the saxophonists, or the vocalists out there — you’re all essential — but focusing on the very heartbeat of a song, or anything else for that matter, isn’t bad advice. His battered bass is now in my living room and I can’t listen to jazz without thinking about him, a black musician in an interracial band in the days of segregation.

Music often speaks to our identities and memories. This week, that’s Race/Related’s focus.

You’ll hear from a New York Times reporter, David Gonzalez, who connected with his father, who was from Puerto Rico, through his father’s love of boleros; and from Shreeya Sinha, a Times editor who is a digital storyteller by day and an aspiring D.J. by night.

Her musical tastes are as global as she is — an Indian millennial who grew up in Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Vietnam, and Bangladesh, among other places — but she believes an uncomfortable confrontation with a neighbor would have been avoided if she were more into pop.

We’re also featuring a Spotify playlist of songs from Race/Related readers and contributors. When the Times newsroom starts to get to me, I sometimes pop on headphones and listen to Bob Marley’s first No.1 hit, “Simmer Down.” We asked the executive editor Dean Baquet, who comes from a long line of New Orleans jazz musicians but describes himself as a failed trumpet player, to weigh in on his favorite song, too.

– Marc Lacey

_____

My earliest memory of being alive comes with its own soundtrack. My father, Pedro, used to sit with his battered guitar by the window of our first-floor apartment in the Bronx and slowly pluck out the songs he had learned decades earlier in Puerto Rico.

They were romantic boleros, filled with melancholy and heartbreak, or traditional aguinaldos from his own rural childhood in Caguas.

God, I hated those songs.

During the 1960s, when Puerto Ricans were depicted as knife-wielding know-nothings who would be the downfall of the South Bronx, the last thing I wanted to hear was some corny music that reminded me of where my parents were from. Besides, by the end of that decade I was too enamored of Jimi Hendrix, Creedence and The Guess Who to even give a second thought to papi’s music. So while he tried once to teach me guitar, all I ever learned to play were records.

A few weeks ago, I was driving by Van Cortlandt Park on a sunny morning when one of those old songs popped up randomly. I only had to hear a few notes from the lead guitar to know it was “Noche de Ronda” by Dúo Pérez Rodríguez, one of papi’s favorite groups. With flowery, poetic lyrics, they declared loyalty to a vanished lover, vowing to wait until death.

Waiting. Maybe that was also a theme of papi’s life. He had come here as a teenager to work in factories where, in time, he would lose most of two fingers on his playing hand. No longer able to play leads, he switched to rhythm. He didn’t really talk about that. Nor did he talk much about Puerto Rico, having only gone back to visit once in the mid-1940s after he married my mother.

Music was the link to the island he left behind. Along with his brother Eusebio, and Luis Reyes, a family friend, they would break out the guitars to perform the music of their youth.

To look back on them now — in a 1950s picture my sister Alice found — was a revelation. During the week, they toiled in factories or as janitors. But on the weekends, they stood proudly, one foot on a chair, dressed in jackets and ties, flanked by their wives who were just as dolled up.

There are things you do to feed your family, and there are things you do to feed your soul. Papi’s music was his sustenance in a foreign land. No matter what happened on the streets of the South Bronx, inside those living rooms they had recreated a bit of Puerto Rico. They could perform magic, coaxing from their guitars sounds that transported them and kept them alive, even if for many of them the toll of life here would lead to early graves.

Papi was no exception. He was 59 when he died on March 12, 1980, after having been diagnosed months earlier with lung cancer. Soon after his death, I was at a record store on Broadway, where I spied a cassette of boleros. I bought it, went home and started listening.

All I could do was cry. In an instant, my mind was flooded with images from those old house parties: the sounds of guitars, the garlicky smell of pernil in the oven, my uncle Juan with his stogie clenched in his teeth. I recalled my father, sitting by the window on Beck Street, humming to himself as he played, slapping the guitar to keep time.

In the years since then, I have bought tons of that old music. Now, just as papi’s music kept a part of Puerto Rico close to him, it now keeps part of him close to me.

God, I love those songs.

– David Gonzalez

_____

“I hate to be a pain,” said the angry, handwritten note slipped under the door of my New York apartment by a neighbor, “but frankly, you are being a pain.”

Squabbles between neighbors are nothing new but I had one I’ll never forget after I temporarily moved into a small studio in a fancy building on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.

Anyone who knows me knows I love music. My taste is eclectic. I played in my school’s jazz band while living in the foothills of the Indian Himalayas, love the rapper Nas and can get lost in house music, the pulsating bass and tribal rhythms mixed with R&B, soul, funk and all that good stuff.

Though the music is big and bumpy, I tried to be tame and respectful. A little music in the morning and evening but not after 10 p.m. I kept the volume low.

One night, just before 10 p.m., I heard a succession of bangs on my door and low-grade yelling for at least 10 minutes. As a single woman living in New York, I was not about to open the door. I figured it was a drunk guy knocking at what he thought was his ex’s place.

On another night, I got a normal knock on the door. It was Will from security telling me my neighbor had complained about the noise. I invited Will in to listen himself. He agreed it wasn’t loud and I considered the case closed but I kept hearing bangs, now through the wall.

The next time I saw my neighbor, who was white and in his early 50s, I politely introduced myself, and asked that we work out a solution. He got aggressive quick. He said he would complain, night or day, if he heard any music from my apartment. He even threatened to make sure I couldn’t renew my lease. His wife, standing nearby, added, “So what do you even do?” She seemed surprised that a short Indian girl who liked electronic music could actually be an editor at The New York Times.

I continued trying to pacify the situation. Eventually, he acknowledged that it was not so much the volume, but the music itself. “How can anyone like that music?” he asked me.

To be neighborly, I told him I’d tone it down even more. I put away the subwoofer and bought a portable, wireless speaker.

That’s when the note came:

“In the event you are not aware of the bass from your apartment. It is better than it was, but it is still TORTURE!!!. Your enjoyment is to my detriment. IT IS NOT FAIR + UNACCEPTABLE. Technology can improve this situation. You still need to improve the situation. I hate to be a pain but frankly, you are being a pain. My tolerance is waning. Do something ASAP.”

Living in New York forces a certain level of tolerance when it comes to music. (I once lived next to an opera singer.) I wondered whether this man was discriminating against the genre and formed an opinion about the sort of person I was for liking it. I decided to move elsewhere, to Brooklyn, and still wonder if what I faced was musical profiling.

– Shreeya Sinha

_____

We couldn’t do a music issue without a playlist. Below you’ll find a selection of songs — and the reasons they were picked — from New York Times staffers and Race/Related readers.

“That’s the Way of the World,” by Earth, Wind & Fire My favorite songs of youth were not about race, directly. But they provoke memories for me that are certainly about race, memories of dimly lit house parties in working class New Orleans neighborhoods like Vascoville, which we called Boscoville, for obvious reasons. Of course everyone there was black. The songs that make me think of that time are “That’s the Way of the World” by Earth, Wind & Fire, and “Could It Be I’m Falling in Love” by The Spinners. Dean Baquet, Executive Editor, The New York Times African-American / 59 / New York City

“All Falls Down,” by Kanye West As a black citizen, I understand that part of the problem of collective black struggle stems from the desire to acquire and then boast of material possessions despite not having a set financial means to support these actions. I am aware of the destructive behavior yet still take part. Chadd Denson African-American / 21 / West Lafayette, Ind.

“One Step,” by Macaco I teach English to kids from Spanish-speaking countries and West Africa and this song is in four languages sung by people from Spain, Senegal and Mali. The message is that we are one under the same sun. Laura O’Keefe White / 40s / New York City

“No Soy de Aquí,” by Chavela Vargas To be an immigrant is to realize you’ll always be an outsider in your new country as you become an outsider in the country you left behind. This song speaks of this uncertain condition — muted sadness, wrapped in a smile. Fernanda Santos, Phoenix Bureau Chief, The New York Times Brazilian / 42 / Phoenix

“A Change Is Gonna Come,” by Sam Cooke I heard it the day of Obama’s inauguration driving to work. It touched me so deeply I pulled over on the side of the road and bawled. All the years, all the hate and hurt and here we were with a possibility that it was going to get better with our first Black president. Still waiting for that level of change in America. Peggy Goodwin Black / 46 / Englewood, NJ

For a full Spotify playlist of songs recommended by Race/Related readers and contributors from The New York Times, whose tastes range from K-pop to Kanye, click here. Also check out The New York Times Magazine’s 25 songs that tell us where music is going.

_____

• Meet Lemonade’s Somali-London poet, Warsan Shire; then watch Wesley Morris, Jenna Wortham, Nikole Hannah-Jones and Jon Caramanica discuss Beyoncé.

• The Music Issue of The New York Times Magazine was filled with gems, but don’t miss Ms. Wortham on Syd Tha Kyd and Jazmine Hughes on Sunday Candy by Chance the Rapper.

• There was no debate among top Times editors that Prince’s obituary deserved to run on the front page. Such decisions are not always so smooth, however. There was an animated discussion in 2012 over where to place the obit of Adam Yauch, a founder of the Beastie Boys. It ended up on A1. Three decades earlier, Bob Marley’s obituary was featured far less prominently, on D23. When Louis Armstrong died in 1971, reason prevailed.

_____

Meet the Mardi Gras Indian of “Lemonade.” Read Dodai Stewart on Prince, blackness and sexuality; or Rembert Brown arguing that Drake’s new album “is the album you make when you want No. 1, when you want the gold, when you want the belt as the biggest musician alive, right now.”

Also, Questlove recalls how Jimmy Fallon won over The Roots. And Pharrell gets an action figure?

_____

Miguel Jontel Pimentel, better known as Miguel, is a California native, born to an African-American mother and Mexican father.

Victoria Ford (aka Sneakshot) has been photographing his rise to stardom for years, as he combines genres and tackles race, class, love and lust — drawing comparisons to Prince.

We put together a full slide show with her images and her story of Miguel. Below are a few highlights.

(If you like what you’ve seen so far, share this or sign-up for Race/Related. Let us know what you think at racerelated@nytimes.com.)


