


DALLAS — Amanda Green knew precisely why she was having lunch Thursday in a 17th-floor restaurant accessible only to guests of the luxury hotel where she and the rest of the Oklahoma City Thunder organization were staying during their first-round playoff series against the Mavericks. In a sense, knowing why is part of her job.

“It’s in the collective bargaining agreement, that you have to stay at a certain class — level of hotels,” Green said over her vegetarian lunch.

Or, to quote from Page 266: “Each Team agrees to use its best efforts” to have players “stay in first-class hotels.” (Not surprisingly, teams are also urged to find accommodations that “have extra-long beds available.”)

Green, 31, who grew up in Queens, knows the 510-page agreement between the league and the players’ union pretty well as she nears the completion of her fourth season as the Thunder’s basketball operations coordinator.

Her status makes her one of the few women in the N.B.A. with a prominent job in what is termed basketball operations. Unlike several women with important roles in business development, marketing and other aspects of the multimillion-dollar business that is a pro basketball team, Green, in her job, centers on the game in the most granular way — like mastering the current C.B.A.

In addition to some legal duties, including handling the immigration status of foreign players, Green huddles with the general manager, scouts and others before the draft and the trade deadline. She keeps tabs on what other teams are doing. She suggests trades. She thinks strategically about the Thunder, who since arriving in Oklahoma City in 2008 from Seattle have been highly competitive but have not won an N.B.A. title.

“It’s very, very noticeable that I’m an African-American woman; can’t really hide that,” Green said. “But for them to say, ‘She does her job well,’ that’s what I want people to know me for.”

Green had long aspired to work in sports. For four years in college, she was a rare female manager for Duke’s men’s basketball team.

But years ago, an acquaintance of Green’s mother, who is a Wall Street executive, told Green that she would never make it in the front office of a professional team because the N.B.A., he said, was “an old-boys’ club.”

“Some people do think those things,” Green said. “I work hard to show that a woman can do this.”

If her mother’s acquaintance was plainly wrong about Green, there is also evidence he was wrong about the league.

The N.B.A. is the most gender-diverse men’s sports league in the United States, according to Richard Lapchick, who leads the sports business management program at the University of Central Florida. He found that the N.B.A. had the highest percentage of women in executive positions at the league office and with individual teams, grading significantly better than the N.F.L. and Major League Baseball.

In terms of working on basketball issues, women hold positions as vice president for basketball operations for the Toronto Raptors and the Utah Jazz. The executive director of the players’ union is Michele Roberts. The former W.N.B.A. star Becky Hammon was named an assistant coach for the San Antonio Spurs two years ago, followed this season by Nancy Lieberman, who is an assistant with the Sacramento Kings.

Just as relevant, N.B.A. front offices reflect a diversity of backgrounds, some nontraditional. The Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, who won two titles as a player and 11 as a coach, represents one paradigm for running a team; Bob Myers, who had been an agent and was an assistant general manager for a year before being named general manager of the record-breaking Golden State Warriors, represents another.

Much as when Red Auerbach’s Boston Celtics fielded an all-black starting five for the first time in a game in 1964, the impetus for these changes has seemingly been more selfish than altruistic.

“Our teams are always looking for an edge,” said Mark Tatum, the N.B.A. deputy commissioner and chief operating officer.

He added, “If you have the same people in the room with the same experiences and they all speak the same language, that’s not as good as having a room full of people with different experiences, different perspectives, and applying it to the same task — how do we win a championship?”

Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski, who said “there was not a tougher manager” than Green, concurred.

“Where the game is moving opens up the door even more for women on the men’s side, not just the women’s side,” Krzyzewski said.

Green excels at the Talmudic C.B.A., which not only regulates everything from players’ 401(k) accounts to road hotels but also establishes the several esoteric salary cap quirks and devices that permit teams maximum flexibility: “Bird rights,” “sign-and-trades,” the “non-taxpayer midlevel salary exception.”

Green played a crucial role, according to Thunder General Manager Sam Presti, identifying one of the right partners for the three-team swap at the 2015 trade deadline that netted the Thunder the big man Enes Kanter and forward Kyle Singler.

“She’s like a quality-control expert with our processes, making sure we’re following them,” Presti said of Green. “She’s strong and confident enough to articulate when she feels like we may be skipping a step.”

Before the Thunder’s 131-102 victory against Dallas in Game 3 on Thursday night, Green sat courtside watching Thunder players warm up. She chatted with Mark Simpson, Oklahoma City’s director of sports science, whose experience before the Thunder was largely in soccer and cycling. Other members of the staff — a coach, a trainer, a video analyst — sat nearby. The Thunder’s staff is markedly diverse not only in terms of gender and ethnicity, but also in previous experience.

Presti looked on, observing what he hoped was fruitful cross-pollination in an organization that, he said, still strives to preserve the “start-up challenge or spirit” of its relaunch in Oklahoma City nearly a decade ago.

“We really believe that diversity of the people you work with make for some of the marginal gains you can achieve,” he said, referring to the varied careers of several staffers, including one who worked with the Navy SEALs. “I hire people, not positions. I keep lists of people who I think are high-potential individuals.”

Green, Presti said, “was on that list for a very long time.”

They met in 2005, when Presti, who was working for the Spurs, helped hire Green out of college for a season-long internship.

She started at Georgetown University Law Center the following year, after which she accepted a job at Proskauer Rose, the corporate law firm known for its sports practice. It placed her for a year with the N.B.A. league office, where she worked on intellectual property, and then with the firm’s mergers and acquisitions department, where she worked on purchases of the Cleveland Browns and the San Diego Padres.

All the while, she kept in touch with Presti via email, saying hello in person if Presti and she happened to attend a Duke game.

Green enjoyed her work but experienced it, she said, as “taking a step back” from “the team environment.” She told Presti she was looking for a change, and he created a position for her.

Now she plays recreation-league basketball with several Thunder staffers and their spouses. Over team breakfasts, she discusses new Duke recruits with Singler, a fellow Blue Devil; home renovations with center Nick Collison; and the television series “Empire” with point guard Russell Westbrook.

What she missed the most, she said, was “being part of something that’s greater than yourself.”

At certain points during practices, she recalled, Duke managers were required to move a basketball from under their shoulders to the front of their bodies, ready to pass it to Krzyzewski at a moment’s notice.

“That might seem like something small,” she said. “But because you’re ready with the ball, Coach can go seamlessly into teaching this play. Maybe it’s a play or scouting report or something the players might remember.”

She added, “It’s the smallest things that can have the largest impact.”


