


Chicago officials on Friday released a series of videos and audio recordings of shootings and other episodes involving the police as part of an effort by the administration of Mayor Rahm Emanuel to restore the public’s trust in the department.

The videos — recorded by officers’ body cameras, traffic and security cameras and bystanders — at times paint a fractured, if not confusing portrait of the shootings. In a city embroiled in a crisis over race and police conduct and roiled by an alarming rise in street violence, they may raise more questions than offer answers.

We asked experts in police training and conduct to watch a video clip of the following confrontation between Ismael Jamison and a police officer and tell us what they saw — or did not see.

Videos in this article contain scenes of violence and vulgar language.

Subject: Ismael Jamison

Date: Nov. 22, 2012

Location: 62nd and California

Scene: Mr. Jamison is pacing shirtless on the sidewalk near a bus stop. His fists are clenched. His arms are flexed. A police car pulls up. Mr. Jamison walks toward it, briefly disappearing from view. He continues to pace, staring at the police car and gesturing. He looks agitated. Though there is no audio, Mr. Jamison appears to say something to an officer. The officer retorts, then points a gun at him. Mr. Jamison charges at the officer. The officer fires at him.

Analysis: Maria Haberfeld, a professor of police science at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York, analyzed the video linked to Mr. Jamison’s shooting. A bus passenger flagged a passing police car and told an officer that Mr. Jamison had been beating up people inside the bus.

The video “left me with more questions than answers,” Professor Haberfeld said.

“There’s this guy who is walking around, very agitated, and there’s suddenly a police officer holding a gun, pointing a gun at this individual, but I don’t see where he’s arrived from, if there was some type of exchange before,” she said.

What the video lacks, she said, is proper context: Did the officer say something that angered Mr. Jamison so that he decided to attack the officer, or was Mr. Jamison simply out of control?

Because many of the videos released on Friday by Chicago’s Independent Police Review Authority lack audio, they leave questions unanswered. What police officers say — and hear — during the confrontations is important to determining if the officers followed proper protocol. Did they try to defuse the situation? Did they give forceful orders that clearly conveyed their authority? Did they tell suspects to get down or drop their weapon before they opened fire?

The following videos from dashboard cameras and bystanders’ cellphone cameras raise similar questions that the police training experts noted in the video of Mr. Jamison.

Subjects: David Strong, Leland Dudley, John Givens

Date: April 30, 2012

Location: Mike’s Electronics, 24th and Western

Scene: Officers surrounded Mike’s Electronics in Chicago’s Little Village neighborhood after reports of a burglary in progress. After being ordered to surrender, the police said the three men continued to load merchandise into a minivan, then tried to escape by driving through a metal door. At the time, the police said that as the three men attempted to flee, their minivan struck a police officer and a squad car, then headed toward several other officers. The police then opened fire, shooting all three men, who were unarmed. Mr. Strong, 27, hit by five bullets, died at the scene. The two other men, also injured by police gunfire, were charged with homicide because their accomplice died in the commission of a felony. Mr. Givens, 32, and Mr. Dudley, 33, sued the police in Cook County Circuit Court, alleging excessive force.

Subjects: Lisa Simmons and Jeremiah Smith

Date: July 12, 2014

Location: 15th and Christiana

Scene: Ms. Simmons and Mr. Smith were among those attending a block party on Chicago’s West Side, celebrating a neighborhood rap group’s newly signed recording contract. The celebration was “joyous and peaceful” until the police showed up and began harassing partygoers, a federal lawsuit alleged. An officer identified as Brett Kahn slammed Ms. Simmons’s body and head onto the hood of a patrol car after she complained that they were harassing her son. After yelling, “Get out of the street or you’re going to jail,” the same officer walked up behind Mr. Smith and cracked him on the head with a baton.

Charges of public drinking against Ms. Simmons were dismissed. After 12 days in jail, Mr. Smith pleaded guilty to misdemeanor battery so he could be released from jail, the lawsuit alleges. The charges were later dropped after a judge reviewed the video, said a lawyer who represented them, Rahsaan A. Gordon. In court papers, the Police Department acknowledged that Mr. Smith was hit on the head and that Ms. Simmons was pinned against the car during an arrest, but it denied improper conduct. The case was settled in April out of court for $100,000. In an interview on Friday, Mr. Gordon complained that no action had been taken against Officer Kahn. “Historically, these so-called police review boards have moved slowly in Chicago,” he said.

Subject: Terrence Clarke

Date: June 16, 2015

Location: Portillo’s, Clark and Ontario

Scene: Mr. Clarke, a Canadian, was among customers at a restaurant called Portillo’s on the night the Chicago Blackhawks won the Stanley Cup. On the video of a case under investigation, it appears that Mr. Clarke voices a complaint about his meal and says, “I want my money back,” then cheese from his meal landed on a nearby officer in plain clothes, Khaled Shaar. The beating that ensues can be plainly seen on the video.


