


“Music stores encapsulate a moment in history,” said Emily Judem, co-director of “For the Records,” a documentary about the demise of the Manhattan music mecca Bleecker Bob’s in 2013. “When you walk into one, they bring you back to a time that seems to be disappearing.”

That’s especially true in Greenwich Village. “It had been an artsy, progressive area associated with social change,” she said. “Many people still associate those changes with the Village record stores.”

Rebel Rebel, at 319 Bleecker Street, epitomizes that funky passion. It looks as perilous as it does alluring. Inside the coffin-narrow, gangplank-long space, cardboard boxes choke the only aisle. They’re stacked into towers that buckle with LPs, CDs, EPs, DVDs, 12-inch picture discs, seven-inch 45s and collectibles of every kind. At the front stands the owner, David Shebiro, looking surprisingly serene.

Rebel Rebel has benefited in recent years from a growing mania for vinyl. Purchases in the format leapt 30 percent last year, according to Nielsen SoundScan, generating more profit for record companies than YouTube streams.

Enough of the money has trickled down to Rebel Rebel to make it marginally profitable, according to Mr. Shebiro. But that margin won’t be enough to keep the store from losing its place on Bleecker Street, where it has been a neighborhood staple for 28 years.

While record store closings seem as inevitable as newspaper downsizings these days, June has proved to be an especially cruel month in New York. Rebel Rebel’s closing, set for June 30, will follow the shuttering of another cherished Village sonic emporium, Other Music, on the 25th. Two other Village music stores have died in the last two years: Bleecker Bob’s and Kim’s Music and Video. In the same period, Bleecker Street Records was forced from its longtime home on the street for which it was named to cheaper quarters at 188 West Fourth Street.

Rebel Rebel’s closing is indicative of the change Bleecker has undergone. The seven blocks of the street between Abingdon Square and Seventh Avenue South now include nearly 70 stores devoted to high-end clothing, jewelry and fragrances, leaving only about half a dozen mom and pop places. “The fashionistas have taken over,” Mr. Shebiro said.

The trend began over a decade ago, led by Marc Jacobs. He currently commands four storefronts on Bleecker, near international brands like Ralph Lauren, Michael Kors and Burberry. Before 2000, Bleecker had lots of boho boutiques, a small grocery store, a magazine shop, even a store that sold nothing but condoms, Condomania, which closed in 2007. The rumpled era of the Village, evoked in all its crusty glory in the Coen brothers’ 2013 movie “Inside Llewyn Davis,” seems more remote each year, though the central area around Macdougal Street retains some of its falafel store grease and head shop scent. West Bleecker, by contrast, has become “just another Madison Avenue,” said Ngawang Choden, owner of Beautiful Tibet, a boutique dedicated to that country’s handicrafts. “I feel like I’m the last of the Mohicans here.”

Mr. Shebiro says he wasn’t given a chance to stay in his space. “To have a landlord call someone who has never had a problem paying rent for 28 years and say, ‘I’ve rented your space,’ was really disrespectful,” Mr. Shebiro said. “On the other hand, if we had a pair of shoes and somebody wanted to give us $3,000 for them but our friend only wanted to give us $200, we’d also think about it twice.”

The landlord, SW Management LLC, did not return calls for comment.

According to Faith Consolo, who brokers commercial real estate along the chic stretch of Bleecker for Douglas Elliman, rents for a 500-square-foot space there now average $25,000 a month, and turnover has increased. Coach, Brooks Brothers and Lulu Guinness have all recently left the block. More than a dozen storefronts are currently empty.

Mr. Shebiro, 54, who grew up in Borough Park, Brooklyn, has never had a full-time job outside a record store. He began by working at the Village haunt Record Runner when it opened in 1979, and he stayed until he had enough money to open his own place in 1988. Mr. Shebiro chose what was then a quiet stretch of west Bleecker Street, though friends told him he was crazy to do so. “‘There’s nothing there but antique stores,’” Mr. Shebiro recalled being told. “But it was really sweet and quaint.”

He signed the lease with his first landlord, a Holocaust survivor, over tea. Mr. Shebiro named the store after David Bowie’s 1974 glam-rock song “Rebel Rebel” because “he was the one who influenced me in music completely,” he said, “and the name had the best ring.”

Though Bowie never went to the store, he did act in a movie, “Band Slam” (2009), that featured a scene shot inside Rebel Rebel. The movie was written and directed by Todd Graff, a friend of Mr. Shebiro’s. The director told Mr. Shebiro that Bowie was well aware of the store. But according to Mr. Shebiro, when Mr. Graff told the star, “If you go there, the owner would absolutely faint,” Bowie replied, “That’s exactly why I don’t go.”

Other music stars have happily ventured into the warren over the years. Prince, who came with a beefy bodyguard, bought a Kate Bush album, a Young Disciples recording and some magazines. (The bodyguard paid.) Robert Plant wanted advice on the latest hits, and he picked up a Smashing Pumpkins album. Jimmy Page came in four times. “He actually collects bootlegs of his own work,” Mr. Shebiro said. “He came up to the counter with one and slapped down his American Express Black Card. I didn’t charge him. Another time he told me about a mash-up on YouTube of ‘Whole Lotta Love’ and James Brown’s ‘Sex Machine.’ When I played it, he came behind the counter, practically put his chin on my shoulder and said, ‘Isn’t it brilliant?’”

In his autobiography, “See a Little Light,” Bob Mould, the singer of the 1980s indie-rock band Hüsker Dü, credited Rebel Rebel’s owner with broadening his guitar-driven aesthetic to include dance music, inspiring a lucrative second career as a D.J.

Over the years, Rebel Rebel has served as a school as much as a store. Mr. Shebiro and his sole employee, James Wiltshire, have acted as sonic Sherpas, guiding customers to sounds ideal for them. The other night, Alvero Yepez, 32, of Elmhurst, ventured into the store for the first time, announced that he liked fusion music “that’s trippy and spacey,” and within minutes Mr. Shebiro and Mr. Wiltshire played for him a new copy of a vintage album by the jazz organist Johnny Hammond and another from the tenor saxophonist Stanley Turrentine. Mr. Yepez bought them both.

Rebel Rebel’s nearly impassable aisle means curation of this kind dominates over browsing. The result has given the store a bespoke quality that’s rare even among the most intimate independent music outlets. Charlie Grappone, who ran Vinyl Mania’s three stores on Carmine Street until their demise in 2007, said, “the beauty of someone like David is that when people come in and say, ‘What do I need?’ he knows. He listens to you and figures out where your head is at.”

Mr. Shebiro, who said he made 95 percent of his friends through Rebel Rebel, plans to take a break after the store closes. He does not know if another location will provide the same experience. “It wasn’t just about what was inside the store,” he said. “It was the community that surrounded it that made it what it was.”


