


It is hard to dispute that the best team in the N.H.L. this season was the Washington Capitals. They racked up 120 points, 16 more than their nearest rival.

Not every elite regular-season team in the N.H.L. has steamrollered through the playoffs. Just two of the last 10 winners of the Presidents’ Trophy, which goes to the team with the most points, also won the Stanley Cup, and several, including the Capitals in 2010, lost in the first round.

But this year’s Caps are unlikely to meet that fate; they are crushing the Flyers in Round 1 so far, going up, three games to none, on Monday night in a contentious game.

The Capitals and the Flyers are not big fans of each other, and Monday’s game turned ugly. A hard hit by the Flyers’ Ryan White that left Brooks Orpik dazed in the second period set the tone. In the third period, Pierre-Edouard Bellemare belted Caps defenseman Dmitry Orlov headfirst into the boards. Bellemare was ejected, and a brawl started with seven minutes left, leading to more ejections.

Dozens of giveaway glow-in-the-dark wristbands were hurled to the ice by angry fans stirred up by the fracas. Despite an admonishment from the public-address announcer in Philadelphia, Lou Nolan, more wristbands hit the ice when the Caps went ahead, 5-1, minutes later. The Flyers earned a penalty for the fans’ actions, leading Nolan to sarcastically say, “Way to go.”

Not every Flyer was embarrassed though:

The Capitals have outscored the Flyers, 12-2, in the series. A key has been power plays, which have given the Capitals eight goals and the Flyers none.

Nothing much has gone right for Philadelphia. In Game 2, Jason Chimera of Washington tried to knock a long pass toward the goal so that the Capitals could make a line change, but the puck squeezed through Philadelphia goalie Steve Mason’s pads instead.

The Caps this season were, as usual, led by Alex Ovechkin, who led the league in goals for the fourth straight season, with 50. Evgeny Kuznetsov had a breakthrough season at age 23 with 57 assists. Nicklas Backstrom had 50, and leads all players in the playoffs with five. And Braden Holtby was excellent in the net. The team scored the second most goals in the league and gave up the second fewest.

The Capitals franchise dates to 1974, but the team has never won the Stanley Cup and made the finals only once, when it was swept by the Red Wings in 1998.

With an eye of the playoffs, the team added some reliable veterans in the off-season, T.J. Oshie and Justin Williams, who is known as a playoff Game 7 specialist. The two have combined for five assists in the three playoff games.

Game 4 is Wednesday in Philadelphia. Bellemare had a hearing Tuesday with N.H.L.’s department of player safety about his hit on Orlov and may be suspended.

The Flyers said that there were no plans to give away more wristbands Wednesday.

Let’s hope it isn’t free puck night.


