


As the primary calendar turns to Connecticut, the Clinton campaign has enlisted a powerful new surrogate who has cut both a 30-second and 60-second ad for the campaign: a daughter of Dawn Hochsprung, the principal killed at Sandy Hook Elementary School.

On Screen

Slides of a wedding day scroll past — a bride in her white dress, smiling as she poses for a picture in sneakers. But the joyous day is quickly shrouded, somber piano chords ringing in the background. “My wedding was one of the last things I planned with my mom,” says Erica Smegielski, Ms. Hochsprung’s daughter.

The camera travels back, for a brief moment, to the scene outside Sandy Hook school, ambulances waiting outside. The text from a New York Daily News article detailing Ms. Hochsprung’s heroic efforts overlays an image of a vigil held outside the school, as her daughter says, “No one is fighting harder to reform our gun laws than Hillary Clinton.”

Scenes of Mrs. Clinton speaking from the campaign trail, including her gun violence town hall in October 2015, and a headline from The Wall Street Journal — “Hillary Clinton Challenges the Gun Lobby” — give evidence to Ms. Smegielski’s statements.

The ad closes with Mrs. Clinton and Ms. Smegielski sharing an extended embrace. “She reminds me of my mother,” Ms. Smegielski’s voice says over the footage. “She isn’t scared of anything.”

The Message

The battle over gun control has been a frequent topic on the campaign trail for Mrs. Clinton, and she said her positions on the issue are “one of my biggest contrasts with Senator Sanders.” She has been especially critical of his statements to The Daily News, in which he said that he would not hold gun manufacturers accountable or liable in the Sandy Hook shooting.

Fact Check

Mr. Sanders has defended his positions on guns, pointing to his “D-minus” rating from the National Rifle Association. He also said, “I don’t believe it is appropriate that that gun shop owner who just sold a legal weapon” should “be held accountable and be sued.”

Where

The campaign says the ads are airing in Connecticut and Rhode Island, which hold primaries next Tuesday.

Takeaway

After the 2012 massacre, Connecticut enacted some of the toughest gun control laws in the country, passing them with bipartisan support. It is a state where, after the tragedy, 93 percent of citizens supported background checks for all gun buyers, and Mrs. Clinton’s positioning on the issue should resonate there.


