


Five correction officers accused in the brutal beating of a Rikers Island inmate were convicted of all charges on Tuesday, including the most serious count of first-degree attempted gang assault, in a case that shined a harsh light on the New York City jail complex.

The inmate at the center of the case, Jahmal Lightfoot, said after the verdict that “justice got served.”

“They beat me almost to death,” he continued, “and I hope that nobody has to go through that.”

The outcome was a major victory for law enforcement officials who have struggled to successfully prosecute correction officers accused of brutality, in part because of negative perceptions and credibility problems with victims who are in jails and prisons.

“Today’s convictions make a strong statement: Savagely beating an inmate will not be tolerated in the city’s jails,” said Mark G. Peters, the commissioner of the city’s Investigation Department, which worked on the Lightfoot case.

It was also seen as the first major test for the Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, who has made prosecuting crimes committed at Rikers a priority at a time when the jail complex has come under scrutiny over what many see as an entrenched culture of violence and corruption there. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and other critics have called for its closing.

Ms. Clark, a Democrat, who had attended the opening arguments in the Lightfoot case, sat in the front row on Tuesday when the verdicts were announced.

“A Bronx jury has sent a clear message that a uniform and a badge does not absolve anyone from committing a crime,” Ms. Clark said, “and that even a criminal behind bars deserves to be treated like a human being.”

Jonathan S. Abady, a lawyer who has represented Rikers inmates in brutality cases against correction officers, said that even though he had won multimillion-dollar settlements in lawsuits against the city, few of those guards were convicted of criminal charges. “Unfortunately, successful prosecutions of correction officers for misconduct and abuse of prisoners are rare,” he said.

Prosecutors work closely with correction officers, Mr. Abady said, just as they do with the police, and have often declined to vigorously pursue charges against guards. In addition, he said, prosecutors and jurors sometimes view inmates with bias and skepticism.

“Regrettably, some people think of prisoners as less than human,” he said. “It’s very troubling and unfair, but it’s also an undeniable perspective animating these cases.”

In the past four years, in addition to the Lightfoot case, the Bronx district attorney’s office has prosecuted 26 other correction officers in cases of excessive force against inmates or suspected cover-ups. Eleven of them still have open cases. Of the remaining 15 officers, nine were convicted and six were acquitted, according to prosecutors.

The Lightfoot case is significant because of the large number and the high rank of some of the officers — an assistant chief for security and two captains — involved. The trial, which lasted more than two months, provided an unusually detailed look at the daily operations at Rikers, with about 8,000 inmates.

In addition to attempted gang assault, the jury also found Tobias Parker, Jose Parra, Eliseo Perez Jr., Alfred Rivera and David Rodriguez guilty of other charges, including attempted assault in the first degree, assault in the second degree, falsifying business records and official misconduct in the July 2012 beating of Mr. Lightfoot and an effort to cover it up.

The jury acquitted a sixth officer, Jeffrey Richard, who was not directly involved in the beating, of all charges related to the cover-up.

The verdicts for six of the nine current and former officers who were tried together were delivered by a jury in State Supreme Court in the Bronx on the fourth day of deliberations. The three other officers — Harmon Frierson, Dwayne Maynard and Gerald Vaughn — have chosen to allow the judge presiding over the trial, Justice Steven Barrett, to try them. The judge has adjourned their proceedings until Friday.

The guilty verdicts were a blow for the officers, who did not testify, and their lawyers, who had maintained that their clients committed no wrongdoing and rested their case without calling a single witness or presenting any evidence. A contingent of correction officers has faithfully attended the trial, with dozens of them packing the benches at times.

“Today’s verdict is an absolute travesty and yet another example of how correction officers are treated differently and disrespected for doing the job they are sworn to do: protect New Yorkers,” said Norman Seabrook, the president of the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association.

Glenn Garber, a lawyer for Mr. Rodriguez, had said in his summation that the prosecution’s case had ignored the dangerous environment the guards worked in, under daily threat from armed gang members. He had argued that “this is simply not the case” to make a point about the “culture of corruption” at Rikers.

The officers, who are scheduled to be sentenced in September, face up to 15 years in prison on the most serious count alone. When convicted of a felony, officers are automatically fired from their jobs under state law, according to correction officials. Even with an acquittal, an officer could still be disciplined by the department, including possibly dismissal.

A 10th officer, Michael Pollard, has also been charged in the beating but will be tried separately because of medical problems.

“We have zero tolerance for any illegal behavior on the part of staff, and the officers found guilty of felonies will be terminated,” Joseph Ponte, the correction commissioner, said. “The vast majority of our officers carry out their duties with care and integrity, and we are taking many steps to ensure that all staff adhere to the highest professionalism.”

Bronx prosecutors had contended that Mr. Perez, a former assistant chief for security, and Mr. Vaughn, a former captain, ordered five members of an elite correction squad to beat Mr. Lightfoot after he caught Mr. Perez’s eye during a search of inmates for weapons. They said that Mr. Perez thought the inmate was a tough guy and told the officers to kick his teeth in.

Mr. Lightfoot, now 31, had testified in court that it was “open season” for the officers to mercilessly pummel him with their fists and boots even as he curled up in a fetal position on the floor to shield himself. “I kept getting hit, punched and kicked all over my body,” he had said. “I couldn’t do nothing but just hold myself.”

Mr. Lightfoot suffered fractures to both eye sockets and testified that long after the beating, he spit up blood and had blurry vision and headaches. Mr. Lightfoot was sent to Rikers in 2010 after snatching a woman’s pocketbook. After the beating, he was sent to state prison. He was released in 2014.

Defense lawyers countered that Mr. Lightfoot was found with a sharp metal object during the search, and then disregarded the officers’ repeated orders to drop it. They maintained from the start that Mr. Lightfoot was injured while being forcibly restrained by officers who were simply doing their jobs.

The lawyers repeatedly sought to undermine Mr. Lightfoot’s credibility, bringing up his ties to the Bloods street gang and previous criminal history for drugs and other minor offenses. They suggested that he made up a story about being singled out and beaten, and hoped to gain financially with a pending lawsuit against the city over the attack.

As the verdicts were read on Tuesday afternoon, there were gasps from the officers’ supporters in the benches. Mr. Perez swung his head around as his wife began sobbing loudly.

Later, as Mr. Rivera left the courthouse, he said, “It’s not over.”


