


Kathryn Ainsworth Long and Andrew Drexel Allen were married May 7 at Dunwalke Farm in Far Hills, N.J., where the couple live and the groom’s family raises cattle. The Rev. Dr. Kent R. Walley, an Episcopal priest, led the ceremony.

Until April 2015, Mrs. Allen, 32, was an executive director specializing in foreign exchange in the New York offices of UBS, the Swiss bank. She helped with currency trades for institutional clients. She graduated from Harvard.

She is the daughter of Dr. Barbara M.L. Long of Atlanta and the late Ferdinand P. Schoettle Jr., who lived in Vero Beach, Fla. The bride’s mother is a psychiatrist in Atlanta who does consulting on workplace problems on behalf of companies and other organizations. She is the secretary of the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, a nonprofit group based in Dallas. The bride’s father was a professor of tax law at the University of Minnesota Law School in Minneapolis.

She is the adoptive daughter of the late Stephen B. Parker, who ran an independent executive search firm in Atlanta.

Mr. Allen, 44, is a senior vice president and a wealth management adviser in the Morristown, N.J., office of Bank of America Merrill Lynch. He is also a co-president of Dunwalke Farm. He is on the boards of Second Stage Theater in New York and the Berkshire School in Sheffield, Mass. He graduated from Rollins College in Winter Park, Fla.

The groom’s previous marriage ended in divorce.

He is a son of Elisabeth Fell Allen and Philip D. Allen of Hobe Sound, Fla. The groom’s mother is the vice-mayor of the Town of Jupiter Island in Florida. His father retired from the Dillon Trust Company in New York, which managed the Dillon family assets.

His family owns and operates Domaine Clarence Dillon, a French company that owns three Bordeaux vineyards: Château Haut-Brion, Château La Mission Haut-Brion and Château Quintus. The groom is also a descendant of Anthony J. Drexel, the 19th-century Philadelphia investment banker and philanthropist.

The couple, who were introduced in 2014 by a mutual friend, met for the first time at Cafe Boulud in New York.


