


ATLANTA — When Chris Bridges — better known to his fans as the rapper Ludacris — was growing up, his mother, Roberta Shields, made sure he knew how to swim.

Just like those who came before her.

“Swimming is generational,” said Shields, who also runs the Ludacris Foundation. “I’m blessed because my grandfather swam. His grandfather swam. It wasn’t a matter of if you’re learning to swim, but when.”

Far too many children never get that message, especially in the African-American and Hispanic communities. The result: Drowning is the leading cause of accidental death for all children ages 1 to 4, and ranks second only to car crashes for those 5 to 14, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The U.S.A. Swimming Foundation hopes that Ludacris and other celebrities can bring a little star power to its efforts to teach children how to swim through the Make a Splash program — especially in an Olympic year, when there is a lot more attention on one of the biggest sports at the Summer Games.

Judging from a recent clinic held in Atlanta, it was clear that children were more impressed when the message was delivered by someone they had heard through their headphones or seen on one of their favorite television shows.

“It’s a problem we wanted to bring to light and just do our part,” Ludacris said. “It starts in my home. I make sure my kids know how to swim. I swim.”

During a session at Georgia Tech’s aquatic center, site of the 1996 Olympic swimming events, a group of youngsters squealed in unison when they found out they would get a lesson from Blake Michael, who starred in the Disney Channel’s “Lemonade Mouth” and “Dog with a Blog.”

Sure, the four-time Olympic medalist Cullen Jones was also there — Make a Splash is one of his passions — but the 19-year-old Michael was the one who really got the children excited.

“Awesome!” Jasmin Flowers, 8, screamed when asked what it was like to get a lesson from one of her TV favorites. “I watch his show all the time.”

Michael grew up in Atlanta and competed for Dynamo Swim Club, one of the nation’s most prominent teams. He won several state titles before heading to Hollywood.

“I didn’t even realize and I think most people have no idea how important this really is,” he said.

The next day, at the Carrie Steele-Pitts Home for abandoned and neglected children on Atlanta’s west side, Ludacris and the singer-actress Keri Hilson were joined by Michael for another clinic.

Bridges changed into his swim trunks, hopped into the pool and paddled around to each group as they worked with their instructors. Before he was done, he took on Jones in a race across the 25-yard pool. The children cheered as Jones easily touched first, several seconds ahead of Ludacris.

Of course, it did not really matter who won as long as everyone understood the real message: Learning to swim is important, even if you are not the fastest one in the water.

“There are a lot of people out there that this is not second nature to, who don’t know how to swim,” said Jones, an African-American who won gold medals in both Beijing and London and will be trying to make his third Olympics when he competes at the United States trials next month.

Jones said he still had family members “who are terrified to be around the water.”

That includes his mother, who insisted that Jones learn to swim after he nearly drowned in a community pool at age 5.

“She’s getting better about it; she’s learning,” he said. “But she’s still not comfortable. God forbid if I wasn’t there.”

Hilson cut short her vacation to take part in the Make a Splash event. Like Michael, she grew up in the Atlanta area swimming competitively, joining an all-African-American team in her neighborhood. She went on to represent Georgia in the junior national championships at age 14, and several of her teammates attended college on swimming scholarships.

“I was pretty good,” said Hilson, breaking into a big smile. “I’m really proud of the exposure I got swimming, and I just want to give that back to others in my community.”

Debbie Hesse, executive director of the U.S.A. Swimming Foundation, said that it was important to get big names outside of swimming involved in the Make a Splash campaign. She noted that while Jones has some 54,000 followers on Twitter, Ludacris reaches 11.5 million.

Until now, celebrities have been reluctant to join the cause, perhaps not understanding what a serious problem drowning really is.

“But people have started to become more aware of the message, more aware of the risk,” Hesse said. “We have 3,500 people die every year from drowning. That’s 10 people every day.”

Indeed, the number of people who do not know how to swim is alarming: 70 percent of African-Americans, 60 percent of Hispanics, 40 percent of whites. What makes this even more frustrating for Hesse and others involved in the sport are studies that show swimming lessons can reduce the number of drownings by nearly 90 percent.

The foundation has conducted 44 clinics since beginning the Make a Splash program in 2009, but the Atlanta events were the first with celebrity involvement.

Hesse hopes it is not the last. She wants the glow of an Olympic year to carry on long after Rio.

“This can change the way you look at a body of water,” she said. “You can look at it as a very fun environment, one you can have a blast in, instead of one that can take your life.”


