


Last July, President Obama announced, in a video message, that he was commuting the sentences of 46 nonviolent drug offenders in federal prison. Not since the Johnson administration had so many sentences been commuted in a single day. It was a small corrective, Obama said, to the “inequities in the criminal-justice system” and the unnecessarily harsh sentences with which these men and women had been saddled. He had already commuted 30 such sentences the previous winter and has since kept going: The latest 42 grants of clemency, announced by the White House two weeks ago, brings the total to 348. More than a third of these prisoners were serving life sentences, often with no possibility of parole.

In a letter to those granted clemency last July, President Obama conceded how difficult reentry might be: “Perhaps even you are unsure how you will adjust to your new circumstances,” he wrote. The Office of the White House Counsel was already exploring ways to give those released a shot at success and, on a more basic level, how to get from whichever federal prison they had wound up in to a halfway house near their homes (often hundreds of miles away). One person the administration approached was Michael Romano, director of the Stanford Three Strikes Project, a criminal-justice group at Stanford Law School. Romano had been dealing with a similar problem in California, after petitioning for the release of thousands of prisoners under recent changes to the state’s Three Strikes Law. The only solution Romano knew of was the one he arrived at himself, somewhat inadvertently. So when the White House called, he remembers, “I just started telling them about Carlos and Roby.”

I wrote about Carlos Cervantes and Roby So in the magazine the same week that Obama made his video announcement. Since 2014, these two young men had been driving around California, picking up Third Strikers the morning they got out of prison and ushering them through their first day of freedom. Stanford originally hired Carlos and Roby just to transport these people from Point A to Point B. But Carlos and Roby each spent more than a decade in prison themselves. And their own experiences re-entering society, along with their extraordinary big-heartedness, allowed them to do a lot more. They quickly proved to be hypercompassionate Sherpas, guiding shell-shocked Third Strikers through the terrifying enormity of our world.

For someone who has spent the last 15 or 20 years behind bars, daily life is fraught with potentially demoralizing challenges. Riding along with Carlos and Roby, I watched one man wrench the front off a soap dispenser in a Denny’s men’s room because he didn’t understand it was motion-activated, then later freeze up, trying to decide between the “Colgate 2X Whitening Action” and “Colgate 360 Degree Whole Mouth Clean” and “Oral-B Indicator Contour Clean” in the toothpaste aisle at Target. Bungle enough of these encounters and a certain insecurity, or even despair, can quickly set in, compounding a feeling, typical among those recently freed from prison, that they have no legitimate place in society.

The response to the article was moving. Carlos and Roby received email from people around the country: some had recently gotten out of prison; others were asking for advice about helping a formerly incarcerated loved one readjust. A high-school theater class in Pittsburgh wrote and performed a one-act play about Carlos and Roby (or, rather, about “Carla” and “Roberta”; “Our class is almost all female,” the teacher explained.) And Hollywood pitched them television shows and documentaries. One day, Carlos and Roby texted me a selfie with Eva Longoria, whose production company ultimately optioned the story. Then, last December, I received another selfie: this time, Carlos and Roby were at the White House. The Ride Home Program, as they call their work, was going national.

The Three Strikes Project had offered to expand the program to help the President’s clemency recipients. Since last fall, Carlos and Roby have been crisscrossing America, picking up and mentoring as many clemency recipients as they can. Together with four new drivers hired by the Three Strikes Project, all of them formerly incarcerated, this new-and-improved Ride Home program has picked up 21 people at prisons the day of their release and visited with another 70 men and women shortly after. One of the team’s new drivers is Stanley Bailey, a former Third Striker whom Carlos picked up from Ironwood State Prison, in California, in October 2014. (Bailey, a former heroin addict who did 25 years, was studying for his truck drivers’ license and had just run a marathon when I met him last year. He was also the subject of a short film that accompanied the article online.)

The scenes of disorientation, joy and adjustment that they have been witnessing around the country feel somehow familiar by now: the man, for example, who had apparently forgotten what a seatbelt was or had been away so long that he never knew; or the man who, after returning home to Louisiana, confessed that he sometimes slept in the shed next to his house, because he had grown so accustomed to cramped spaces. Two weeks ago, Carlos picked up a clemency recipient named Exdonovan Peak from a federal prison in North Carolina and delivered him to Brooklyn, where Peak’s best friend since grade school — a man who he spoke to from prison once a week for 20 years — swept him into his arms. “One of the greatest hugs we’ve seen,” Carlos said.

But the sudden, cross-continental expansion of their service has pushed Carlos and Roby into some unfamiliar and befuddling situations, too. They both grew up in Los Angeles, in poor Mexican and Cambodian families, respectively, and spent most of their adult lives in prison. They’ve only been free for five years. Before they flew to Miami together for a kind of trial run last fall, Roby had been on an airplane only twice in his life. And one of those times was when he was transferred between prisons in Arizona and Oklahoma, chained up, wearing a paper jumpsuit.

Zipping all over the country, navigating rental car counters and tiny regional airports in Kentucky or Missouri or Texas, didn’t come naturally. Nor did driving through epic rain storms in Florida or New Hampshire country roads flanked by five-foot-high snow banks, traveling deep into parts of America that they never expected to see. “It’s like jungles!” Carlos told me, describing Tennessee. “Forests! You can see the nature!” In Maine, Roby said: “I almost ran into a moose! There was a big, big moose!”

Even more surreal have been their visits to the White House. In December, Carlos and Roby traveled to Washington with Romano and other Three Strikes Project staff members to meet with officials of the White House Counsel’s office and the Department of Justice. They were taken to lunch at the White House Mess, next to the Situation Room, and drank coffee out of to-go cups branded with the presidential seal. Then, in March, Carlos spoke at a White House briefing on life after clemency, along with Valerie Jarrett, senior advisor to the President, and the White House counsel Neil Eggleston. MC Hammer was also there; Carlos fist-bumped him. Carlos told me he spent the morning before the event hustling around a Ross Dress for Less with one of the clemency recipients they had picked up, trying to find the guy a sport coat. The man had been invited to speak, too, but was tripped up by the phrase “business casual.” The following month, Roby, who wasn’t able to go to the event because he couldn’t get off work at his day job in television production, was invited back to receive a “Champions of Change” award. In an email, Eggleston told me, “Carlos and Roby are two examples of why President Obama believes so strongly in the importance of second chances.”

One thing I learned, riding along with Carlos and Roby last year, was that the fundamental, stable sense of self that most of us take for granted doesn’t switch back on all at once when a person walks out of prison after so many years. It takes some coaxing to remember what being free even feels like. Carlos and Roby admitted they were still going through that process themselves: Every time a bunch of lawyers at Stanford trusted them to pick someone up, they told me, it reinforced their image of themselves as responsible, ordinary members of society. Now, I asked Carlos, given everything that’s happened in the last year, were there moments when he caught himself feeling this kind of validation even more profoundly? He told me that, honestly, somewhere along the way, he must have stopped registering those milestones. Maybe he didn’t need those reminders the way he used to, he said.

“Sometimes my wife stops me and tells me: ‘You’re talking like you’re from the outside world. You’re talking like a normal person,’” Carlos said. The other day, for example, they were at a little doughnut shop in Los Angeles, and Carlos, flummoxed, asked the person behind the counter: “You guys don’t make Americanos?” He wasn’t being snooty, just genuinely surprised; it was the sort of place he expected to make Americanos.

Gabrielle, his wife, rolled her eyes. “What are you even talking about?” she said. He spent 11 years drinking terrible instant coffee in prison. Now look at him, holding up the doughnut line.

“I became an American, I guess,” Carlos told me. “I became a free person.”


