


CHICAGO — Ethan Winnett, a 31-year-old from Waukegan, Ill., said that if Senator Bernie Sanders endorsed Hillary Clinton after his decades as a progressive champion, it would amount to nothing short of “a betrayal of all of his principles.”

Virginia Ramos Rios, 44, who was a Sanders field organizer in California and New York, said it would be a “hard pill to swallow.”

And of their fellow Sanders supporters now throwing their support to Mrs. Clinton? “Disgusting,” said John Flaherty, 63, a retired photographer from Wayland, Mass.

One of the last remaining questions of the Democratic presidential primary season is how many of the 12 million people who voted for Mr. Sanders will back his opponent, Mrs. Clinton, now that she is the presumptive nominee.

And if interviews with about a dozen Sanders supporters who gathered here this weekend are any indication, the “Bernie or Bust” component of his large following will survive past the summer, even if Mr. Sanders eventually endorses Mrs. Clinton.

“He’s been fighting against the 1 percent, and Hillary has become the 1 percent,” said Mr. Winnett, an unemployed computer engineer. “She’s become everything that we’re against.”

Mr. Sanders has yet to concede the nomination, though in a speech streamed live last week to more than 200,000 viewers, he hinted that he might endorse Mrs. Clinton, saying, “The major political task that we face in the next five months is to make certain that Donald Trump is defeated and defeated badly.”

Mr. Sanders’s advisers say that before he throws his support behind Mrs. Clinton, he is seeking assurances that she and the Democratic Party will embrace some of his ideas. Much of his speech was devoted to urging his followers to continue fighting for causes like universal health care, free public college and an end to fracking, regardless of who wins the general election in November.

That happened to be the theme of the gathering this weekend, which was called “The People’s Summit” and drew thousands of people to McCormick Place, a large conference center in Chicago. Against a backdrop of Twister games, Lego sculptures and beanbag throwing contests, they talked about pushing progressive ideals.

The event, which was organized by National Nurses United, a labor union that campaigned heavily for Mr. Sanders, featured discussions about how to encourage like-minded people to run for local offices and to push groups to work together on issues like racial justice, income inequality and electoral changes. One session included discussion of protest methods, using mock sit-ins and arrests, for the Democratic National Convention next month in Philadelphia.

Panels included “The Robin Hood Tax: Challenging Wall Street, Neo-Liberalism and Perpetual Debt” and “Ending Voter Suppression, Mass Incarceration, Deportations and Gender Inequality.”

Mr. Sanders did not attend, though “Bernie 2016” hats, buttons and pins were easy to spot, and songs from the senator’s rallies, like Simon and Garfunkel’s “America,” blasted through speakers. Conference attendees effortlessly repeated elements of his stump speech — “rigged economy,” “a corrupt campaign finance system.”

Some of Mr. Sanders’s Democratic surrogates did show up, like Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii and Nina Turner, a former Ohio state senator who delivered a fiery speech urging people not to allow the party to return to “business as usual.”

The question of whether to support Mrs. Clinton in November was not an official topic of discussion, but it was on a lot of minds nonetheless.

“I’m very frustrated by people who are like, ‘Vote blue, no matter who,’” Ms. Ramos Rios said. “I feel like we are being threatened with the boogeyman of the dream state and not confronting the actual difficulty that we have in front of us, which is we are being ruled by an oligarchy.”

Some at the Chicago gathering said they might vote for a third-party candidate. Others said they would write in Mr. Sanders’s name. (None of the people interviewed said they would vote for Mr. Trump.)

Curtis Anderson, 29, an estate groundskeeper from Plainfield, Ill., said that he would vote for Mrs. Clinton, but that that was about all he would do for her. “I campaigned 500 hours for Bernie,” he said. “I wouldn’t campaign five minutes for Hillary.”

Naomi Klein, a progressive author, spoke on Friday night at a panel about the way some of Mr. Sanders’s supporters were feeling. “Let’s not be afraid to admit that we come here wounded and that we also come here in pain,” she said. “We are grieving political losses, dreams tantalizingly tasted but ultimately unrealized.”

Polls suggest that a large majority of people who voted for Mr. Sanders will back Mrs. Clinton, and in tight races in swing states, her campaign will welcome that support.

On the opening panel Friday night, the journalist Juan Gonzalez said that he belonged to the antiwar group Students for a Democratic Society in 1968, and that like some other members, he sat out the presidential election that fall. Richard M. Nixon beat Hubert H. Humphrey by less than a percentage point, and Mr. Gonzalez said he wondered whether the result could have been different.

“Our slogan was, ‘Vote with your feet. Vote in the street,’” he said. “I’m here to tell you that the slogan was right. The tactic was wrong.”

“Hopefully,” he added, “other generations learn from the mistakes of those who came before them.”

It was not clear if that argument held much sway with the Chicago crowd.

“If we get Trump, then we’ve gotten the country we deserve,” Mr. Winnett said. “It’s not the fault of the Bernie Sanders supporters. It’s the fault of the Democrats for choosing Hillary Clinton.”


