


Rock am Ring/Rock im Park Various venues, June 3-5

This two-pronged music festival takes place simultaneously on an air force base in Mendig, Germany, and in the central German city of Nuremberg, about 200 miles away. Roughly the same groups appear in each locale. Acts in this year’s dance and house music-heavy lineup include Major Lazer, Panic! at the Disco, the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Rudimental. rock-am-ring.com, rock-im-park.com

Botticelli Reimagined Victoria and Albert Museum, through July 3

This exhibition examines the legacy of the 15th-century Florentine artist through works that he produced and art that he inspired. Even though major works like “Venus” are on view, the show explores how the 19th-century British painters known as the Pre-Raphaelites revived Botticelli’s reputation in the Victorian age, and how his work has made its way into pop art and contemporary fashion since then.vam.ac.uk/botticelli

Tell Me a Story: Locality and Narrative Rockbund Art Museum, May 28-Aug. 14

Artists from countries across Asia are on view in this multimedia show, which focuses on how their work responds to the regions they come from and the areas in which they work. The exhibition includes photographs of the Russian island of Sakhalin by the Japanese photographer Tomoko Yoneda; a video work that shows the interior of a Thai temple by the artist Apichatpong Weerasethakul; and “Hong Kong is Land,” an installation piece by the duo known as MAP Office, who created a map of an imaginary, future Hong Kong. rockbundartmuseum.org

Ai Weiwei Museum of Cycladic Art, through Oct. 30.

The Chinese artist Ai Weiwei, who recently set up an art studio on the Greek island of Lesbos to document the arrival of refugees, created new work for this exhibition, drawing inspiration from the museum’s collection of archaeological artifacts to make his pieces. Some of his best known works, like “Grapes” and “Cao” (which shows blades of grass carved from marble), are also on display. The museum focuses on the artwork produced by the Cycladic culture, which ruled in the region several thousand years ago. aiweiwei.cycladic.gr/en/

Primavera Sound Parc del Fòrum, June 1-5

Dance music stars from far and wide will descend on Barcelona for this music festival, widely regarded as southern Europe’s leading indie music affair. Some bigger names have joined the lineup in recent years. This year’s festival includes Destroyer, led by Dan Bejar; the London rockers Savages; and the much-adored Radiohead. A more intimate edition of the festival in Porto, Portugal, with about one third the number of acts, including Battles, Beach House, Moderat and Savages, takes place June 9 to 11. primaverasound.com

Noguchi’s Playscapes Museo Tamayo, through Oct. 9

The Japanese-American artist Isamu Noguchi (1904-1988) is known in part for his playgrounds: Artfully designed pieces that served as both public art and structures for children and adults to play on. This exhibition includes sketches and models of these works, as well as some scale replicas, on view in the museum and around Chapultepec, the major city park that houses the museum. museotamayo.org

HowTheLightGetsIn Various venues, May 26-June 5

This unusual event bills itself as the “world’s largest philosophy and music festival,” and includes a mix of talks, concerts, circus and other varieties of performance. Lectures include “Quantum Whispers,” a talk with the physicist Lev Vaidman on the possibility of teleportation, and a lecture from the British Labour Party politician Chi Onwurah on “Democracy and Digitalization.” Rachel Sermanni, King Charles, the fusion band Sifaka and the D.J. duo known as Zero 7 will perform.howthelightgetsin.iai.tv

Holland Festival, Various venues, June 4-26

Experimental theater, movies starring puppets, chamber music concerts and contemporary ballet will all play a part in this spring festival. The event includes works produced by the Netherlands’ leading arts organizations, like the Dutch National Ballet, along with some major names from abroad. hollandfestival.nl

Odyssey: Navigating Nameless Seas Singapore Art Museum, June 4- Aug. 28

This maritime-themed group show will focus on the ocean and will feature work by around a dozen artists. Among them are Sally Smart, whose works include the 2009 installation “The Exquisite Pirate,” and Wyn-Lyn Tan, who has made intricate, acrylic renderings of water. The museum’s contemporary art wing, 8Q, is simultaneously hosting “Imaginarium: Over the Ocean, Under the Sea,” a show about the ocean geared toward children. singaporeartmuseum.sg


