


Once a year, like an alarm clock that goes berserk on schedule, a thing called Maker Faire sets up in Queens. The Faire is science, dressed up as carnival and art and cartwheeling. There is, for instance, a life-size mousetrap arranged in a giant circle. A bowling ball drops, as it must, from a platform. It lands on a trigger, which flips another level, and 700 feet and a dizzying array of simple machines later, a bank safe drops onto a taxicab.

There is a lock-picking workshop. Do-it-yourself electronics with open-source circuit boards. Workshops on 3-D printing. Drones. A Bellagio-style fountain of Mentos-foaming Coke bottles.

For two days every autumn since 2010, the Faire has been held at the New York Hall of Science, housed in Queens at the site of the 1964 New York World’s Fair in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. Last year, the Faire had 95,000 visitors, according to the Hall of Science.

But this year, the organizers of the Faire, scheduled for Oct. 1 and 2, have run into the extraordinary obstacle of a professional baseball team in possession of a sweetheart lease underwritten by the public. The New York Mets and the team’s various business arms control a million-square-foot parking lot — built by the public, on publicly owned land, but operated by the Mets, who collect virtually all the money from it.

Parking is New York bullion.

“We were informed that Founders Entertainment intends to produce a massive music event that will take away virtually all of the parking lot space at Citi Field on the same weekend as Maker Faire,” Dan Wempa, a vice president of the Hall of Science, said.

The logistics of putting on Maker Faire are no simpler than creating a 700-foot-long mousetrap that starts with a bowling ball and ends with a bank safe. Flushing and Corona meet at a crowded corner of the city; that time of year, it is especially busy with the Mets, down the block from the Hall of Science, and the United States Open tennis tournament, next door.

“We choose our Maker Faire date for the following year once the Major League Baseball schedule has been published, to pick a weekend when the Mets are out of town,” Mr. Wempa said.

Why?

“That’s what gives us our ability to have access to the parking at Citi Field,” Mr. Wempa said.

In years past, people have come from 47 states and a few dozen countries, and many of them are not taking the No. 7 train. So a place for cars is essential for the gathering. The parking is not charity, by the way: The Mets get the money from the fees paid by people who use the lot.

Mr. Wempa said the Mets were informed of the date for the 2016 Faire last year, as were the police and parks departments and elected officials. Only on Monday of this week, Mr. Wempa said, did he learn that the Mets had plans to rent out the parking lots for a music festival. The festival plans anticipate 35,000 to 50,000 people for two 11-hour days of music, food and drink.

For a number of years, until the team got better, the parking lots were among the most valuable parts of the Mets franchise. The city paid to tear down Shea Stadium in 2008 and pave over the ground for parking. The Mets were given the rights to the first $7 million in revenue. Above that, the city is supposed to get a share. (Last year, when nearly 2.6 million people went to games at Citi Field, the city got $392,000.)

Baseball is just one way businesses like the Mets make money. Through a company called Metropolitan Hospitality, the stadium is rented out for film shoots, parties and concerts.

So is the gigantic parking lot, the company says on its website: “Set up tents for vendors, host a ride and drive or create a big obstacle course all around our ballpark!”

Or hold a music festival. No doubt it is more profitable than collecting $10, or whatever, from people parking at Maker Faire. Still, one wonders how the Mets expect the neighborhood to absorb tens of thousands of people at a music festival while 100,000 are at the fair. A team spokesman declined to be quoted, but expressed earnest affection for the Hall of Science; the Mets have a representative on the hall’s board. (Three years ago, the hall published an interactive book I wrote.)

It’s a case of the nerds against the jocks. Or nerds against the rockers. Unless they’re careful, a bank safe is liable to land on someone’s head.


