


FRONT PAGE

An article on May 29 about a funding crisis at the City University of New York misstated the academic discipline of Stephen Brier, a CUNY professor who spoke about the system’s financial straits. He specializes in urban education, not education. The article also omitted a word from the title of Mr. Brier’s forthcoming book. It is “Austerity Blues: Fighting for the Soul of Public Higher Education” (not merely “Public Education”).

METROPOLITAN

A museums and galleries listing in the Long Island Calendar in some editions last Sunday about “Recess,” an art exhibition in East Hampton, misidentified the venue. The gallery at 87 Newtown Lane is Harper’s Books, not Glenn Horowitz Bookseller. The listing also misstated contact information for the venue. The telephone is (631) 324-1131 and the website is harpersbooks.com.

•

An article in some editions last Sunday about family-run Italian restaurants in Westchester County misstated the given name of a daughter of Maurice Giliberti, the owner of Sam’s in Dobbs Ferry. She is Melissa Giliberti, not Megan.

SPORTS

An article last Sunday about Garbiñe Muguruza’s victory over Serena Williams in the final of the French Open misstated, in some copies, the point in Williams’s career when she began working with her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou. It was in 2012 after losing in the first round of the French Open — not in 2014 after she lost at three major tournaments in a row.

SUNDAY BUSINESS

An article on May 29 about the economic costs of long security lines at airports gave an outdated figure for the fee that the Transportation Security Administration imposes on airline tickets. It is now $6.50 per flight leg, no longer $2.50. The article also referred incorrectly to a request for the T.S.A. to publish accurate data about lines at airport security checkpoints. It was a lobbying group, Airlines for America, not American Airlines, that made the request. Also, the group asked that the data be made more freely available. It did not specify how the T.S.A. should collect it.

•

An article last Sunday about signs of rising wages as the labor market tightens misspelled the surname of the Economic Policy Institute’s director of research and policy, who tracks wage trends. He is Josh Bivens, not Bevins.

MAGAZINE

A picture caption on June 5 with an article about living in New York City at 800 feet described incorrectly the construction workers shown at 3 World Trade Center. They are workers who install rebar in concrete and create walls; they are not ironworkers.

REAL ESTATE

A picture last Sunday with the Hunt column, about Richard Zoglin’s search for an Upper West Side apart-ment, was published in error. The photograph showed a building at 170 Amsterdam Avenue — not the Aire, an apartment building on West 67th Street that he considered. A picture of the Aire can be found at nytimes.com/realestate.

ARTS & LEISURE

An article on May 22 about the remake of the mini-series “Roots” misstated the name of the ranch where the original series was filmed. It was Hunter Ranch — not Disney Ranch, which was used as a location for “Roots: The Next Generation.”

•

An article last Sunday about the Performance Mix Festival misstated the surname of the festival curator. She is Karen Bernard, not Barnard.

•

Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about recent and coming portrayals of Charles Manson in television and film misstated the title of Karina Longworth’s podcast about Hollywood. It is “You Must Remember This” — not “Charles Manson’s Hollywood,” which was the name of a 12-part series on the podcast. The article also misquoted Jeremy Rosen, a producer of the film “The Family.” He cited “Making a Murderer,” not “Making a Murder,” when talking about a recent surge in interest in shows about cult leaders and serial killers.

BOOK REVIEW

A review on May 29 about “From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime,” by Elizabeth Hinton, re-ferred incorrectly to the Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Offenses Control Act of 1961. It was passed by Congress, as all federal acts must be; it was not established by John F. Kennedy’s executive order.

•

Because of an editing error, a roundup review of cookbooks on June 5 misstated the surname of the author of “Vegan, Vegetarian, Omnivore” at one point. As the review correctly noted else-where, she is Anna Thomas, not Madison. (A book by Deborah Madison was mentioned in the same part of the review.)

TRAVEL

The cover article on May 29 about Vladimir and Véra Nabokov’s cross-country journeys to the American West, during which the author researched “Lolita,” misidentified the country where “Lolita” was first published. It is France, not England.

•

An article on June 5 about Berlin playgrounds misidentified the location of a local playground. It is behind the marketplace at Winterfeldt-platz, a square — not at Wittenbergplatz, an-other square where there is no playground.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


