


Mayor Bill de Blasio addressed a closed-door crowd of roughly 600 in a Brooklyn bowling alley on Thursday night for a birthday party that doubled as a fund-raiser and an early rally for his 2017 re-election campaign.

To a room packed with supporters — lobbyists and actors, taxi drivers and public-relations experts — Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, pitched his run for a second term as essentially defensive, urging those in the crowd to help stand with him against the “powerful forces” arrayed against the “progressive change” brought by his administration. “These changes will not last if we are not strong and we are not vigilant,” he said, his voice stretching into a campaign cadence. “The billionaire class does not give in easily to a progressive agenda.”

As he had done in his 2013 campaign, Mr. de Blasio incorporated his family from the start. His wife, Chirlane McCray, introduced the celebrity draw for the $100-minimum-donation event, the comedian Louis C.K. During his 14-minute speech, the mayor brought out his son, Dante, now in college, whose presence in campaign advertisements helped secure victory, and tousled his hair.

The event was the first hosted by Mr. de Blasio, who turned 55 on May 8, since a raft of investigations into aspects of his fund-raising by state agencies, the Manhattan district attorney and the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York came to light starting last month.

Neither Mr. de Blasio nor Louis C.K., who introduced the mayor, directly addressed the inquiries, though they appeared to shadow the event, which was closed to the news media. (Tickets were on sale to anyone, and a video was later made public.) The specter of those inquiries as well as the reality of negative headlines appeared to animate both Mr. de Blasio and Ms. McCray.

“Despite the negativity, the feeding frenzy among the elite, there’s something I want you to know about Bill,” she said in her five-minute speech. “Bill never backs down from a fight.”

Mr. de Blasio said he expected to face challengers during his re-election campaign. “And those other candidates will be well-connected,” he said. “They’ll be well funded. They’ll have deep ties to Wall Street and Albany and Washington.”

Though the event, held at Brooklyn Bowl in the Williamsburg neighborhood, was never sold out, a spokesman for the mayor’s campaign, Dan Levitan, said more people had bought tickets than could be accommodated in the portion of the cavernous space reserved for it. (The bowling area remained blocked off from those at the fund-raiser.)

Some came for Louis C.K., whose expletive-filled ode to New York as an “equalizing city” and Mr. de Blasio as the “nerd” and “goofball mayor” digressed into other curiosities of city life: train troubles and the ineffectiveness of 311; what parts of duck anatomy can be bought for consumption in Chinatown; and how Polish sandwich makers in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, make sandwiches (only one way).

Others, like more than a dozen City Hall staff members, attended out of professional obligation. Beer and wine were free. A line for the food stretched and moved slowly. Bowling pins clattered in the alleys to the right of the stage before the speeches began. Conversation continued at a dull murmur throughout.

Mr. de Blasio articulated a kind of campaign theme before closing his speech. “We’ve come too far to turn back,” he said of his administration’s accomplishments. “Now it is our mission to make it stick.”


