


The Big 12 Conference will play a championship football game in 2017. What remains unclear is whether it will still be a 10-team league.

While the Big 12 board of directors made the decision to resurrect the title game, the league’s spring meeting in Irving, Tex., ended with expansion a lingering issue.

“I’ll just say we’re not ready to vote on expansion,” said David Boren, Oklahoma’s president and the chairman of the league’s board.

Boren left his first spring meeting as the board’s chairman saying the conference had “never been stronger” and had sent a message that it was around to stay. The league will divide a record $304 million in revenue, about $30.4 million per university, for the 2015-16 academic year.

RAIDERS’ MOVE HINGES ON PUBLIC FUNDING The Oakland Raiders owner Mark Davis said a $750 million public contribution toward a stadium was “the bottom line” on whether the team would make Las Vegas its new home, The Las Vegas Sun reported.

The Raiders want to move because Oakland has not made significant progress toward building a new stadium. The Las Vegas Sands casino company owned by the billionaire Sheldon Adelson was championing a domed stadium that would cost more than $1.4 billion.

The rookie Tyler White was the victim of a prank that left his sport-utility vehicle on the warning track in center field at Houston’s Minute Maid Park before a 6-5 win over the Oakland Athletics.

Some of the Astros’ veterans, led by the ace Dallas Keuchel, orchestrated the prank.

Keuchel said, “As long as you don’t take it out of context, it’s all fun and games, and it makes you a little bit stronger.”

White was not amused, and he fumed as he made the walk from home plate to the outfield in an attempt to move the vehicle. But he could not find the keys and soon retreated to the clubhouse. A team employee finally moved it, but not before Houston center fielder Carlos Gomez hit a ball that landed on top of it. Keuchel said the perpetrators would pay for any damage the stunt had caused.

ORTIZ’S R.B.I. TOTAL GROWS David Ortiz added two more R.B.I. to his torrid start in what he has said will be his final season, Mookie Betts had two hits and drove in two runs, and the Red Sox beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 6-4, in Boston.

Ortiz, 40, entered the day leading the majors in R.B.I. and raised his total to 53, helping the Red Sox halt a three-game skid.

STRASBURG’S STREAK ENDS Stephen Strasburg gave up Joey Votto’s two-run homer and limped off the field a few pitches later as the host Cincinnati Reds overcame two rain delays to beat the Washington Nationals, 6-3.

The Nationals had won Strasburg’s past 15 starts, which was the longest active streak in the major leagues.

“I just got real dehydrated out there,” said Strasburg, who threw 97 pitches on a muggy afternoon.

Reliever Felipe Rivero took the loss for the Nationals.

Sebastien Bourdais of France raced to his first IndyCar victory of the season, beating Conor Daly of the United States by two seconds, at Belle Isle in Detroit.

Bourdais had not led a lap in any of the season’s first six races, and he had not finished higher than eighth. Bourdais led only 12 of the 70 laps on the 2.35-mile street course, but he was able to hold on after Daly made a pit stop on Lap 61 and gave up the lead.

Karine Icher of France matched the Bay Course record with a nine-under-par 62 to take the second-round lead at the ShopRite L.P.G.A. Classic in Galloway Township, N.J.

Icher, 31, who is winless on the tour, had nine birdies in a 13-hole stretch in a round that started on No. 10 at Stockton Seaview.

Haru Nomura of Japan, a two-time winner this year, and Na Yeon Choi of South Korea were a stroke back at 11 under.

A RECORD-BREAKING DAY IN IOWA Billy Andrade broke the course record with a nine-under 63 for a share of the second-round lead with Joe Durant and Todd Hamilton at the PGA Tour Champions’ Principal Charity Classic in Des Moines.

Harzand overcame a prerace scare and held off the fast-finishing favorite, US Army Ranger, to win the English Derby, Britain’s richest horse race.

Harzand had a front foot iced after losing a shoe on the way to the racecourse in Epsom, England.

There was doubt whether Harzand would be included in the 16-horse field, but his team got him to the starting line in time to run a perfect race in front of an estimated 125,000 spectators, including Queen Elizabeth II.

First prize was $1.27 million.


