


FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on May 18 about signs that the Islamic State is on the defensive in Iraq, but by no means in its death throes, carried an erroneous dateline. The reporter, Tim Arango, reported from Istanbul, not Baghdad.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on May 17 about the Eurovision Song Contest, in which a singer from Ukraine unexpectedly upset the odds-on favorite, a Russian, referred incorrectly to changes in the contest this year. Contest organizers changed the way the votes were tabulated: Votes by viewer polls and by a five-member jury in each participating country were presented separately, instead of being combined. The popular vote/jury vote system was not introduced this year.

NEW YORK

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Saturday about expectations of a quieter Belmont Stakes this year misstated the projections for attendance that day. While 46,000 tickets had been sold as of Friday, more people were expected to attend; the number of attendees was not expected to be 46,000. (Officials later announced that paid attendance was just over 61,000; more than 100,000 have attended some years.)

SPORTS

An article in some editions on Saturday about San Jose Sharks goaltender Martin Jones referred incorrectly to the playoff performances of his teammates Logan Couture and Joe Pavelski. Couture was the postseason leader in points and Pavelski was the leader in goals, not the other way around.

•

The On Boxing column last Wednesday, about the golden era of the heavyweight division, misspelled, in some copies, the given name of one of Muhammad Ali’s opponents. He is Earnie Shavers, not Ernie.

•

A report in the Scoreboard column in some editions on June 4 about the United States men’s soccer team’s 2-0 loss to Colombia in the opening game of the Copa América tournament misstated the frequency of the tournament. While it has been played the past two years, it is not an annual event. (The tournament has been played at various intervals during its 100-year history.)

THE ARTS

A theater review on Tuesday about “The Taming of the Shrew,” at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, misstated the date the play opened. It was Monday night, not Tuesday night.

•

A Critic’s Notebook article on Saturday about some museum-quality shows at art galleries in Manhattan misstated a date in the title of the show at the Edward Tyler Fine Art gallery. It is “Ed Ruscha: Ribbon Words: 1966-1973” (not “1967-1973”). The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.

SCIENCE TIMES

The Personal Health column on Tuesday, about transgender individuals, used an outdated psychiatric term in some editions to refer to feeling a mismatch between one’s gender identity and biological sex. It is gender dysphoria, no longer gender identity disorder.

•

A picture credit on June 7 with an article about a new theory on black holes misstated the photographer’s middle initial. Two photographs, of several scientists, were taken by Anna N. Zytkow, not Anna M.

OPINION

An Op-Ed article on Friday, about the efforts to recall the judge in the Stanford rape case, misidentified the site of an online recall petition. It is Change.org, not Change.com.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


