


As a child, I was pro-carrot in any form. My birthday cake was always raisin-studded carrot cake with cream cheese frosting, and I had no complaints with cooked carrots, especially well-buttered ones.

These days, my inclination is toward preparations that mitigate a carrot’s innate sweetness, which I sometimes find a bit monochromatic (even with prestigious multicolored heirloom carrots). Rather than plain raw or plainly simmered, I crave a carrot with zip. Carrot juice doesn’t tempt me at all, generally speaking, but if it did, it would need goosing up with salt, cayenne and acid.

So I go for garlicky, lemony carrot salads or vinegar-laced carrot pickles or well-roasted caramelized carrots. I like them sautéed with anchovy, capers and parsley or smeared with a kicky red pepper paste. Among the virtues of the carrot is its versatility — the possibilities are limitless.

Now that we’re on the cusp of a new season, since spring produce is fading and most of the summer vegetables are still weeks away, it’s a good time to appreciate just-harvested new-crop carrots.

Long and slender, these carrots obviously taste better, fresher than the fat ones in jumbo bags. (Don’t get me started on those so-called baby carrots in the cellophane bags — we all know they’re whittled from giant carrots in some baby carrot factory, impervious to seasoning and appreciated only for their grab-and-go convenience.)

I have a friend who makes a lovely, delicate buttery carrot risotto, turned golden with carrot purée and flecked with chives and chervil. These young debutante carrots would be perfect for that.

And yet, what I really craved from the carrots in my market basket was carrot soup. Not the cloying, overly sweet, one-dimensional, too-thick, porridge-like generic carrot soup. I wanted a carrot soup with character, with sunny assertive Indian spices (turmeric, coriander, mustard, cumin), a touch of coconut and a squeeze of lime; a soup with the supple consistency of heavy cream but without dairy.

We happily had it for dinner, piping hot from the pot. But the next day, when the weather turned warm, it was even better served chilled.

Recipe: Spiced Carrot Soup With Lime | More Soups


