


“Swiftly fly the years,” goes the poignant lyric in the song “Sunrise, Sunset” from the enduring musical “Fiddler on the Roof.”

Swiftly have flown the 43 years since Mrs. Levine’s students sang those words in their ambitious 1973 version of “Fiddler” at Shell Bank Junior High School, in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.

Their production featured a single piano accompanist, a flimsy set and cobbled-together costumes, but to the adolescent students who starred in it, it felt like a full-fledged professional version.

Several members of the cast managed to find one another online in recent months and arranged to buy tickets to see the latest revival on Broadway. Now, more than four decades later, here was the same cast, in their mid-50s, gathering in Midtown Manhattan on Sunday afternoon for a reunion.

They drove in from Westchester County, Long Island and upstate New York, and flew in from Toronto and Tampa, Fla.

Even the now-retired Mrs. Levine drove into the city from her home in New Hampshire, and some of her former students discovered her first name was Diana.

Most in the group had not seen one another since their school years in Brooklyn. There were hugs, laughs and some tears. As they did back then, they called one another by their stage names from the show.

“I’m known among these folks as the Fiddler,” said Valerie Schaer-Mirels, who in the 1973 production played her student violin, which she still owns, and stood precariously on a ladder.

Even as many of them went on to Sheepshead Bay High School, the show became “this thing that tied us together,” said Ms. Schaer-Mirels, now a television executive who cut short a trip to Toronto to make the reunion.

The musical pushed her in the direction of a career in show business and the media, she told Mrs. Levine, who beamed.

The old neighborhood was mostly Jewish, but the “Fiddler” cast was diverse, including some Italian-Americans and black students. An African-American student played the rabbi role, former cast members recalled.

“It was an interracial family,” said Nancy Libow, 55, who played Yente, the matchmaker. Apparently her theatrical experience did not translate to real life.

“You know how many couples I’ve set up in my life? Zero,” said Ms. Libow, who teaches English in Yonkers.

Seth Goldman said he did his best Zero Mostel imitation to win the part of Tevye, the dairyman Mr. Mostel played memorably on Broadway in the 1960s.

In raising his daughters, Tevye struggles to keep his Jewish traditions intact. The girls seek to marry for love in pre-revolution Russia, where the family farm is located.

Mr. Goldman said the musical raised similar questions for him, including the time he was scolded by his rabbi after rehearsals caused him to miss studying for his bar mitzvah.

“He said to me, ‘What’s more important, “Fiddler on the Roof” or your bar mitzvah?’ I said, ‘Fiddler,’” recalled Mr. Goldman, who would go on to enter the theater and restaurant industries.

On Sunday, as the group gathered outside, near the Broadway Theater, Mr. Goldman showed his fellow cast members the many photos of the old production that his family took and collected in an album.

“Hey, we were a Brooklyn Jewish family, and I was playing Tevye,” he said. “It doesn’t get more important than that.”

Michael Pollack, a marketing executive, handed everyone “press kits” he said he made, which included a copy of his old libretto, signed by the cast, and a description of this “Miracle of Miracles.”

Mr. Pollack, who played Perchik, a radical student, was the main organizer of the reunion. He said reconnecting through the old play “just blows the dust off” the old relationships.

The middle school production saw exactly one weekend of performances and a modest tour of local grammar schools and nursing homes. But as the years passed, it became a touchstone of their Brooklyn childhoods, and a memorable achievement during a formative and poignant time in their lives.

Many of the cast members came from Eastern European families for whom certain themes in “Fiddler” — anti-Semitism, challenging tradition and defying one’s parents, for instance — were particularly resonant.

“Even though it was middle school in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, it’s amazing how everyone related to the story,” said Susan Feiner, who played Shprintze.

“Everyone went their own way and went against tradition,” said Ms. Feiner, of Manhattan, who was inspired to become a cabaret singer.

For Carol Abenanti, who played Hodel, the experience helped her overcome shyness, especially when Mr. Pollack, as Perchik, initiated dancing with her onstage. On Sunday, he did it again, and she laughed.

“He made me realize I could get over myself and just do it,” said Ms. Abenanti, of Washingtonville, N.Y.

The cast members laughed about how closely they retained aspects of the characters they played.

As a girl, Meryl Tenenbaum played Chava, the daughter who married a non-Jew. In real life, she went on to marry an Irishman from Long Island and became Meryl Cassidy. She became a social worker and the director of a crisis intervention service.

“I really took the role to heart,” she said with a laugh.

Outside the theater, the group met another cast member, Ilene Harrison, who had flown in from Tampa, and they all filed into the theater and took their orchestra seats to experience their musical together again, more than four decades later.


