


Pop stardom is confusing, messy, thankless work, equal parts exultation and excoriation. Just ask Justin Bieber, playing to sold-out arenas of shrieking young women one day, feeding squirrels and walking barefoot through a city that’s not his home the next, then posting notes online about how fans who want pictures with him will no longer be allowed them, lest he lose whatever is left of his soul.

Not every pop star suffers such meltdowns, but the scrutiny is persistent. And yet there is no shortage of applicants for the role, even those who know better, or at least know different.

That craving underpins the new albums by Meghan Trainor and Mike Posner — pop stars who aren’t quite — albeit in opposite ways. Ms. Trainor found unlikely fame with “All About That Bass,” which reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 in 2014, and her second major-label album, “Thank You” (out Friday), is an attempt to solidify her presence in pop’s most rarefied ranks.

Mr. Posner just released his second major-label album, “At Night, Alone.,” almost six years after his first, and it largely shrugs at the sort of fame Ms. Trainor is openly chasing with a set of self-eviscerating songs about tattered pride.

Ms. Trainor hasn’t arrived at her internal reassessment yet — she’s just now securing her footing. Four tracks from her 2015 major-label debut album, “Title,” hit the top 15, but her songs were sometimes accused of retrograde gender politics: As a pop star, she was about five decades behind, sociologically.

Not surprisingly, “Thank You” is a warp-speed trip to the feminist present, a world in which Beyoncé and Rihanna teach class and take names. Ms. Trainor, for her part, attends class and takes notes, which is better than playing hooky. “NO,” the first single from this album, went to No. 3 on the Hot 100, and is the sort of song you might write for a Broadway musical about a Beyoncé-like figure, or perhaps for an episode of “Empire.”

In it, Ms. Trainor brushes off a suitor — “My name is no/My sign is no/My number is no” — with the same fervor she sought one on her debut. She sings her own background harmony vocals, a Destiny’s Child of one.

The production — by Ricky Reed, who handles almost all of this album — is convincing mid-2000s pop-leaning R&B, nuanced in a way Ms. Trainor is not. She has a round and slightly stodgy voice that’s most effective when it aims lowest, as on the winning novelty song “Dance Like Yo Daddy,” full of quizzical dance instructions (“Can you overbite? Can you old man overbite?”) and doo-wop harmonies over a skronking sax and sock-hop swing.

Elsewhere on this spotty album, Ms. Trainor grinds her way through tough-stand songs like “Watch Me Do,” a homage to Destiny’s Child’s “Independent Women (Part 1),” and “Me Too,” where she awkwardly proclaims self-love: “Who’s that sexy thang I see over there?/That’s me, standin’ in the mirror.”

That song’s video recently caused a mini-controversy when it was revealed that Ms. Trainor’s body had been digitally altered to appear smaller in it, either reliable proof that pop star norms are ubiquitous and relentless, or a slickly contrived method of making Ms. Trainor — who insisted the video be pulled, fixed and rereleased — seem like a champion of body positivity.

Whatever the case, pushing back against the suffocation of pop stardom is at least part of Ms. Trainor’s goal. But it’s unlikely she’ll go as far as Mr. Posner does. “At Night, Alone.” is an elegantly rendered album by a singularly grating singer.

Mr. Posner, like Ms. Trainor, is a songwriter, too, or, more accurately, a songwriter who happens to sing. Most of the best songs on this album are about how little tastes of stardom — Mr. Posner had a handful of hits in the early 2010s — ended up feeling like assaults, and how Mr. Posner’s easy gift for melody is like an albatross.

“I Took a Pill in Ibiza” is a hilarious downer of a lead single. “I’m just a singer who already blew his shot,” Mr. Posner sings. “You don’t wanna be high like me.” On “One Hell of a Song,” he boasts of how his songwriting ability is a tool of seduction, but an empty one. And “Only God Knows” is an affectingly scraped-up shout blues that Mr. Bieber might relate to (or want to record): “I’m sitting on a park bench, in a city I don’t know/trying to convince myself that I’m not all alone.”

What’s most telling is how skeletal these songs are. On the surface, “Alone” recalls a 1970s singer-songwriter album, raw and intimate.

But this is a sort of strategy, as well. These naked, pained songs are, in fact, just raw data for others to remix, modest seed investments toward future pop stardom payouts: This album closes with remixes of six of its 12 songs.

“Cooler Than Me,” Mr. Posner’s first breakthrough hit, was bolstered by a dance remix that extended its chart life. And so it’s been with “Ibiza,” which isn’t a hit in its unvarnished guitar-ballad form: It’s the remix by SeeB that’s currently No. 4 on the Hot 100.

So it’s funny to hear Mr. Posner mope, at the beginning of the song, “I took a pill in Ibiza to show Avicii I was cool/And when I finally got sober, felt 10 years older”: Former dance-floor-hit singer burns out, writes minimalist ballad about pop’s lies, is remixed, becomes pop manna once more. The cycle continues.

Except when it doesn’t. Even if Mr. Posner is having another go at it, Avicii has had enough. In March, he announced he was retiring from touring because of the toll it’s taken on his health. He’s 26.


