


The process by which the artist Dustin Yellin creates his signature works — methodically collaging tens of thousands of tiny cutout images on multiple glass slabs, then stacking those layers to create intricate three-dimensional sculptures — doesn’t require much technological intervention. “I’m pretty analog,” he admitted earlier this week when I stopped by his studio in Red Hook, which is next door to his influential interdisciplinary arts space Pioneer Works.

Then again, there’s another way to look at Yellin’s pieces: as, in his words, “analog Polaroids of VR.” Much of the pleasure of looking at them relies on space and depth, and on the way the artist constructs 3D worlds. So when Google sought several artist collaborators for the launch of Tilt Brush — its just-released technology that allows users to “paint,” employing two hand-held controllers and a VR headset, in virtual-reality 3D — Yellin was a natural choice. He received early access to the technology (Jeff Koons did, too) and has been working with it for about a month, during which time he’s spent many hours in the virtual studio, creating and exploring awesomely complicated virtual works. (He’s also, he said, made many requests of and suggestions to the developers.)

“For me, it was such a perfect thing,” Yellin said. “I work in space and through space. So in a way, this was cool, because it kind of put me inside one of my works.” With the headset on in his studio, it really did feel that way — wandering around one of the pieces he’d created, experiencing it from within and without, was almost as much fun as painting my own. “It’s such a totally different kind of practice,” he said, compared to the cutting, pasting and assembling that go into his usual work. “But as this evolves, and I might be able to scan pieces of collage and maybe video and things like that, this is going to get bananas. But even now, what a way for me to make a sketch, or practice an idea that I’m thinking about or test space.”

By this point, Yellin is more or less synonymous with Pioneer Works, and the Tilt Brush collaboration involves the center, too. The headset and software Yellin has been using will live in its tech lab, so that artists in residency there can create new virtual work. And at Sunday night’s Pioneer Works Village Fête, its annual spring fund-raiser, one of the galleries in the space will be equipped with three VR stations, giving guests the opportunity both to explore the works Yellin has created and to try their hand at creating their own.

“I actually care less about people seeing what I did and more about getting to experience it for themselves,” Yellin said of the event. Though playing with VR is an essentially solitary event, it’s not out of keeping with his well-documented community-minded ethos. “I like VR because it’s accessible,” he said. “I like certain art forms and music forms that are accessible, spaces that are accessible, ideas that are accessible — because I think if you can make something that resonates to everyone, then you can create a glue.”


