


The Jacksonville Jaguars have selected U.C.L.A. linebacker Myles Jack with the 36th overall pick in the N.F.L. draft, landing a speedy player with huge upside who is recovering from a serious knee injury.

If Jack returns to form, the Jaguars could have the steal of the draft.

Jacksonville traded up two spots to get Jack, who had been widely projected to go early in the first round. The Jaguars traded the 38th and 146th (fifth-round) overall picks to Baltimore to grab Jack.

Jack tore the meniscus in his right knee on Sept. 23 and missed the remainder of the season. He left college in early October to rehab in Phoenix.

Jack said this week that he might need microfracture surgery down the road. The Jaguars examined his knee and worked him out a few weeks before the draft and clearly did not have enough concerns to pass on him.

In other second-round moves, the Cleveland Browns selected Oklahoma State defensive end Emmanuel Ogbah with the first pick of the second round.

The 6-foot-4 Ogbah, who is from Nigeria, had 28 sacks during his time with the Cowboys.

The Tennessee Titans used their first two of three selections in the second round on defense, taking Clemson linebacker Kevin Dodd at No. 33 and Penn State defensive tackle Austin Johnson at No. 43.

The Dallas Cowboys took Notre Dame linebacker Jaylon Smith with the 34th overall pick.

The Kansas City Chiefs chose the versatile defensive tackle Chris Jones from Mississippi State with the 37th overall pick.

San Diego took Arkansas tight end Hunter Henry, a consensus first-team All-American and winner of the John Mackey Award as the top Division I tight end.

Tampa Bay selected Eastern Kentucky defensive end Noah Spence, hoping he had put behind him the off-field issues that kept him from being a first-rounder. The Buccaneers also traded up 15 spots, from the third round to late in the second, to pick Florida State kicker Roberto Aguayo.

Baltimore used the 42nd overall pick to take Boise State linebacker Kamalei Correa.

The Oakland Raiders selected Illinois defensive end Jihad Ward with the 44th overall pick.

ALABAMA FLOODS 2ND ROUND Only one member of the national champion Crimson Tide, center Ryan Kelly, went in the first round. And none was selected through nine spots in the second round.

Then three All-Americans heard their names called.

Linebacker Reggie Ragland went to Buffalo, which had traded up to the 41st spot with Chicago. At No. 45, Tennessee took the Heisman Trophy-winning running back Derrick Henry. And on the very next pick, defensive tackle A’Shawn Robinson was selected by Detroit.

Defensive tackle Jarran Reed then went 49th to Seattle, and cornerback Cyrus Jones went to New England with the 60th pick.

SUPER BOWL TICKET LAWSUIT A lawsuit against the N.F.L. is going forward, in which the league is accused of having violated New Jersey consumer protection laws when it made only about 1 percent of tickets to the 2014 Super Bowl available to the public.


