


Good news, everybody! The best drama currently on television is going off the air!

FX announced Wednesday that “The Americans,” its resonant Soviet spy drama set in 1980s suburban Washington, has signed a deal for two additional and final seasons. If you love the show like I do, this is — like so many things on “The Americans” — sad but perfect, because it will have the chance to end well.

This strange phenomenon — cheering for the end of one of your favorite dramas — is a curious byproduct of the peak-TV era. Traditionally, networks wrung everything they could out of hits, and TV history is full of greats (say, “All in the Family”) that are greater if you don’t think much about their last few seasons. Ending a veteran series was once more a matter of crafting a bang-up finale episode than plotting a multiseason story arc.

But the more ambitious and serial TV became, the more jarring it was for a series to abruptly end, or worse, continue past its creative peak by fiat. More and more series were naturally driven toward an endpoint, like “Lost,” for which ABC took the unusual step of setting a three-season glide path to its finale. Whether you loved that ending or hated it, it was preferable to spinning out the story, “Gilligan”-style, until the Harlem Globetrotters washed ashore on The Island.

“The Americans” is one of those rare series that actually has gotten better every season. But we shouldn’t kid ourselves that it, or any show, would do that indefinitely.

Its core premise — protagonists with a secret hidden from their family and neighbors — is very much like that of “Breaking Bad,” even if its tone is different. There’s a sense of dread, of inevitable doom, of walls closing in, that implies an end. (And while TV series can always stretch out time, “The Americans” also has the ticking clock of the actual end of the Cold War.)

The Jenningses have brought their daughter, Paige, in on their secret, as Walter White brought his wife, Skyler, in on his. Functionally, Stan is much like Hank on “Breaking Bad,” the dogged investigator who doesn’t realize he’s been sharing beers and secrets with his quarry. Over a few seasons, that situation creates tension. Over, say, 10, he’s just going to seem like a patsy at some point.

At six seasons, “The Americans” will end at around the midrange for dramas that got to end on their own terms: “The Sopranos” also ran six seasons, “Mad Men” seven, “Breaking Bad” five. (In each case, that’s if you count a two-part final season as one.) The fantastic “The Good Wife” would have been better off, in retrospect, planning its ending a season or two earlier.

Optimal end-of-life care is not just for dramas, either. I miss “Parks and Recreation,” but it was serial enough that it benefited from wrapping up in its seventh season. Compare its spiritual ancestor, “The Office,” which should have closed for business when Steve Carell hung up his “World’s Best Boss” mug.

But there’s not necessarily a single golden number. “Orange Is the New Black,” for instance, has developed such a vast universe of characters and stories that I could imagine it running until it simply stops being good. (Yes, prisoners serve sentences — the ultimate built-in time limits — but the show could survive the loss of individual characters, including even, I suspect, Piper.) Likewise, there’s no narrative (or ratings) reason demanding that “The Walking Dead” do anything but stagger on and on and on, though giving it an end date and a final arc might make it interesting again.

“Game of Thrones” is reportedly considering two more, abbreviated final seasons, despite its teeming, loyal khalasar of viewers. This idea surprised me, given that George R. R. Martin’s source novels still have two volumes to go. But if the current season to date is any sign, hurtling toward a climax at a faster pace will be good for its story (if not for HBO’s coffers).

In a way, “The Americans” is lucky to be as modestly rated as it is. It’s just successful enough to have stayed on the air, not so successful that anyone was tempted to keep it on past the end of its useful life. A planned, crafted ending might mean, like “Friday Night Lights,” that it could finally get some Emmy recognition on the way out.

But the real reason to kill the series kindly is artistic. “The Americans” is a moving, melancholy thriller about the servants of a dying empire; its very foundation is the idea that things come to an end. It deserves, like “Breaking Bad,” the chance to follow through on its implications, saving nothing for later.

Which is not to say I wouldn’t take a sequel. Anyone up for “Better Page Paige”?


