


For much of Tuesday night, as he ranged right and glided left, Didi Gregorius looked so smooth gobbling up whistling grounders that it was easy to forget how tentative and harried he had looked at the start of last season, when he had the unenviable task of replacing Derek Jeter at shortstop for the Yankees.

But those plays, and that growth, were not what was on Gregorius’s mind at the end of the night. Instead, he was thinking about the crucial play he could not make — on an 11th-inning single by Mark Canha that ticked off the edge of his outstretched glove and scored the winning run — and two little ones that loomed large in the Yankees’ 3-2 loss to the Oakland Athletics at Yankee Stadium.

The loss was the Yankees’ fifth in six games and carried a familiar hallmark for their early-season slump: an inability to drive in base runners and do the little things that often make the difference between winning and losing.

The Yankees squandered chances to blow open the game early and then were left to scramble for crumbs against the Athletics’ bullpen, which held the Yankees to one hit and no other base runners over the final five and a third innings.

Once the Athletics survived the vaunted part of the Yankees’ bullpen — Chasen Shreve, Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller, who have not allowed an earned run in 18 1/3 combined innings — they broke through in the 11th against Johnny Barbato.

Jed Lowrie looped a one-out double to right, took third on a groundout and headed home when Canha scorched a one-hopper past Gregorius, who dived to his right. It was the second hit of the season for Canha, who struck out looking as a pinch-hitter facing Miller.

“As long as it wasn’t Miller, I was O.K. with anybody,” Canha, a Rule 5 acquisition, said of his at-bat against Barbato.

As soon as the ball was hit, Barbato said, he was kicking himself over the location of the pitch, which cut over the heart of the plate. Then he allowed himself to think that Gregorius, who had five assists and a putout, might be able to produce one more defensive gem.

“If I made that play, that would have saved the game,” Gregorius said. “So that’s the most important play right there, and I couldn’t make it.”

If Gregorius had been able to get Canha, it might have erased a couple of blunders, one on the basepaths and the other in the batter’s box. After leading off the fifth with a single, Gregorius was caught taking off early on a 3-2 pitch to Brett Gardner and was picked off by the left-hander Eric Surkamp.

The mistake did not prevent the Yankees from taking a 2-1 lead — after Gardner walked, Starlin Castro doubled, and Carlos Beltran hit a sacrifice fly to score Gardner — but it may have short-circuited a big inning.

“It’s a 3-2 count,” Gregorius said. “I should have held and make sure he goes to the plate first and then go. It was my mistake.”

After Chase Headley singled to lead off the ninth against the right-hander Fernando Rodriguez, Gregorius was called on to bunt. He fouled off two attempts and then flied out. Jacoby Ellsbury, pinch-running for Headley, was then thrown out stealing.

Gregorius said Rodriguez had quick-pitched him on the initial bunt attempt. As for the second, he said, he asked the home-plate umpire, Laz Diaz, for time — several times — but Diaz later told him that he had not heard him.

“My mistake for not getting the bunt down,” Gregorius said. “But on the second one, if you want to check back at it, I asked the umpire, like, four or five times — time, time, time — so the second one I wasn’t ready at all. I just tried to put the ball in play, and it didn’t happen. So I didn’t move the runner over.”

It was one of many opportunities the Yankees could not seize.

A throwing error by Athletics third baseman Danny Valencia kept alive the sixth, but Gardner ended the inning by lining out to first baseman Yonder Alonso. Beltran had given the Yankees the lead in the fifth, but Alex Rodriguez left two runners on base that inning when he popped up. And Gardner’s leadoff double in the third was wasted when the next three batters went down in order.

The Yankees left eight runners on base and were 1 for 7 with runners in scoring position. They are 2 for 42 with runners in scoring position in their last four games.

“It’s going to happen a lot — a lot more times,” said Beltran, who doubled with two outs in the first and scored on a Rodriguez single. “You want to come through in situations like that, but at the same time this is a game of a lot of failures. Right now, we’re not getting the hits with runners in scoring positions, but there’s going to be a time where we’re able to do it.”

Although the Yankees did not lose to Surkamp, they have not beaten a left-hander in three starts this season. Aaron Hicks, who started in place of Ellsbury — as he had in place of Gardner — is 0 for 11 this season against left-handers.

When the Yankees scored in the first inning, it looked as if their luck might be turning. Manager Joe Girardi even allowed himself to think so in the dugout.

“Maybe tonight is the night,” he said. “It wasn’t, so let’s hope for tomorrow.”


