


Shame has been part of the human condition ever since Eve fell for the serpent’s patter and she and Adam then realized that they were naked.

In this country, shaming punishments have been woven into the communal fabric at least since the days when scarlet letters were doled out and reprobates were slammed into stocks. To chasten defendants through means other than jail terms, modern judges have resorted to actions like forcing shoplifters to announce their crimes in newspaper advertisements, or making deadbeat fathers carry signs proclaiming their child-support delinquency.

The advent of social media has raised the volume on shaming as millions of judgmental types get in on the act via Facebook, Twitter and their online brethren. All too often, the line between understandable finger-wagging and unbridled bullying has been blurred or even erased by cybermobs. The potential for ugliness is examined in this final offering in the current series of Retro Report, video documentaries that return to major news stories of the past and explore how they continue to resonate.

The video’s focus is on Jennifer Connell, a New York woman who found herself portrayed in both new and old media as a mix of Cruella de Vil, Lady Macbeth and Madame Defarge — only less sympathetic than any of those fictional women. (There is, too, a detour into tabloid-style shaming as embodied by Jerry Springer’s television show, long defined by the quiet good taste typically associated with the roller derby.)

Ms. Connell’s perceived sin was suing a boy who was a close relative, and who simply wanted to hug her. Among those in the Twitterati for whom nuance is a scarce commodity, she was cast as a woman who deserved nothing short of flogging.

Reality was more complex. In 2011, Ms. Connell went to a birthday party in Connecticut for an 8-year-old cousin, Sean Tarala, who regarded her as an aunt. Excited to see her, the boy leapt into her arms. She was caught off balance and fell backward. With the boy’s full weight on her, she landed badly, breaking her wrist so severely that she needed three operations and ran up $120,000 in medical bills.

Ms. Connell’s troubles were only beginning. When her relatives’ homeowners insurance would not cover the bills, her lawyers felt her only recourse was to go to court and let a jury determine liability. Under Connecticut law, someone had to be named as a defendant. So she sued the person whose actions had led to the injury: Sean.

Plainly, this was just a legal formality. The real target was the insurance company, not the boy. But that was too subtle a notion for many on social media. Vituperation poured down on Ms. Connell, including a suggestion that her other wrist should be broken — and maybe her legs, too. Tabloid headline writers labeled her “the Auntie-Christ.” The fact that the woman and the boy had close bonds — Sean understood the tactical nature of the lawsuit — was ignored.

In cyberspace, rage turned to glee when a jury rejected Ms. Connell’s claim in October. By then, the hounding had hurt her professionally. A human resources consultant, she had difficulty finding work. “People reached out and then canceled interviews, or then said, ‘Oh, we’ve changed our direction,’ or you know, ‘Mmm, we’ve decided not to move forward,’” she told Retro Report.

She had to “take certain measures,” she said, “in order to re-establish myself.” They included altering her appearance in the hope that she might not be instantly recognized.

Hers was hardly an isolated instance of mob shaming online. In recent weeks, online invective was heaped upon Michelle Gregg after a gorilla at the Cincinnati Zoo grabbed her 3-year-old son and the animal was killed. The boy had scampered into the gorilla’s enclosure while Ms. Gregg’s back was briefly turned as she tended to her other children. A prosecutor concluded that she had not been inattentive and bore no responsibility for the animal’s death — but not before the mother found herself roundly condemned.

In 2013, Justine Sacco foolishly tweeted a tasteless joke about Africa and AIDS. Though she had only 170 Twitter followers, her message rocketed through cyberspace at warp speed, leading to a reaction wildly disproportionate to the offense. Tens of thousands of Twitter users denounced her, some demanding that she be tossed from her public relations job in New York. Indeed, she was fired.

So was Lindsey Stone, who lost her job helping people with learning disabilities. This was after Ms. Stone posed in 2012 for a photograph by a sign at Arlington National Cemetery. The photo, intended as a visual joke to be shared with friends, was in questionable taste, but was not born of malice. Nonetheless, after its posting on Facebook, the calls for her head were unforgiving.

Once upon a time, miscreants subjected to public ridicule were pilloried for perhaps a few hours. In internet life, that can last forever. “You never escape it,” Danielle Keats Citron said. She is a law professor at the University of Maryland and author of “Hate Crimes in Cyberspace” (2014).

“When you post something really damaging, reputationally damaging, about someone online, it’s searchable and seeable,” she told Retro Report. “And you can’t erase it.”

Does shame have a legitimate place in our lives? Mark Twain seemed to think so. “Man is the only animal that blushes,” Twain wrote in 1897.

“Or needs to,” he added.

Jennifer Jacquet, an assistant professor of environmental studies at New York University, shares the sentiment. In her book “Is Shame Necessary?” (2015), the professor argues that shaming can be a strategy for beneficial change, notably if the targets are corporate polluters and others whose deeds harm the commonweal.

She is not opposed to chastising individuals publicly, as long as the tactics are not abusive, but her preference is to call out governments and large organizations that behave badly. “Shaming is better used for the collective well-being,” she said in an interview.

While public whippings and the like may be long gone, officialdom has hardly abandoned shaming. California’s Franchise Tax Board posts a list of the top 500 delinquent taxpayers, who in mid-June owed the state a total just shy of $70 million. This naming of names began in 2007, and California has since recovered at least $511 million, the board says.

Some police departments routinely parade criminal suspects before cameras in a ritual of humiliation known as a “perp walk.” In 1979, Mayor Edward I. Koch of New York tried a comparable shaming of men who patronized prostitutes. Mr. Koch pressed for their names to be aired on the city-owned radio and television stations — what he called the John Hour. The hour, which actually lasted less than two minutes, produced an outcry loud enough for it to become a one-time-only affair.

Other modes of shaming keep arising. New York, for instance, is one of several cities requiring restaurants to post letter grades issued by the health department, and to display the ratings prominently in their front windows. This is intended as a guide for consumers. But what self-respecting restaurant owner wants to live with the disgrace of a poor grade in full view?

Although Professor Jacquet sees benefits accruing from certain forms of finger-pointing, she also feels they can do only so much to improve bad behavior. “If shaming was the most efficient method, we wouldn’t have harsher forms of punishment,” she said.

For one thing, the targets would have to be capable of feeling shame. All it takes is a glance at current politics to realize that some people are absolutely shameless.


