


After hitting his first home run at Citi Field this season, coming off a vintage uppercut swing that created a thundering crack and sent the ball towering over the left-field wall, David Wright went through the congratulatory line awaiting him in the Mets dugout and briefly shrugged his shoulders.

Wright’s first-inning solo shot was not improbable, but his reaction was fitting.

Wright’s spinal stenosis has drained the once bountiful pop found inside his bat: Through the first month of the season, Wright’s regular slot in the second spot of the Mets lineup at times felt more like a courtesy for 13 years of service rather than an appropriate role.

But on Monday, he rediscovered that pop, jump-starting the Mets’ offense in the first inning of his team’s 4-1 win over the Atlanta Braves.

“I hadn’t been swinging it great by any means,” Wright said, “but one of the things I think I’ve done a decent job at — even though I’m not seeing the ball well, or mechanics are off, or timing’s off a little bit — I am finding a way to get on base for those guys that are seeing it well and are swinging it well.”

Wright reached base two more times, going 2 for 3 with a walk and coming up short on a third hit in the seventh inning when Mallex Smith made a running catch in deep center field.

Michael Conforto followed Wright in the first inning with a single, and then Yoenis Cespedes and Lucas Duda hit back-to-back home runs — the fifth time the Mets had done so this season.

In 77 games with the Mets, Cespedes became the fastest player in franchise history to reach 25 homers, topping Carlos Delgado’s previous record by 11 games.

Atlanta starter Mike Foltynewicz challenged Cespedes with a 96-mile-per-hour fastball over the plate that Cespedes launched over the center-field wall.

“I think a lot of teams think I can’t hit it when it comes straight like that, so I’ll keep swinging at them and showing them that I can,” Cespedes said through an interpreter.

Monday’s early power surge against the Braves provided a quick boost of morale.

Swelling with positive vibes after winning the first five games of their current nine-game homestand, the Mets had suffered a deflating loss Sunday to the San Francisco Giants.

Giants pitcher Madison Bumgarner had cooled off Conforto, who finished April batting .365 with 18 R.B.I. Conforto was hitless in three at-bats against the Giants’ ace, striking out twice. Despite his sweltering start over all, Conforto remains unproven against top-level left-handed pitchers, as evidenced by his performance against Bumgarner.

Noah Syndergaard had also verified his mortality, putting in his worst outing of the season on Sunday, while his continuing inability to hold on baserunners emerged as a troubling trend.

The Mets had no such difficulty Monday attacking Foltynewicz, who had been recalled from the Braves’ Class AAA affiliate in Gwinnett, Ga., for the start. After a 42-pitch first inning, Foltynewicz lasted only three and two-thirds innings.

“Bumgarner — I mean, any team that faces him, you have a good chance of just getting blanked out for the whole game, so try to look at it that way,” Cespedes said. “Today we were fortunate we were able to take advantage of a young pitcher.”

Like Wright, Bartolo Colon, another veteran, also turned back the clock. He allowed two hits in each of the first three innings, but after a single by Adonis Garcia, he settled in to retire the next 12 batters he faced in order by frequently using a pitch rarely used in his stable — a cutter.

With two outs in the seventh, Chase d’Arnaud, the brother of Mets catcher Travis d’Arnaud, singled to break the streak, but Colon rebounded when Smith softly flied out to center field.

Manager Terry Collins left Colon in for the eighth inning, and he picked up three more quick outs. After Conforto caught Freddie Freeman’s fly ball to end the inning, Colon gave himself a round of applause and then was told he was done for the night. Wright walked over and gave Colon a pound of the fist.

Colon struck out seven batters over eight scoreless innings, prolonging the woes of a Braves lineup that has scored the fewest runs in the National League. While the Mets homered three times in one inning Monday, the Braves have only five home runs all season.

Colon notched his 220th win of his career, which surpassed Pedro Martinez’s total, and gave him the second-most wins among Dominican-born pitchers, behind Juan Marichal’s 243.

“I’m amazed when he goes out there every fifth day,” Collins said. “Nothing seems to faze him. He’s truly an amazing guy, deserves all the wins he’s had.”


