


Under ordinary circumstances, naming a polar research ship after the naturalist David Attenborough would have made perfect sense.

But these were not ordinary circumstances, because in announcing on Friday that the vessel would carry Mr. Attenborough’s name, the Science Ministry in Britain chose to disregard the opinion of the 124,000 people who voted for a different name in an online poll: Boaty McBoatface.

“The public provided some truly inspirational and creative names, and while it was a difficult decision, I’m delighted that our state-of-the-art polar research ship will be named after one of the nation’s most cherished broadcasters and natural scientists,” the universities and science minister, Jo Johnson, said in a statement.

The Natural Environment Research Council, a British government agency, had tried to open things up on the Internet and let people suggest a name for the $287 million vessel in an online survey in March.

That plan backfired, when the name Boaty McBoatface received overwhelming support. Many of those who voted for it were quick to express their disappointment.

The initial suggestion to name the ship Boaty McBoatface took off: A Twitter account was created; a train was called Trainy McTrainface for a day; and even Cheesy McCheeseface surfaced online.

Mr. Attenborough’s name received over 11,000 votes, putting him in fourth position when the poll closed on April 17.

The government signaled that it was unlikely the name Boaty McBoatface would ever grace the ship. Mr. Johnson told The Daily Telegraph the government was looking for “something that fits the mission and captures the spirit of scientific endeavor.”

On Friday, Mr. Johnson said the ship would be named after Mr. Attenborough in celebration of the broadcaster’s “contribution to natural science.”

If the people’s will was ignored, their voice was heard: The name Boaty McBoatface will live on as a high-tech remotely operated submarine that will collect data and samples.

“We’re ensuring that the Boaty name lives on through the sub-sea vehicle that will support the research crew,” Mr. Johnson said.

Still, that failed to satisfy supporters of the Boaty McBoatface handle, who made clear that this was not what they had voted for.

James Hand, the man who initially coined Boaty McBoatface, said he was pleased that the name would live on.

“The name appeals to the child in us: That’s one of the reasons it’s been so popular,” he said in a statement that referred to the Natural Environment Research Council. “I never expected Boaty to become as popular as it has, and I’m glad N.E.R.C. have chosen to harness some of that interest.”

He added he found the ship’s name, R.R.S. Sir David Attenborough, a “fitting and excellent choice.” He voted for Attenborough, despite having prompted the social media frenzy around the Boaty name.

One of Britain’s most adored personalities, Mr. Attenborough said he was honored to give his name to the ship.

“I have been privileged to explore the world’s deepest oceans alongside amazing teams of researchers,” he said in a statement. “And with this new polar research ship, they will be able to go further and discover more than ever before.”


