


INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 7 about a successful operation to separate conjoined Pakistani twins at a hospital in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia — part of a Saudi program that helps poor families of such twins around the world — misstated the age of Dr. Abdullah al-Rabeeah, the surgeon who leads the program. He is 61, not 66.

NATIONAL

An article on Thursday in which three Times writers discussed the coming changes to United States currency and some aspects of bills now in circulation misidentified the scene shown on the back of the $2 bill. It is a presentation of a draft of the Declaration of Independence, not the signing of it.

•

An article on Saturday about the arrest of the Los Angeles art dealer Perry Rubenstein on embezzlement charges referred incorrectly to an artist who is among his creditors after his gallery filed for bankruptcy protection. The artist, Zoe Crosher, is a woman and thus not “Mr. Crosher.”

BUSINESS DAY

An article last Tuesday about Argentina’s return to the bond market misstated the currencies in which bond sales were made in emerging markets. The bonds were sold in several currencies, not just the dollar. The article also misstated the amount of Mexico’s bond sale in 1996. Mexico sold $18.1 billion of bonds, not $16 billion.

•

An article on Monday about the settlement between Argentina and a group of disgruntled debt holders referred incorrectly to the returns received by hedge funds holding defaulted bonds. They were in the hundreds of percentage points, not hundreds of times, their original investments.

SPORTS

The Sports Business column on April 16, about protective netting set up at Target Field in Minneapolis, referred incorrectly in some copies to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution columnist Bill Torpy, who wrote that the Braves gushed about the high speed fiber optic cable at their new ballpark the day after announcing they would use higher netting. He writes for the metro section, not for sports.

THE ARTS

A headline on Monday with a music review of Mozart’s “Abduction From the Seraglio,” conducted by James Levine at the Metropolitan Opera, referred incorrectly to Mr. Levine’s tenure at the Met. While this run of performances will be his final appearances at the Met as music director, they are not scheduled to be his final appearances there. He will continue to conduct some performances after this season as music director emeritus.

•

A music review on Saturday about a concert performance of Verdi’s opera “Falstaff,” by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra at Orchestra Hall in Chicago, misstated the number of operas that Verdi adapted from Shakespeare with the librettist Arrigo Boito. It is two, not three.

WEEKEND

Because of an editing error, a dance entry in the Listings pages on Friday about the Boogie Down Dance Series at the Bronx Academy of Arts and Dance included an outdated phone number for the academy. It is now 718-918-2110.

OBITUARIES

An obituary last Tuesday about Bill Campbell, an adviser to executives in the technology industry, misstated his history with the tablet computer company Go Corporation. While he was a former chief executive of the company, he did not help found it.

•

An obituary on Monday about Elton Spitzer, who for many years ran the Long Island radio station WLIR, misspelled the surname of his stepdaughter, who survives him. She is Beverly Marchica, not Machica.

OPINION

Because of an editing error, a letter from Sonoma State University in California on Monday about Georgetown University’s role in the slave trade referred imprecisely to the Jesuit Plantation Project at Georgetown. Although it is no longer available, it has been replaced by a new website, the Georgetown Slavery Archive.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


