


In the early minutes of Monday night’s Met Gala — the annual benefit that shuts down the Metropolitan Museum of Art and hands several of its galleries over to a scrum of fashion designers, Vogue editors and the celebrities they clamor to dress — a hush hung over the opening room of the Costume Institute exhibition the gala celebrates, “Manus x Machina: Fashion in an Age of Technology.”

In the central room, where a Chanel couture wedding dress sits under a dome of digitally projected embroidery, all that could be heard was the churchly incantation of the Brian Eno soundtrack. Tavi Gevinson, the actress currently appearing on Broadway in “The Crucible,” was gazing in rapt silence.

There was more than one reason for that. Ms. Gevinson, it turned out, had lost her voice.

“I feel like a spy,” Ms. Gevinson said, or rather, wrote. She was communicating largely by notes scribbled in the small notebook she carried, and by facial expression. (She caught sight of a faux radish appliquéd Dada-ishly on a Vogue editor’s dress and goggled her eyes in compliment.)

At the Met Gala, everyone feels like a spy, or at least an interloper. The ticket price is blue-chip ($30,000 each this year), and the crowd is, famously, famous. (Anna Wintour, Vogue’s editor in chief, keeps a close eye on the guest list.) This year, a spokeswoman for the museum said, the event raised a record $13.5 million.

“It’s fun for meeting the five people you’ve always wanted to meet in your life,” said Marcus Wainwright, a co-founder of Rag & Bone and a veteran of many years at the Met. “It gives you some sort of permission because you got in the front door.”

The initial quiet was soon superseded by a dull roar. There they all were, wandering the corridors of the “Manus x Machina” exhibition or sipping Champagne in the Carroll and Milton Petrie European Sculpture Court: a motley crew of actresses (Naomi Watts and Michelle Williams, Uma Thurman and Nicole Kidman), musicians (Taylor Swift, Nicki Minaj and Zayn Malik), sports stars (Maria Sharapova, Derek Jeter and Caroline Wozniacki) and tech gurus (Tim Cook and Jony Ive of Apple, a sponsor of the exhibition).


