


Buying a fixer-upper was not part of the plan when S. Jefferson Thomas and Patricia Balaci decided to move to Westchester County from Brooklyn last year.

After all, their combined renovation experience consisted mostly of watching reality TV. But in a search for more space and proximity to nature, the couple found themselves captivated by a dated one-bedroom apartment in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.

Never mind the wall-to-wall carpeting, linoleum-lined balcony and pink bathroom toilet. Facing the Hudson River and the cliffs of the Palisades beyond, the place had a view — and at 900 square feet, including the balcony, was much larger than their maisonette in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn.

So with the proceeds from the sale of the Brooklyn place, they paid about $227,000 for the apartment last July and embarked on an ambitious plan to bring urban design to their slice of suburbia.

“I wanted to bring Manhattan to Westchester and I wanted to bring it up to the 21st century,” said Mr. Thomas, 49. A real estate agent with Douglas Elliman, he spends enough time in expensive New York City apartments that the latest design trends are seared into his brain. “We wanted to emulate these multimillion-dollar apartments, but we wanted to do it cheaply.”

But with no previous renovation experience, the couple didn’t know where to start. A tour of local home-improvement stores in search of ideas proved that the streamlined, contemporary look they wanted was not to be found on the shelves of Home Depot or Lowe’s. Local design stores in Westchester came closer, but asked $30,000 to $40,000 to outfit the kitchen alone, not including labor.

It wasn’t until they got into a car accident in TriBeCa that inspiration hit. Wandering the cobblestone streets while waiting for the police to arrive, they paused to look at real estate listings in the window of an agency. There, in an ad for 210 Pacific Street, a new development in Brooklyn where apartments were priced from $2.475 million, they spotted their dream kitchen, with waterfall-style marble kitchen counter slabs, fumed rift white oak and Corian cabinets, according to the development’s website.

The couple were referred to a contractor, Luciano Jacomini of Silver Brook Enterprises, in Bridgeport, Conn., by a structural engineer who was recommended by the co-op board. Then, over the next few months, Mr. Thomas made it his mission to track down vendors that could replicate the custom look they wanted, at a price they could afford. “A lot of it was trying to put the right words into Google,” he said, noting there were hours of typing various combinations of “Ikea replacement doors” into the search engine.

Eventually, he came across Semihandmade, a company that specializes in making doors that fit Ikea cabinets at a reasonable price. Using textured melamine cabinet fronts instead of complete custom built-ins saved the couple as much as $20,000, he estimated, freeing up money to spend on more prominent details like a $5,200 Krion waterfall kitchen countertop from Porcelanosa, the manufacturer and designer of tile, kitchen and bath products.

“We spent money on the things that are the most obvious,” he said. “No one sees your kitchen cabinets behind the doors.”

The bathroom, they decided, needn’t be fancy, but the floor tiles there had to be laid in a herringbone pattern.

But as soon as demolition began, hurdles arose. The walls that had closed off the kitchen didn’t line up properly with the apartment below. They were “off by two inches, resting on nothing,” Mr. Thomas said. “It’s scary to think what was actually holding up our kitchen.”

The walls were so misaligned, he said, “we had to get permission to go downstairs to the apartment below to put in a support column.” Wood and metal columns were added in the garage below the neighbor’s apartment to ensure stability, and a ceiling beam was installed in the kitchen to help bolster the floor above, with the couple picking up the cost for all the work.

Permission was granted by the president of the co-op board, who happened to own the downstairs apartment and was renting it out. It didn’t hurt that the tenant happened to be a contractor. “He knew what these things entail, and he was reasonably O.K. with it,” said Mr. Thomas, noting that the new columns not only improved the stability of both apartments but also allow the downstairs neighbor to open up his kitchen should he ever want to.

The additional work meant that new permits had to be obtained and floor and ceiling joists realigned, increasing the budget and delaying the project by several weeks. In all, the renovation lasted 103 days and cost about $60,000 — not including the $8,000 the couple spent for four months in a rental in the building next door while the renovation dragged on.

“It was a learning curve for both of us,” said Ms. Balaci, an Italian teacher. “I have to hand it to Jeff,” she added. “I picked a smart one, and he could see the big picture.”

While Mr. Thomas took the lead on managing the renovation, Ms. Balaci kept the budget in check, reining in her husband on expenses she deemed unnecessary, like buying a new hallway light fixture when the existing one looked perfectly fine. “He wanted everything new,” she said. “I’m the thrifty-daughter-of-immigrants type where you don’t throw anything out and try to salvage it until it’s on its last leg.”

To save money in the kitchen, the couple kept the existing stainless-steel stove and dishwasher. And they lucked into a high-end refrigerator at a cut rate. An elderly client of Mr. Thomas who found the door of the $2,000 Fisher & Paykel in her new apartment hard to open offered to trade it to him for an $800 model from Lowe’s.

Taking advantage of a sale at Porcelanosa cut their bill for the bathroom vanity, faucet, rainfall shower head and floor tiles by 40 to 55 percent. They splurged on the wall tiles there but found a less expensive Maax bathtub at a plumbing supply store. The pink toilet was replaced by an American Standard model. On the balcony, adding patio decking from Ikea at $3.44 a square foot and a $180 patch of fake grass from SYNLawn gave it a fresh look.

At the couple’s meticulously renovated apartment, it was clear Ms. Balaci appreciated her husband’s attention to detail, but she didn’t miss an opportunity to tease him about his thoroughness. “He has a Ph.D. in these lights,” she said, gesturing to the recessed lighting in the kitchen and prompting an impassioned speech by her husband about the differences between “remodel” and “new construction” housings. He is now well versed in the nomenclature for the various lights’ casings, he said, after he ordered a case of the wrong ones online before consulting his contractor.

The experience “was like a master class in renovations,” said Mr. Thomas, adding that he had enjoyed the renovation challenge but was not in a rush to do it again. “My contractor said, ‘Now you can be a general contractor.’ ”

Ms. Balaci agreed that the time and effort was ultimately worth it. “I love it — it’s the best place I ever lived,” she said, sipping a latte in the couple’s gleaming new kitchen. “This place, I smile when I come into it.”


