


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. We bought a little less than a pound of barbecued brisket at Hometown Bar-B-Que the other evening, then cut it into this easy recipe for fried rice, augmented by a drizzle of toasted sesame oil and a couple of tablespoons of Korean red-pepper paste thinned out with mirin. Put it on the table for dinner: two adults and a lot of kids. It went fast. It was dead easy.

That success got us thinking about all the ways you could give yourself a break this week. Julia Moskin has an ace recipe for Chinese chicken salad that is a terrific use of leftover roast chicken. And you can do that if you have the meat. But if you don’t? It’s pretty awesome served warm, with meat torn off one of those roast chickens you can buy in the supermarket on the way home. Try it.

Or maybe you could adorn a delivery pizza with some sautéed spinach. Or use it as a base for a pan of ramps and fried eggs. Those are worthy meals.

And you ever get to-go mussels from the little French bistro everyone ought to have on a nearby side street? You can dump a single order over a vat of cooked spaghetti and serve four people with ease. Just add bread on the side, olive oil and perhaps a simple green salad. Doctoring food other people have cooked, after all, is still a form of cooking.

But, of course, you can always start from scratch. Martha Rose Shulman has a new recipe for fajitas with skirt steak that you may wish to cook this week, if her recipes for shrimp fajitas and chicken fajitas don’t intrigue. (Whichever you make, serve some salsa fresca on the side.)

You might cook David Tanis’s recipe for a chicken breast Milanese with green olive-celery relish. Or make Pierre Franey’s recipe for sautéed salmon with leeks and tomatoes. Have you attempted Melissa Clark’s recipe for the Charlie Bird farro salad yet? You ought to, and soon.

There are thousands more good recipes to browse on Cooking. Run through them at your leisure and save those you’re interested in cooking to your recipe box. Rate them when you’ve formed an opinion, or leave notes on them. And, as always, if you run into problems, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

Now go read Joan Didion’s notes from the Patty Hearst trial in San Francisco in 1976 in The New York Review of Books. Her notes. Joan Didion can write a little bit.


