


The international film festival at Cannes meant to make its debut in September 1939. The French were sick of the Mussolini-tainted Venice festival and decided to invite the world to their own cinephile party. A short article in The New York Times that July said there would be a prize for best director, named for the French film pioneer Louis Lumière.

It was not to be. Hitler invaded Poland on opening night. The festival was called off.

Fast-forward to September 1946. The festival opened at last. But if World War II was over, the Cold War had just begun. In an article headlined “Russians Balk Film Showings,” The Times reported the assertion that “the Russians were operating a campaign against American movies.” A representative of the American film industry, Harold Smith, “said that when the production ‘Gaslight’ was scheduled, the Russians invited everyone to a last-minute party to keep away representatives of twenty-three nations at the festival and the showing had to be rescheduled.” Furthermore, “Mr. Smith complained that the Soviet delegates usually walk out of the hall when American films are shown.”

It’s probably just as well that no Palme d’Or or its equivalent was awarded that first year. “For ‘diplomatic reasons,’” The Times reported, “it was decided that no prize should be given for the single best film, but by common accord a grand international prize was awarded to the French production ‘The Battle of the Rails,’ an account of the part played by French railroad workers in the resistance to German occupation.”

Another winner? The soon-to-be-classic dipso tale “The Lost Weekend.” It was named “the best American motion picture of the last year and its star, Ray Milland, received an individual honor,” The Times reported.

One of the Russians who attended the festival, Serge A. Gerasimov, a leading Soviet film producer, said in an interview with The Times in his Moscow apartment the next month that “The Lost Weekend,” alone among the various American films at Cannes, “shone like a diamond.” As for the rest, he said, they represented a Hollywood with its priorities askew. Mr. Gerasimov “cites the dictum of Marx — Karl, not Groucho — that work is more interesting than entertainment,” The Times said.

But another critic of the United States showing at Cannes — and indeed throughout Europe, where American films were packing theaters — was homegrown. “We are giving Europe an eyeful, to be sure, but an eyeful of what?” the American documentary filmmaker Richard de Rochemont wrote in The Times. “Europeans know that the world has undergone some terrific changes since 1939. Their own values have been shaken or destroyed, and maybe new cataclysms are just around the corner. Yet, the American films which they are seeing in 1946 seem blissfully oblivious of everything and anything which was not in the film vocabulary of 1938.”

“I wish to report,” Mr. de Rochemont added, “that the provincial French, for instance, think that we Americans are somewhat off our rocker.”

Why, he wondered, “give them films in which the principal characters act like black-market millionaires on a spree? Why emphasize ad nauseam our wastefulness, our greed, our psychological instability?” (Sounds familiar.)

“At first the gaudy inconsequentialities of Hollywood films simply received a good-natured bird” (a popular expression for a sound of derision), Mr. de Rochemont wrote. “But as time went on, it all began to rankle, and the feeling developed that, while Europe had grown more mature by suffering, Americans remained the genial and acquisitive half-wits our detractors are anxious to prove we are.”

For the record, in addition to “The Lost Weekend” and “Gaslight,” the American films entered at Cannes that first year were “Rhapsody in Blue,” “Anna and the King of Siam,” “Gilda,” “Notorious,” “Make Mine Music” and “Wonder Man.”


