


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Happy Mother’s Day! It’s not too late to cook her our classic recipe for a Dutch baby, and set her to watching “Jane Eyre” on Netflix this afternoon. Nip in around 3 or so and offer some tea or sherry, then do chores until dinnertime, when you can serve this easy recipe for pasta with butter, sage and Parmesan and congratulate yourself (silently, please!) on what a good son, daughter, husband or wife you are.

So that’s Sunday night. On Monday, perhaps you could join with those who abjure the consumption of meat on Mondays (they’re out there!) and cook the Nigerian chef Tunde Wey’s recipe for vegan jollof rice. It’s really good — unless you’re Liberian and take exception to every single thing about the recipe because Liberian jollof rice is better.

Tuesday? We’re thinking this recipe for fish tacos, which I developed in an attempt to match the ones served at El Siete Mares in Los Angeles, with an assist from the fish magician Dave Pasternack of Esca in New York.

Do yourself a favor while you’re cooking the fish. Slide a pot onto the stove and make yourself a few cups of short-grained rice, sometimes labeled sushi rice. When it’s done, let it cool a little, then slide it into a Ziploc bag and set in the fridge to chill. That way, on Wednesday night, you can make Francis Lam’s new recipe for kimchi fried rice. (Do yourself another favor today and read the recipe now so you have time to obtain the other ingredients you’ll need: kimchi, nori, some Spam.)

On Thursday, try a classic: Craig Claiborne and Pierre Franey’s chicken fricassee with vermouth. (You can always use white wine if you have no dry vermouth on hand.) It’s outstanding.

And then round out the week out in the yard, on the deck or fire escape, up on the roof or just crouched in front of the broiler, and make spiedies with garlic bread and a big batch of grilled broccoli. Summer’s coming. Let’s walk right into it.

Other recipes to cook this week are available on Cooking. Save the ones you’re interested in cooking to your recipe box. Rate them when you’re done eating, and leave notes on them for yourself or for others if you’ve got a shortcut or ingredient substitution to share. And raise your prep-cook game by auditing our new guide to basic knife skills, which we’d warrant is as helpful to experienced cooks as to beginning ones.

Finally, if you run into problems, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com and will get back to you soon as we can. Or you can find me on Twitter like Farhad Manjoo; Instagram like Sarah Jessica Parker; Pinterest like this dude who’s really into smokers and grills; or Facebook just like everyone else but the kids. Have a great week.


