


A vocalist must be a certain age to sing “I’m Still Here,” a proclamation of resilience by an indomitable show business trouper who hasn’t bitten the dust. Right now, no veteran cabaret performer has a stronger claim to ownership of this Sondheim classic from “Follies” than Marilyn Maye, who turned 88 last month. The song was the thrilling finale of the most detailed autobiographical show I’ve seen her give, “Highlights,” which opened on Tuesday evening at Feinstein’s/54 Below.

“I’m Still Here” invites a wide range of interpretations, from bitter to blasé. Ms. Maye’s upbeat rendition embraced the believe-it-or-not attitude that can make a line like “Lord knows, at least I’ve been there, and I’m here” ring with an amused befuddlement.

“Highlights” arrives at just the moment when Ms. Maye’s voice has begun to lose its unblemished velvet sheen. The slight erosion has been accompanied by a sharper attention to lyrics, which Ms. Maye delivered with a wry, good-humored warmth tinged with a sense of the absurd.

Her story is a chronicle of life on the road, going back to her childhood, when she sang on radio stations in Des Moines and Louisville, Ky. “I wasn’t meant for cooking and washing and subservience,” she said. Along the way, she had three marriages to men who, in her words, “drank a lot.”

An early high point on Tuesday was a comically lubricious “Honeysuckle Rose,” part of a Fats Waller medley. The most introspective number was a tender rendition of “If He Walked Into My Life,” from “Mame.”

Ms. Maye might be described as a down-to-earth Midwestern version of that Patrick Dennis title character. If anyone could be called Ms. Maye’s guru, it is probably Jerry Herman, whose more buoyant numbers she infuses with a joy and maternal solidity. To quote another Herman lyric sung by a strong woman, there is always the promise that “Dolly’ll never go away again.”

Ms. Maye named “It’s Today,” from “Mame,” as her mantra. For show business babies, this militant call to celebrate the moment, no matter what, is more than a song; it’s a philosophy that has served her well.


