


The police on Thursday shot and wounded a costumed 25-year-old man after a standoff at a Baltimore television station, where the man said that he was carrying a bomb and demanded that a message be broadcast. The police opened fire on the man, officials said, because he refused to comply with the instructions of officers.

A Baltimore police spokesman, T. J. Smith, said that investigators ultimately concluded that the man had not possessed a bomb. Instead, they said he had been carrying a mock device that included a motherboard and candy bars that were connected by wires and wrapped in foil.

“The appearance of it was to be an actual, explosive-type device,” Mr. Smith said at an evening news conference.

The police did not immediately identify the man, who was being treated at a hospital and was believed to be from Howard County, Md., near Baltimore. Mr. Smith said the man’s condition was “serious, but stable” and that he was expected to survive.

The police shot the man at about 3 p.m., after he left the building and, according to Mr. Smith, defied repeated orders to remove his hands from the pockets of what he described as a “panda outfit onesie.”

The man did not receive immediate medical treatment, officials said, because of the uncertainty about whether he had a dangerous explosive.

A security guard at the Fox-affiliated station told reporters that the man had presented him with a flash drive loaded with information about “astronomy” and that he had “just wanted to say that the government’s wrong in thinking about the way they do about anything in space.”

“He walked in, opened up his hedgehog outfit that he had on and he pretty much said that he had a bomb on him and that he had a message that he needed to be heard,” the security guard, Jourael Apostolides, said.

Mr. Smith said a vehicle had also been set on fire outside the station and that it was connected to the man who was shot.

The episode came eight months after a former employee killed a reporter and photojournalist in Virginia.


