


WELLINGTON, New Zealand — The results may not reflect it, but Wales Coach Warren Gatland believes his team is improving as it embraces a more expansive style of play during its tour of New Zealand.

When the Welsh arrived in early June for three tests against the New Zealand national team, known as the All Blacks, they talked openly about their desire to be more bold and adventurous as they tried to end a losing streak against New Zealand that dates to 1953.

Their efforts in the first test in Auckland and the second in Wellington on Saturday certainly reflected that, as the Welsh took bigger risks on attack and sought to put players in space rather than stick to the crash-bang, kick-oriented methods that have typically been employed during Gatland’s tenure as coach.

While those tactics have made Wales successful in Europe — it has won three Six Nations titles under Gatland — the Welsh have been far less successful against the three Southern Hemisphere heavyweights: New Zealand, Australia and South Africa. In 32 tests against the big three since Gatland became coach in December 2007, Wales has won just twice: against Australia in 2008 and against South Africa in 2014.

New Zealand Coach Steve Hansen has not been surprised by the change in approach from the Welsh.

“I think they’ve worked out, to play us they can’t just go for penalties, scrum penalties and kick to the corner and go for the lineouts,” he said before the second test.

Yet despite adopting the high-risk, high-reward approach, Wales is 0-2 in this series after a 39-21 defeat in Auckland on June 11 and a 36-22 loss in Wellington on Saturday.

Wales’s second-string team also suffered an embarrassing 40-7 loss to the Chiefs Super Rugby team between the first two tests, even though the Chiefs were missing the All Blacks players on their roster, along with several injured players.

Gatland, however, was adamant that the lessons learned on this tour would benefit Welsh rugby in the long run.

“Would it have been good for their development?” he said of the loss to the Chiefs last Tuesday. “Absolutely. Was it the best thing long-term for Welsh rugby? Yes it is. Does it hurt? Was it hard? It was tough. But sometimes you’ve got make those sacrifices and do those things. Short-term pain for long-term gain.”

What the tests and the Chiefs game have proved is that Wales still has a lot of work left if it wants to compete with the best, although Gatland said he believed the gap was closing.

For the first 60 minutes in Auckland, the Welsh had the All Blacks rattled, but they faded in the final quarter as New Zealand stepped up the tempo and took control.

In Wellington, Wales started and finished strongly, but it conceded four tries in a 14-minute spell in the third quarter. Tries by Liam Williams and Jonathan Davies in the final 10 minutes made the final result seem closer than it was.

“There were two or three key moments in the game, and that’s the difference between us and them,” Gatland said. “They are clinical and ruthless on turnovers, and that’s what was costly for us and the difference tonight.

“We don’t think we’re too far away. At the very highest level, it’s small margins and small moments, and that’s where they are a little bit better than us at the moment.”

Gatland said that for Wales to continue to improve, he needed the support of the Welsh Pro12 teams — Cardiff Blues, Scarlets, Ospreys and Newport Gwent Dragons — and their coaches. Gatland has said that the Pro12 is not a good enough competition to prepare players to take on the best in international rugby.

He said that players needed to be playing and training at a higher intensity than they had been and that they needed to improve their ball handling and decision making when going all out on attack if the team was to compete with New Zealand, Australia and South Africa.

“The plan is for us all to work together and for us to provide them with the information and perhaps a strategy so that there isn’t that big jump up when they come from regional rugby to us,” Gatland said. “That’s about us as coaches working together and the Welsh Rugby Union and the regions working as closely as we possibly can.”

While Wales is still looking for its first win in New Zealand, its Six Nations rival England made history with its first series win in Australia as its renaissance under Coach Eddie Jones continued.

England’s 23-7 victory in Melbourne gave it a 2-0 lead in the series, with the final test to be played Saturday in Sydney.

The victory was built on a dominant defensive effort by the English, who kept Australia scoreless in the second half. England made 215 tackles in the game to Australia’s 81, while the captain Dylan Hartley and center Owen Farrell each scored a try.

With the victory, England jumped past Australia to No. 2 in the world rankings.

“The first impression is that we want to win, 3-0, mate,” Jones said on television after the game. “We’ll only be satisfied if we win, 3-0. The players are already talking about it now.”

Jones also said England would not be happy just being No. 2 in the world. “We want to be No. 1, mate, and I think we’ve got the talent to do it,” he said. “But we’re going to have to keep working very hard and keep developing our game.”

In other international tests, South Africa recovered from a 16-point deficit with 18 minutes to go in Johannesburg to stun Ireland, 32-26, and level the series after Ireland’s victory a week earlier. And in Japan, Scotland’s captain, Greig Laidlaw, kicked 16 points as his team defeated the Brave Blossoms, 26-13, in the first of their two-test series.


