


Dan Feig, 59, had just begun his early-morning rounds in the fish market when a man with a longshoreman’s hook sidled up and discreetly described a sweet shipment of sea bass.

“I got a beautiful box over there, the best you ever seen, but you better hurry up,” he told Mr. Feig, who was soon sizing up the catch.

“They don’t come any better than that, pal,” the man said, trying to hook Mr. Feig, one of the biggest fish buyers here at the New Fulton Fish Market Cooperative at Hunts Point in the Bronx.

Mr. Feig picked up a bass and saw from the translucent sheen and bulging eyes that it was fresh. He wiped his fish-slimy hands on his vest and said he’d take the box.

Mr. Feig, whose business card identifies him as a “Fourth Generation Fulton Fish Market Fishmonger,” has been making his living by buying and selling fish ever since going to work at age 17 at the Fulton Fish Market in Lower Manhattan. The market was moved in 2005 up to this cavernous terminal in the Bronx, where the buying begins after midnight each weekday and is largely over before dawn.

Mr. Feig arrives at the market by 1 a.m. daily and begins buying for F. Rozzo & Sons, a wholesale distributor in the meatpacking district that sells to many of the finest restaurants and hotels in Manhattan.

He fills a box truck, sometimes two, with maybe 10,000 pounds of fish a day, to be trucked down to Rozzo & Sons, which is run by Louis Rozzo, whose great-grandfather, Felix Rozzo, started the company in 1900.

“You can’t find too many people who know the fish business and the market like Danny,” Mr. Rozzo said. “He’s buying for places like Le Bernardin and Daniel and the Four Seasons and the Carlyle, and he knows we need high-quality product.”

A heavyset man, Mr. Feig plods cheerfully through the market, as forklifts whiz closely by with crates of iced-down seafood.

“There’s a world of fish in here,” he said, stopping at one stand. “That’s dogfish, which is used in England for fish and chips. You got monkfish right out the water off Long Island. You got pompano, in from Florida.”

Mr. Feig estimates that he buys $1 million worth of fish a month at the market, but that is not the only reason he is continuously courted by sellers at their stalls. He has worked with many of them for decades. He greets the sellers with gibes. He tastes their raw tuna, sniffs their scallops, has them open oyster after oyster so he can eye them.

“This is my home — we’re part of a family here,” said Mr. Feig, who does not mind the chilly temperature in the market, nor the fish smell, nor the ungodly hours.

After all, he said, compared with the old outdoor Fulton market, “This is paradise.”

“This is beautiful,” he said. “There’s no rain, no snow. The ground is level.”

But it lacks the central location of the old Fulton market, said Mr. Feig, who is married with two grown children and lives in West Nyack, N.Y. Nor does it have the lore. Yes, there are characters here, but not like Bo, the fish loader at Fulton Street with a glass eye. “He’d tell buyers he’d keep an eye on their boxes of fish, and then take out his eye and put it on the box,” said Mr. Feig, who sat on a packing crate and whipped out his notebook, which is protected by a metal binder to prevent the fish guts from soaking through.

Mr. Feig said he grew up in public housing in the Gun Hill section of the Bronx and began working summers at the fish market, where his grandfather sold shrimp in the summer and shad in the winter, on South Street.

He said he became adept at slicing shad to remove the roe. His speed — about 500 fish, or 2,000 pounds, an hour — was so impressive that he would challenge any two cutters at the market to keep up with him. Mr. Feig said his uncle once won $1,000 backing him in a race against a pair of cutters.

Mr. Feig eventually became a seller himself, and a fish importer, and would travel abroad seeking new types of fish to market in New York.

In the market, his phone rings nonstop, even at 2 a.m. Mr. Feig calls around constantly, checking prices with wholesalers and fishermen. There are no formally set market prices, and rates can vary and change even during the course of a morning at the market. So Mr. Feig is constantly asking sellers their prices, and about their current and incoming supply.

During his recent rounds, a seller offered him black sea bass for $10 a pound but soon lowered his price to $7.50. Mr. Feig bought some but saved his money. “I got a guy who’s selling it right now for $6.85, down the other end,” he said.


