


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. The printers were hard as work last night as always, assembling the print edition of The New York Times that we pile into cars and minivans across the country to deliver to front doors and occasionally the hedges beside them. Amid grim tidings from abroad, alongside reports from Tuesday’s California primary, near the business news and accountings of the sporting life: Food, and with it a delicious article by Julia Moskin about brownies and how to make them well.

I know it’s the middle of the week. But when you’re done reading, make Julia’s recipe for salted caramel brownies and revel in the excellence of the tips and techniques she picked up during her reporting. They result in really, really good brownies.

Of course, you could wait for the weekend instead. But do cook something tonight. Maybe you could pick up some of those ripe mangos that are showing up in the market and make Melissa Clark’s recipe for sautéed chicken thighs with black pepper, mango, rum and cashews? It’s like an old-school chicken sauté, but remixed – the midweek dinner version of A Skillz’s “California Soul.”

You could make a fast dinner of pasta with spinach sauce. You could make a bread salad, Lebanese-style. You could, if you have a grill or want to use the broiler, make broccoli with apricot puttanesca – a recipe we scored from Nick Anderer at Marta in New York, which you could pair with fish or eat alone. Either way, it won’t be the last time you make it.

You could make chickpea-tahini soup. Or you could just throw the contents of the fridge on top of tortilla chips, adorn the whole thing with cheese and put it in the oven. Loaded nachos are a fantastic midweek meal.

I’ve been messing around a lot lately with the Korean rice cakes called garaetteok: long, cylindrical white fingers of glutinous rice flour. They’re flavor sponges, the very definition of toothsome. You can find them at most Korean markets and, naturally, online. And they’re at the heart of this week’s no-recipe recipe for a vaguely Korean ragù, though if you can’t find any, just serve the sauce over steamed rice.

Dice some bacon and cook it in a wok. Remove. Stir-fry some ground beef in the bacon fat. Remove. Stir-fry some sliced shallots in the bacon-beef fat and, when it’s soft, add a lot of chopped garlic and chopped ginger. Cook until the garlic has just started to brown. Then return the beef and the bacon to the wok and add to it a cup’s worth of “sauce” – I used gochujang, the thick, fermented Korean red-pepper sauce, along with soy sauce and brown sugar, but you could use miso, soy and chile sauce just as easily. Thin it out with water; you want it to be like a pasta sauce. Now chop some kale and get it in there as well, to soften. Then lower the heat, and use another pot to boil the rice cakes until they’re soft. Add them to the slowly bubbling ragù. Top with Sichuan peppercorns if you have any. Dinner!

Actual recipes to cook this week are on Cooking. I hope you’ll save the ones you like to your recipe box, and share them with friends and family. If you run into trouble along the way, you can reach us at cookingcare@nytimes.com. Or you can find me on Twitter and Facebook, Pinterest and Instagram.

Now, a staff note: Tejal Rao has joined us from Bloomberg, where she was the restaurant critic, as a reporter for Food and a columnist for The New York Times Magazine. You’ll see her articles and recipes on Cooking very soon. You can read some of her work here. Please welcome her to the kitchen!


