


NEW YORK

An article last Sunday about the painter Duncan Hannah misstated, in some editions, the role of the writer Glenn O’Brien, one of his friends, at Interview magazine. He was one of the early editors, but not the first. (Gerard Malanga and a team of others, with Andy Warhol, were the first.)

METROPOLITAN

Because of an editing error, a picture caption in some editions last Sunday with a theater review of “Animals Out of Paper” misstated the year in which the playwright, Rajiv Joseph, was a Pulitzer finalist. It was 2010, not this year.

SPORTS

An article in some editions last Sunday about LaMarcus Aldridge’s performance for the San Antonio Spurs in their N.B.A. playoff series against the Oklahoma City Thunder misstated his number of shot attempts in Game 3. He had 21, not 24.

•

The On Soccer column in some editions last Sunday, about Aston Villa’s last-place season in the Premier League, misspelled the surname of an Aston Villa coach who had to step down because of medical issues. He is Gérard Houllier, not Houlier.

•

Because of an editing error, the Keeping Score column last Sunday, about center Jonas Valanciunas’s breakout performance for the Toronto Raptors in the N.B.A. playoffs, misstated, in some editions, the time frame of his teammates Kyle Lowry and DeMar DeRozan’s 12-for-75 3-point shooting. It covered all Raptors playoff games heading into Game 3 against the Miami Heat, not the first two games against Miami.

SUNDAY REVIEW

A Download column about the NASA investigator Kim Binsted on May 1 misstated the name of Ms. Binsted’s dog. He is named Cosmo, not Cosmos.

•

A news analysis last Sunday about people with intellectual disability misidentified the 1924 law under which a 17-year-old girl, Carrie Buck, was sterilized. It was the Virginia Eugenical Sterilization Act, not the Racial Integrity Act of the same year.

MAGAZINE

An introduction to the Money Issue on May 1 referred incorrectly to Webster’s dictionary. It was Noah Webster who created it, not Daniel Webster.

•

An article on May 1 about the representation of the middle class on TV misspelled the surname of an actress featured in an episode of “Horace and Pete.” She is Laurie Metcalf, not Metcalfe.

•

Because of an editing error, a tweet featured in the mail column on May 1 carried an incorrect handle for a reader who commented on a recent article on Minecraft. It is @chaykak, not @chayak.

SUNDAY BUSINESS

An article last Sunday about the Labor Department’s new rules for retirement accounts described the negative interest clause incorrectly. It requires a brokerage firm to act in an investor’s best interest; it does not eliminate that requirement.

ARTS & LEISURE

An article on April 24 about the film “Dheepan” included a quotation from the actor Antonythasan Jesuthasan that omitted part of the given name of a philosopher he studied. He was Jean-François Lyotard, not merely François Lyotard.

•

An article last Sunday about a new Viceland TV show hosted and produced by Gloria Steinem misstated the number of weekly episodes that will air. It is eight, not 10.

•

A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the comedian Chelsea Handler reversed the identities of the two women shown working on her makeup and hair. Katey Denno was pictured at the left and Christine Symonds at the right.

VOWS

A report last Sunday about the wedding of Stephanie Ramirez and Keith Nobbe misidentified the university from which the bride graduated and referred incompletely to the organization that employs the groom’s mother. The bride graduated from Georgetown University in Washington, not Georgetown College in Kentucky. And SCO Family of Services, a nonprofit for which Mr. Nobbe’s mother works, serves children and families in New York City and Long Island, not just in Queens.

•

Because of an editing error, a report last Sunday about the marriage of Hilary Corman and Mark Kirsch incompletely described the groom’s role at the law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. He is a full partner in the firm and a co-partner in charge of the New York office; he is not a co-partner of the overall firm.

•

A report on May 1, about the marriage of Laura Thompson and Sean Love incorrectly stated the groom’s age. He is 30, not 29.

SUNDAY STYLES

An article on May 1 about the actress Emily Kinney misstated the number of seasons that she appeared in the TV show “The Walking Dead.” It was four seasons, not three.

BOOK REVIEW

A picture caption on April 24 with a review of “The Universe in Your Hand,” by Christophe Galfard, and “Seven Brief Lessons on Physics,” by Carlo Rovelli, carried an erroneous credit supplied by a photo agency. The still image from a computer simulation of two black holes colliding was from Simulating eXtreme Spacetimes, via Reuters, not from Caltech/MIT/Ligo Laboratory.

TRAVEL

A map on May 1 with the 36 Hours column, about Louisville, Ky., misidentified the state on the other side of the Ohio River bridge from Kentucky. It is Indiana, not Ohio. A corrected map can be found at nytimes.com/travel.

•

Because of an editing error, the Check In column on May 8, about a Maine hotel, misstated the name of the hotel group that owns the Whitehall. It is the Lark Hotels, not Larkspur.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


