


BEIJING — Nearly 27 years later, the carnage of June 4, 1989, remains a raw political scar in China. So raw that a man has been detained on subversion charges, his supporters say, because he shared pictures of liquor bottles labeled to mark the day soldiers extinguished democracy protests based in Tiananmen Square in Beijing.

The man, Fu Hailu, an itinerant worker in Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province in southwest China, was formally detained by the police on Sunday on suspicion of “inciting subversion of state power,” according to human rights websites that follow cases in China, including Canyu.org.

Mr. Fu’s wife, Liu Tianyan, said by telephone on Monday that she was unsure whether her husband had anything to do with the macabrely humorous images. They included a beer bottle with a label showing a man sitting in front of a column of tanks — echoing an iconic image of public defiance of the armed crackdown in 1989.

“My impression is that I may have seen those pictures,” Ms. Liu said. “But these kinds of things just get passed around. I wasn’t paying attention, so I don’t know whether he had anything to do with them. It’s just some pictures, so I wasn’t paying attention.”

But China’s security apparatus, always vigilant against discussion of the traumas of 1989, apparently was paying close attention. The police took Mr. Fu away on Saturday, after the images spread on WeChat, a popular Chinese social media platform that allows circles of friends to share messages and pictures.

The photographs also showed what appeared to be bottles for baijiu, the fiery Chinese liquor, with similar labels. But Ms. Liu said that, as far as she knew, her husband did not know how to create labels or images like that on a computer. Nor did he make liquor, she said.

“I didn’t hear him talk about June 4,” Ms. Liu said. “It’s true that he cares a lot about social justice — the police, food safety, public welfare issues.”

The labels played on the similarity in Mandarin Chinese between the word for liquor and the word for nine, as in 1989: “jiu” in both cases.

“Remember, Eight Liquor Six Four,” said the beer bottle label, echoing the date of June 4, 1989, when armed soldiers seized Tiananmen Square after pushing through parts of Beijing, often shooting at protesters or residents who tried to stop them. Hundreds, possibly thousands, died in the mayhem in Beijing, and there was heavy bloodshed in Chengdu and other cities, where the protests persisted for days after June 4.

Mr. Fu, 29, a former soldier from Sichuan, worked on and off as a security guard and in other menial jobs, and liked to write verse, Ms. Liu said. She was unsure whether he had a lawyer. The authorities may detain Mr. Fu for at least two weeks and could decide to keep him longer, to formally arrest him or to release him, possibly with conditions.

The Communist Party goes to great lengths every year to avoid rekindling memories of the schisms and bloodshed of 1989 — the efforts are so strenuous that they serve to remind many of the June 4 anniversary. Every year around this time, dissidents and outspoken liberals are placed under house arrest or are taken outside Beijing on compulsory trips, accompanied by state security officers.

The liquor bottles are by no means the first grim sign of humor inspired by 1989. To outfox censors looking for June 4, people have taken to referring to “May 35” — four days into June. In 1991, the overseas edition of People’s Daily published a poem that was ostensibly an ode to China from a homesick student abroad. But, read diagonally, words in the poem attacked Li Peng, the prime minister in 1989, who enforced the armed crackdown.

“Li Peng, step down to placate public outrage,” the poem said.


