


The Metropolitan Opera is projecting that it will take in only two-thirds of its potential box-office income in the season that ends Saturday, the lowest percentage on record, raising questions about how the organization is grappling with the significant challenges of mounting opera in the 21st century.

Twenty years ago, the Met was earning more than 90 percent of potential box-office revenue. Tickets were even scarcer when it moved to Lincoln Center: The general manager at the time, Rudolf Bing, wrote in a 1966 internal memo that the company’s many subscribers made it “impossible ever to buy a ticket.”

But now the Met is faced with the same challenge that is confronting many other opera companies, orchestras and dance troupes in America: the decline of the subscription model, as older, reliable audiences that would attend many times each year are replaced by new theatergoers who go to the opera less often. This season, the Met says it will earn only 66 percent of possible box-office revenue, which officials said would be the lowest percentage ever.

The Met’s finances have been precarious in recent years, but even with its weak box-office figures the company ran a surplus last year because of large donations and across-the-board cuts made after it won concessions from its unions.

When Peter Gelb became general manager a decade ago he tried to expand the audience by offering more new productions, modernizing theatrical values, simulcasting operas to cinemas around the world (and to Times Square, live, on opening night). He also raised ticket prices, which now average $158.50, because box-office revenues cover an ever-smaller percentage of the price of putting on operas.

In an interview Mr. Gelb said he believed the current box-office slump was partly caused by timing, as the Met’s older audience has aged out faster than it could be replaced. But he said he was encouraged that the Met had managed to sell tickets to 74,000 new buyers this season.

“We have more individual ticket-buyers than ever before, but because they are relatively new to the Met, they are not yet converted to the kind of opera fanaticism that would result in enough multiple ticket purchases to make up for the loss of the older subscribers,” he said in a telephone interview. “That’s basically the math that’s going on.” The number of new ticket buyers, however, “gives us reasons for hope,” he said.

The Met is hardly alone. Attendance at classical music, opera and ballet fell between 2002 and 2012, according to the National Endowment for the Arts, as organizations struggle to make their programs affordable and appealing to new audiences.

Marc A. Scorca, president and chief executive of Opera America, a service organization, said, “This is emphatically not specific to New York, and not specific to the Met,” adding that attendance at main stage performances dropped in the last 10 years “almost across our entire field.”

The Lyric Opera of Chicago reported earning 103 percent of box-office capacity for 91 performances two decades ago. (Receipts exceeded 100 percent because of tickets donated back for resale.) By 2014, Chicago reported a 79 percent attendance rate at its 67 main stage performances.

But the Met’s scale and its international prominence make its fortunes of particular interest. The nation’s largest performing arts organization, with an annual budget of roughly $300 million and a house that can hold 4,000, it offered 225 performances of 25 operas.

When discounts are accounted for, the Met projects an attendance rate of 72 percent. That will be in the ballpark of New York City Ballet, which expects to fill 75 percent of its seats. The New York Philharmonic said it expected to sell about 80 percent of its seats but did not report the extent of its discounting programs.

Even in a rough season the Met will have sold about 660,500 opera tickets, more than almost any of its peers globally. Met sales averaged 2,869 seats per performance, which would have overflowed the Royal Opera House in London (2,256 seats), or the Vienna State Opera, (2,284 seats). Last season, the nearly-sold-out Vienna company had sales of 462,901 opera tickets; 421,100 people attended operas in 2o14 at the Paris Opera.

Mr. Gelb said that the Met planned surveys and focus groups and would open more dress rehearsals to students and work to expand educational offerings. He said that since the company’s softest sales came in winter, he was weighing a midwinter break.

Expanding dress rehearsals would allow 26,700 students to attend next season. Mr. Gelb said he would move the students down from the highest reaches of the opera house. “So instead of just enjoying cutting school — or missing school, I should say, since they’re going with their schools — they can actually be enjoying opera up close,” he said.

He said the company would continue to invest in the work it puts on the stage. “When people new to opera come in to the Met,” he said, “we have to impress them — because we want them to come back.”

The memo in which Mr. Bing lamented having too few seats came to light as the company prepared to celebrate its 50th anniversary at Lincoln Center. “We live,” Mr. Gelb said, “in a different time.”


