


With the world premiere of his play “Lewiston” at Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, the playwright Samuel D. Hunter demonstrates his growing mastery of narratives that slowly, sometimes painfully, and ultimately sympathetically peel back the layers of struggles that define the lives of people who drift below the middle class.

Then there’s the restraint of Mr. Hunter, who was awarded a MacArthur “genius grant” in 2014. It is that quality that best foreshadows the even greater fulfillment of the promise Mr. Hunter has shown with plays like the Obie Award-winning “A Bright New Boise,” a meditation on modern faith in which the main character summons the rapture while working at a Hobby Lobby store, and the Drama Desk Award winner “The Whale.”

As he ignites the story of Alice and her companion Connor, who run a roadside fireworks stand outside of Lewiston, Idaho, with the return of Alice’s granddaughter Marnie, Mr. Hunter manages to bring themes of isolation, loss and the burden of family legacy to a point of perfect dramatic equilibrium.

Just enough is revealed to render the narrative cohesive and complete, but any urge to preach or provide a neat punctuation mark is avoided.

The play’s director, Eric Ting, credits Mr. Hunter with being in a vanguard of playwrights pursuing a new realism. “They recognize more often than not that what’s unspoken is most profound,” he said. “They trust in the audience to fill those moments with meaning.”

The unavoidable meaning for the three characters in “Lewiston” derives from the gravity of the past.

When Marnie arrives at the fireworks stand in early July, she is initially unrecognized by Alice. What ensues balances on the fulcrum of audio recordings that Marnie’s mother made while hiking along the route that Lewis and Clark took to the Pacific Ocean. Following the hike, the mother drowned herself in the Snake River.

Alice and Connor sell their cheap, disappointing fireworks as developers chew up adjacent land for new condos, one of which is promised to Alice as part of a property deal. Marnie proposes to buy Alice’s remaining land in order to save the family legacy, but Alice reacts violently and commands her to leave and not come back. The motivations of each are revealed over the course of the powerful 90-minute play.

“Lewiston” and a companion play by Mr. Hunter entitled “Clarkston,” which had its premiere this year in Dallas, are haunted by the physical and psychological imprints of the American West and the 1804 Lewis and Clark expedition. Alice and Marnie are distant descendants of Meriwether Lewis, and a character in “Clarkston” is a relative of William Clark.

“The unusual challenge of Lewiston is that so much of the play lives in the past,” said Mr. Ting, who recently became artistic director of the California Shakespeare Theater, near San Francisco. “Sam has made a kind of herculean effort to make sure that the story that unfolds is only the necessary story for the audience. He’s counted on the actors to fill in the deep, deep well of experience that simmers underneath the characters. That’s been a key to this production.”

Gordon Edelstein, the artistic director of Long Wharf Theater, said: “I have been a fan of Sam’s since I read ‘Bright New Boise’ and read ‘The Whale’ before they were even produced. So I had my eye on him as a writer.”

Mr. Edelstein said he strives each season to complement interesting productions of classics with provocative, contemporary plays like “Lewiston.”

Mr. Hunter’s outlook grew out of his roots in Idaho, a landscape that fundamentally inspires him. “He writes about people we would not ordinarily see on stage,” Mr. Edelstein said. “He writes about people he knows from his native Idaho, and he writes about them with tremendous compassion.”

The playwright is keenly aware of the contrast between his characters and the sophisticated, affluent audiences that encounter them.

“Hopefully the plays decrease that distance for some people,” Mr. Hunter said.

During a recent Saturday evening performance, the full house in the Stage II theater was nothing but warm and engaged, laughing at the humor Mr. Hunter employs to leaven a story that darkens as it builds, and otherwise quietly reverential, signaling a connection to the universal qualities the playwright evokes.

While the rest of us may not stock shelves at a Hobby Lobby, teach essay writing online while eating ourselves into obese oblivion (“The Whale”) or peddle fireworks on the side of the road, we have most likely suffered anguish over the sins of our forebears, or have been driven to commit questionable acts out of fear for a family member’s future.

Mr. Hunter credits the cast with helping to shape revisions that took place throughout previews. Randy Danson is a commanding Alice, Arielle Goldman brings an appropriately prickly angst to Marnie, and Martin Moran is a one-man Greek chorus. Heard but never seen, Lucy Owen haunts the stage as the Female Voice.

Mr. Hunter is guiding “Lewiston” and “Clarkston” toward a joint production, more likely in repertory than back-to-back. “I wanted to premiere them outside of New York and I wanted to premiere them separately,” Mr. Hunter said.

“Having seen both of them on stage, I’m more excited than ever to put them both together,” he said.

As he pursues staging a theatrical diptych, Mr. Hunter said he had a first draft of a new work “bubbling to the surface,” and he has been working on a full-length play called “The Healing” for Theater Breaking Through Barriers, an Off Broadway theater dedicated to advancing actors and writers with disabilities.

“It’s similar to ‘Lewiston’ in dealing with big themes like faith and doubt, but also very different,” he said. “The landscape of ‘Lewiston’ is very, very quiet. Everything is kind of under the surface.”

That everything includes the ultimate question for Marnie and Alice:

Is redemption forthcoming?

And smaller questions as well: Will Marnie stay in Lewiston, save what remains of the land owned by descendants of Meriwether Lewis, avoid the demons that consumed her mother and find a state of grace with her grandmother and new baby? Will Alice overcome guilt stemming from the impact on her daughter of once valuing preservation of family heritage above all else, and overcome fears about Marnie’s fate should she stay in Lewiston?

Mr. Hunter is noncommittal, but powerfully, poetically so. As the play quietly draws to a close, Marnie says she has figured out why her mother sounds so different in the tapes made on her journey. It’s because she sounds happy.

“Grandma, we have to believe that something good is possible, that it — right?” Marnie says near the end.

After Alice declares, “God, what a sad, tiny little life I’ve led,” the play closes with the Female Voice framing the nature of life’s challenge in the last recorded tape. The message summons both meaninglessness and hope; the rest is up to the audience to decipher.


