


CLEVELAND — In hockey, they award the three stars. In soccer, the top performer is named the man of the match. And in the N.B.A. — well, someone often gets a Bronny.

In one of his most audacious feats to date, LeBron James has put himself in charge of more than just the Cleveland Cavaliers’ offense as they face the Golden State Warriors in the N.B.A. finals. James has also been giving out game balls — real or imagined — to the series’ best players, including his opponents.

“It just comes off the top of my mind,” said James, who waits for inspiration to strike and then — boom! — gives away a Bronny. “You know the guys that are deserving of it.”

Awarding game balls after big wins and milestones is a tradition in sports. But that job typically belongs to the coach, and he usually sticks with players on his own team.

James cannot help himself. So while he frequently gives Bronnys — and it needs to be noted that the term is ours, not his — to teammates like Richard Jefferson, who received one after the Cavaliers defeated the Warriors on Wednesday night in Game 3, James has also been bestowing theoretical game balls on the Warriors. It might be the first time in the history of sports that an athlete has done so.

So there he was, honoring one of the Warriors after the Cavaliers lost Game 1.

“Obviously,” James said at his postgame news conference, “the game ball goes to Shaun Livingston.”

It was more of the same after the Cavaliers lost Game 2. James cited the brilliant play of the Warriors’ Draymond Green, who did not receive an actual game ball from James. But James wanted to make clear that Green deserved one.

“Game ball to him,” James said.

Friend? Foe? Makes no difference to James, the Oprah Winfrey of game balls: Bronnys for everyone! Everyone, that is, except himself.

For teammates, the game-ball experience can be both bonding ritual and confidence builder. If James, a four-time most valuable player, is taking the time to single you out, it must mean that you did something right. It can have even more of an effect if the team has been struggling.

“When everybody’s sort of down and we need a boost and a certain guy lifts us up, I think LeBron’s just good at acknowledging it,” said the reserve guard Iman Shumpert, who passes along his LeBronified game balls to his mother for safekeeping. “I mean, I would never remember to go grab the game ball. That’s why he’s LeBron.”

James tends to pick his spots. He does not bequeath Bronnys willy-nilly. It has to be an important moment. In January, for example, James gave the game ball to Tyronn Lue after Lue won his first game as the Cavaliers’ coach. Teammates and members of the coaching staff never know when James will show up in the locker room with a souvenir.

“Just out of nowhere, he’ll bring it in before we break,” the assistant coach James Posey said. “‘Game ball goes to so-and-so!’ And everyone’s like, ‘Oh, O.K.!’”

Game balls in general mean more to some players than others. Posey, for example, has kept just one from his long and productive player career — a ball that his teammates with the Boston Celtics gave him after his daughter, Sai, was born in 2008.

James Jones, a reserve guard on the Cavaliers, said the only ball that still had much significance to him was from the game when he scored his first N.B.A. points. He keeps it in a case at his home. Jones has received plenty of other game balls over the years, he said, but their whereabouts are mostly unknown.

“Some of them are probably out in the yard where my kids play,” he said.

Keith Dambrot, who coached James at St. Vincent-St. Mary High School in Akron, Ohio, suspects that James’s affinity for game balls is a holdover from his days playing football as a teenager. Dambrot, who now coaches the men’s basketball team at the University of Akron, said that James did not learn the practice from him.

“We didn’t have enough basketballs to give away back then,” Dambrot said in a telephone interview.

At the same time, Dambrot said, James was a charitable teammate who could sense the pulse of the team. St. Vincent-St. Mary was involved in its share of lopsided games, but James often acted as a pass-first facilitator. James knew that he needed a supporting cast in order to succeed.

“That hasn’t changed,” Dambrot said. “He has a knack for understanding his teammates and how to motivate them.”

James seemed to be delivering one such dose of inspiration after the Cavaliers won the opening game of their Eastern Conference semifinal series with the Toronto Raptors last month.

“The game ball definitely goes to our bench tonight,” he said at his postgame news conference.

As for his bequeathing Bronnys to opponents, James seems to respect good basketball — and possesses the sort of outsize self-assurance required to make such declarations. If there is an ulterior motive, he has kept it to himself.

In any case, the Warriors appear to be less sentimental about keepsakes than the Cavaliers. When the Warriors won their 73rd game of the regular season to set an N.B.A. record, Green made sure to track down the ball, a treasure that could not have foreseen its sad fate.

“We’re going to cut it up,” Green said, “and give everybody a piece.”


