


PASADENA, Calif. — The man who has guided Mexico to international soccer’s longest current unbeaten streak began his coaching career with a small club on Staten Island.

That man, a Colombian immigrant named Juan Carlos Osorio, traveled to the United States in the 1980s, after injuries ended his playing career in South America, to attend college in Iowa. After one semester, he moved to New York, where he worked in construction and food-service jobs to support himself before attending Southern Connecticut State University. After graduating in 1990 with a degree in exercise science, Osorio worked as a personal trainer in Queens while playing for local club teams.

By 1998, Osorio reached a crossroads. At 37, time was ticking on his dream. So Osorio took a risk by joining a local club, the Staten Island Vipers, as a conditioning coach.

“We could tell almost immediately that he would be very successful, because what set him apart from just about everyone was his professionalism and work ethic,” said Adrian Gaitan, the Vipers’ coach at the time, who now guides a club in Spain.

The Vipers competed in the A-League, the second level of American professional soccer at the time, behind Major League Soccer, but played their home games at Tottenville High School and Wagner College. Osorio devoured the opportunity.

“He took his job very serious and was always trying to better himself so he could better the people around him,” Gaitan said. “He was also one of the most competitive people you can be around. He had a great ability to relate to players, and I believe that being a former player helped him a lot.”

When the Vipers folded in 1999, Osorio contacted the MetroStars in M.L.S.

“Juan Carlos knocked on my door looking for an opportunity,” said Octavio Zambrano, then the team’s coach. “I was looking for a bilingual trainer with experience. He was respectful and had the acumen to become a good assistant, but I needed to see his personality and ability to deal with professional players.”

So Zambrano took Osorio on the MetroStars’ preseason tour of Spain and Portugal to evaluate him.

“The players took an immediate liking to him because of his preparation for every session and his individual care for each one of them,” said Zambrano, now the director of youth development for Club Deportivo El Nacional in Ecuador. “By the time we got back to New York, he had earned his position.”

The traits refined during those early years set Osorio on a path toward four club championships and two domestic cups as a head coach — and defined a meticulous, intellectual, collective approach that has helped Mexico win or tie 21 successive games.

Mexico will risk that streak Monday night in Houston against Venezuela at the Copa América Centenario, with the victor finishing first in Group C.

Since Osorio became Mexico’s coach in October, the team has won nine consecutive games and allowed only one goal. Yet when he took the job — his first as any national team’s coach — Osorio was criticized before his first game.

“I don’t know how they came up with Osorio, but there are better coaches in Mexico,” said Cruz Azul Coach Tomás Boy, who played for Mexico in the 1986 World Cup.

Hugo Sánchez, one of Mexico’s 12 coaches between 2006 and 2015, was asked whether Osorio deserved the position.

“If he were Mexican, yes,” Sánchez said. “But since he’s not Mexican, he’d be the ideal coach for Colombia’s national team.”

Mexico’s players, however, are learning to appreciate Osorio’s style.

“He knows a lot and he loves to study,” said goalkeeper Alfredo Talavera, who called Osorio “a soccer philosopher.”

Osorio’s philosophy leaves no room for the melodrama surrounding Mexico’s national team.

“The most important thing is to gain the players’ confidence, because they’re the ones who have to implement what we plan,” he said. “I knew it was going to take time. In fact, I still have the responsibility to inculcate in the players the way we want them to work.”

Osorio’s attention to detail extends to arranging and rearranging training cones himself. He directs players with a notebook he fills with detailed, color-coded comments. He emphasizes collective effort, especially when selecting Mexico’s lineup.

“The national team is involved in a lot of games, and there’s not a lot of time for training,” Osorio said. “It’s more a matter of having a defined strategy. It’s a matter of trying to identify who complements whom in what scenario. In a group like this that has multifaceted players, we see how they interact with each other as a group.”

Osorio’s methods reflect his postgraduate education in Britain, which accelerated his career. In 2001, Osorio left the MetroStars to obtain a degree from Liverpool John Moores University in a unique major: science and football. While pursuing his degree, he often observed Liverpool F.C.’s training sessions from outside a fence at the club’s Melwood training center.

“I remember talking to him before he left for England and told him I thought he was crazy,” Gaitan said. “He was going there to spend a year and take a coaching course. He ended up taking the course watching training sessions, I believe, from his apartment, and eventually working his way into the Liverpool facility.”

Osorio’s persistence led to a four-year stay at Manchester City, where he rose from trainer to assistant coach. In 2006, the Colombian club Millonarios gave Osorio his first head coaching job. A year later, Osorio returned to M.L.S. to guide the Chicago Fire, which promptly surged from last place to the playoffs in half a season.

Yet in December 2007, Osorio resigned to return to New Jersey as coach of the renamed Red Bulls, who reached the 2008 M.L.S. championship game. But after the Red Bulls lost 16 of their first 22 M.L.S. matches in 2009, Osorio resigned that August.

Colombia’s Once Caldas, where Osorio once played, provided his next job and his first league championship in 2010. But Osorio made his biggest impact when he guided Medellín’s Atlético Nacional to three league championships and two domestic cups between 2012 and 2014.

After firing Miguel Herrera last July, Mexico lured Osorio away from his post at São Paulo F.C. in Brazil.

“I guess my whole career is different from anybody else,” Osorio told an interviewer in May. “Now when I look back, probably the hardest and most important decision was being 23, playing professional football in Colombia and saying to myself: ‘No, this is not good enough. I have to go prepare myself to be the best coach I can be. I need to go start from scratch.’”

From that decision, he built a career. With Mexico, Osorio built a team that could become the first from outside South America to win the Copa.

“He started out being a fitness coach, and look how he has evolved,” Gaitan said. “Not many people have that kind of passion and desire to do what he did. He deserves everything that comes his way, and we all take a little pride in the fact that his success started with us.”


