


Ever since Jack Ruby killed Lee Harvey Oswald on live TV in 1963, broadcasters have worried about accidentally showing an act of violence on camera. With tools like Facebook Live and Periscope available to anyone with a smartphone, the chances of unexpectedly streaming a grisly moment have drastically increased.

In the latest example, Antonio Perkins, 28, was taking his friends through a quiet evening in his neighborhood in Chicago on Wednesday, using Facebook to broadcast video live, when, suddenly, gunshots were heard.

The camera fell to the ground, first showing grass, then darkness. But the audio continued. Screams followed: “Oh, my God!” “Call the police!” “Tony! No!”

Mr. Perkins was declared dead a short time later in a hospital. A police spokeswoman, Laura Amezaga, said Friday that detectives had confirmed that Mr. Perkins was the man mortally wounded in the video.

As the video shows, the ability to broadcast live carries with it risks that once were considered only by TV stations.

The allure of live television, and live Facebooking, is partly in not knowing what will happen next, which is why car chases get frequent live coverage, said Mike Conway, an associate professor at Indiana University.

But when they have time to edit, TV stations have generally avoided showing the grisliest of footage because viewers complain when they see it, he said.

“Now in this world, there’s no gatekeeper,” he said.

Facebook moderators take videos down if they glorify violence, but allows them to remain if they appear to be trying to raise awareness. In some cases, as in the video of Mr. Perkins, Facebook adds a disclaimer: “Warning — Graphic Video. Videos that contain graphic content can shock, offend and upset. Are you sure you want to see this?”

Whether for advocacy or for mere voyeurism, the video of Mr. Perkins has been shared thousands of times on social media. Though relatively infrequent, the list of gruesome violence accidentally captured through live streaming is growing.

• In March, a video appeared to show a Chicago man capturing his own shooting on Facebook Live. His selfie-mode video was interrupted by the sound of gunshots, the camera appeared to fall to the ground, and a gunman appeared to step over the camera and fire more shots.

The Chicago police said they suspected the video was linked to a shooting in the South Side, but have not confirmed it. The city has been besieged by gun violence, as documented by New York Times journalists over Memorial Day weekend.

• An Ohio teenager, Marina Lonina, 18, was accused in April of streaming a video of her friend’s rape on Periscope. She pleaded not guilty to a litany of charges as severe as the rape suspect’s. Ms. Lonina told the police that she had filmed the encounter to gather evidence.

“She was swept up by the gravity of the situation,” her lawyer, Sam Shamansky, said in April. “And as she immediately told the police, she was filming in order to preserve, not to embarrass or to shame or to titillate anybody.”

• In February, Marvin Lancaster III was broadcasting from a Tampa, Fla., strip club on Periscope when he was shot and killed, according to WFLA-TV. As music pulsed and lights flashed, a dancer came off the stage to warn him about fighting shortly before gunshots can be heard. Seven other people were also shot, one seriously, according to WFLA-TV.

• The police in Lakeland, Fla., said Whitney Marie Beall, 23, broadcast herself on Periscope while driving drunk in October. At least 57 people watched, and some called the police.

Officers used her live stream to determine her location, and she was charged with drunken driving.

• The old tools, of course, are just as susceptible as the new ones to bearing witness to sudden violence. In August, Vester Lee Flanagan II, an ex-employee of WDBJ in Roanoke, Va., shot a TV reporter and a cameraman live on the air before later shooting himself. The disturbing video shows her screaming, and eight shots are heard before the broadcast cuts back to the station.


