


At 10 a.m. on July 19, the final section of Governors Island, known as the Hills, will open to the public. Some 10 acres of ridges, paths, slides and lawns will rise seven stories over the harbor, providing panoramic views of New York City.

The Statue of Liberty looms large over the vista, the closest point in all of New York to the copper giant. Yet it is not the only outsize presence on this 172-acre island. That distinction also belongs to the woman who stood atop the Hills on Thursday, giving a tour: Leslie Koch, the president and chief executive of the Trust for Governors Island.

“This is the only place in New York City you can see her face,” Ms. Koch said. “She was sited to greet all those ships coming into the harbor, and that’s why she’s facing the Verrazano.”

Yet everywhere you look on Governors Island, you see Ms. Koch’s influence.

The concerts, food festivals and Civil War re-enactments; the award-winning landscape created by the Dutch designers West 8; the 450,000 visitors who took ferries from Manhattan and Brooklyn last year; and the fact that Governors Island is now on the map — the subway map, to be precise, but also the mental map of so many New Yorkers — are largely thanks to Ms. Koch.

This summer will be her valedictory; the island’s parkland will be completed, and it will probably usher in another record number of visitors. There is still much to be done, including attracting private development without alienating the park’s newfound fans. Yet Ms. Koch will not be there to enjoy it. After a decade on the job, and on the island, she will announce her retirement on Monday.

“The summer of 2005, the year before I started, a grand total of 8,000 out of eight million people came,” Ms. Koch said at a cafe in Lower Manhattan later on Thursday. “The buildings are vacant, you couldn’t bring a bike, you couldn’t eat or make art or dance. You couldn’t do much of anything. Now we get 8,000 people every Saturday and Sunday.”

The hope now is to have that many on a given day. The island, and its 139 acres of parkland, will open on Memorial Day this year, as it has for the past decade. But the ambition is for it to become a year-round destination with “millions of new square feet for commerce, culture, and research,” as Mayor Bill de Blasio put it during his State of the City speech in February.

The city had hoped to release a request for proposals by the end of the year for the island’s remaining undeveloped parcels: two lobes of land covering 33 acres on the south end, as well as occupants for the nearly 1.2 million square feet of historic military structures on the north end. Now, the city will solicit expressions of interest this year, which will shape a formal proposal process next year.

“The city’s economy is spawning new companies and new ideas, and what could be a better place for that than this iconic entry to New York City, where the past can literally collide with the future,” said Alicia Glen, a deputy mayor.

As has happened with many public-private partnerships on the waterfront, such as Hudson River Park, Brooklyn Bridge Park and Coney Island, some advocates have questioned why the entire island cannot be open space. Ms. Koch believes both are needed to thrive.

“I’m always very careful to call this an island, not a park, because it’s not — it’s an economic development project,” Ms. Koch said. “There’s nothing worse for a building than to sit vacant.”

She pointed out that if the island were full of restaurants, cultural institutions, artisan shops, business incubators and an educational campus, the interview probably would have taken place on the island, instead of in Lower Manhattan, after the last ferry had returned at 6 p.m.

“You need these kinds of active uses to both pay for and justify more frequent ferry service,” Ms. Koch said. “Every hour is just a little too unpredictable, but if you knew there was a ferry every 20 minutes until 10 o’clock, you might stick around for another drink.”

Early on, Ms. Koch realized the only way to attract developers was to attract everyone else first.

After growing up on the Upper West Side and studying at Yale University, she spent 14 years in Seattle as a marketing executive at Microsoft and a consultant. She returned to New York in 2003 to help start the Fund for Public Schools, and her work there led Dan Doctoroff, a deputy mayor, to hire her for the Governors Island job.

“I grew up here, and I didn’t even know what Governors Island was,” Ms. Koch said. “Everyone was asking what should go on the island, but Dan and I agreed that was the wrong approach. Instead, let’s just get people to the island and let them help us figure it out.”

During Ms. Koch’s first summer, the island hosted art installations, food stands and various events and happenings — all of which have expanded every year since. Another mainstay has been a public wall of sticky notes for suggestions. Among those that have been realized are a grove of hammocks and an ice cream stand.

Since her first summer, Ms. Koch has overseen the design of 40 acres of parkland, a handover of control from the state to the city, the opening of a high school and $300 million in new construction, a good two-thirds of which is invisible infrastructure.

“It’s kind of hard to believe it’s only been a decade,” said Jessica Lappin, president of the Downtown Alliance, a business group that has worked closely with Ms. Koch. “And we’re just getting a taste, because it’s about to take off.”

Now, when developments and businesses like the Italian-run spa that is scheduled to open in 2017 want to come to the island, it will be, as Ms. Koch puts it, as easy as setting up shop in Manhattan.

As for where she might set up next herself, Ms. Koch is waiting to figure that out.

“The island is ready for its next chapter, and so am I. I just can’t wait to have the summer off for the first time in 10 years,” she said.


