


New Jersey lawmakers on Thursday approved a package of measures meant to help Atlantic City avert bankruptcy and a state takeover as the seaside resort stands on the verge of running out of money.

The legislation would not spare the city, which faces mounting debt and has endured several casino closings, from making deep spending cuts, including slashing services and reducing the size of its work force. Nonetheless, some local officials have embraced the measures, which require Gov. Chris Christie’s approval, as offering a chance to resolve the city’s problems before the state steps in.

“This plan gives Atlantic City the opportunity to do the job itself to prevent bankruptcy and make desperately needed financial reforms,” Stephen M. Sweeney, a Democrat who is the State Senate president, said in a statement. “We must have a workable plan that is implemented and followed that will reduce spending, reform government operations so that city services are maintained and the taxpayers of Atlantic City and New Jersey are better protected.”

Mr. Christie, a Republican, has accused Atlantic City officials of being fiscally irresponsible and has pushed for state intervention. Speaking on a radio show on Wednesday, he did not explicitly offer his support for the legislation, but said that “everything that the Senate president and I asked for is there.” A spokesman said on Thursday that the governor was reviewing the legislation.

The measures approved on Thursday would give Atlantic City five months to come up with a balanced budget for 2017 and a five-year plan that puts the city on a path toward financial recovery. The city would receive a loan from the state as well as payments from casinos in lieu of property taxes. The casino money would amount to $120 million in the first year and increase by at least 2 percent a year over the next nine years, lawmakers said.

The payments, according to a statement issued by Senator Sweeney’s office, would “end the tax appeals that have choked off” a stable flow of money from the casinos to the city.

The legislation requires the city to identify spending cuts, as well as ways to increase revenue and reduce debt. The city would be able to use early retirement programs to shrink its work force, lawmakers said. The city would also have to make required payments to the local school district and to Atlantic County.

If Atlantic City officials failed to come up with the plan called for in the legislation, or if the city did not meet its obligations, the state would have the authority to rein in the city’s finances.

“It actually is what the Assembly was looking for — something that would give Atlantic City the ability to be able to reach a state of healthiness,” the State Assembly speaker, Vincent Prieto, a Democrat, said in a statement. “It doesn’t trample on collective bargaining on day one. It keeps the self-governance.”

The legislation was criticized by some lawmakers, who do not believe the city should be given time to find a solution. “I see this as enabling that mismanagement to continue,” said Senator Gerald Cardinale, a Republican. “The losers,” he added, “are the taxpayers from the rest of the state.”

Atlantic City, whose boardwalk and casinos made it a jewel of the Jersey Shore, has lost some of its luster in recent years. Four of its 12 casinos closed in 2014, eliminating thousands of jobs and shrinking the tax base.

As the city reckoned with the severity of its financial situation, officials considered shutting down nonessential services. Though that move was avoided after public employees agreed to defer their paychecks for four weeks, the prospect that money would soon run out still loomed.

Though the city has so far avoided bankruptcy, some analysts expressed concern over whether officials would be able to meet the demands necessary to stave off the state’s intervention.

Marc H. Pfeiffer, assistant director of the Bloustein Center for Local Government Research at Rutgers University, said the legislation, particularly the payments from the casinos, would be helpful. “All that stuff has significant value,” Mr. Pfeiffer said, adding, “The question is, is that enough?”

Marty Small Sr., the president of the City Council, said officials would focus on trying to develop the required plan over the coming months. “We have a shot,” he said. “All you can ask for in life is an opportunity, and we take the opportunity seriously.”

Mr. Small said that maintaining local control was essential because without it, residents would have no influence in setting a financial course for their city.

“It’s going to be brutal for the work force, and there’s going to be cuts — there’s no other way to put it,” he said. “It’s going to be tough, but that’s what we were elected to do. We have to right the ship.”


