


OAKLAND, Calif. — To try to pick the inflection point in this spectacular and deciding game of the N.B.A. finals, to lay a wager on which arcing shot, improbable steal or rebound would turn this game, was to ensure you’d go flat broke.

There were 20 lead changes and 11 ties, waves of emotion surging through the arena and the teams like electrical pulses.

With just under two minutes left in the game and the score tied at 89-89, the Cavaliers’ Kyrie Irving missed a spinning drive, and the Warriors were off to the races. The sore-backed Andre Iguodala passed to Stephen Curry, who flipped it back to Iguodala, who went up for the layup.

Or not, as the case would be.

Sprinting five or six steps behind was that 6-foot-8 Erie Lackawanna freight train known as LeBron James. His strides got longer and faster, and now he was airborne, his eyes nearly even with the hoop. He blocked the shot, his hand pinning the ball to the backboard.

For a moment, players on both teams paused, as if not sure, in their game intensity, of what they had just seen.

In the next minute, Irving, a spinning top of a guard, hit a fall-back-baby 3-pointer in the face of Curry, and that was more or less that, aside from a free throw tacked on by James to make the score 93-89 with 10 seconds remaining.

After a futile Warriors possession, the horn sounded, and the reigning champions, who held the single-season record for wins, were dethroned. James fell to his knees and covered his eyes.

James’s performance in this series was overwhelming. He was the first player to lead both teams in points, rebounds, assists, steals and blocks not only in the N.B.A. finals but in any postseason series of any length, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.

Two summers ago, he had returned to Cleveland, a wayward son grown sated on the humid languor of South Beach. He had also made that most dangerous of vows, promising to bring a championship to his hometown.

The self-imposed pressure became fathoms deep. The Warriors most often play with a loose-limbed intelligence and joy, channeling the jazz of America’s beautiful game. James and his mates often play no less astutely but as if consumed, aware that no end suffices save victory. At game’s end, James, J. R. Smith and their coach, Tyronn Lue, sobbed without shame.

“I never cry; I’ve always been tough and never cried,” Lue said. “A lot of emotions just built up.”

To watch the players before the game was to sense that cord of tension. The Warriors tried to keep their cool-cat vibe. Asked about his game day ritual, Coach Steve Kerr replied that he and his assistant coach Luke Walton had done hot yoga.

“I’m guessing Bill Belichick and his staff don’t do that,” Kerr said, smiling. “Just throwing that out there.”

Curry, in his warm-up ritual, is usually bubbly. On Sunday, his face was stone impassive. When the time came for the national anthem, the Warriors restlessly swayed from foot to foot.

On the other side, LeBron James stood still as a statue. He is 31 years old, a long remove from the man-child who came into the league 13 years ago. He had reached six previous championship series and come away the winner twice. Last year’s loss to the Warriors left him near broken. As the anthem played, he said, he thought of the task at hand, how great the Warriors were, how important it was for his team to keep its head.

Then he acknowledged another thought, as he peered intently about the darkened arena.

“Just living in the moment,” he said. “I told my guys before the game: Listen, there is a game to be played, but there’s not many guys, there’s not many teams, that get an opportunity to be in the N.B.A. finals in a Game 7. There’s just not.

“Don’t take it for granted.”

One of sport’s fascinations is to watch as a young man or woman comes to full and introspective flower. James is the son of a single mother from a tough corner of a tough city. He is a star, an on-court coach, and he speaks about police and gun violence. In different circumstances, had he not been blessed with preternatural ability and drive, we very likely would not have known of talents that have nothing to do with hitting a fall-back 3-point shot.

What a shame that would have been.

Kyrie Irving is 24, with a valise full of ankle-breaking moves. He reportedly chafed at the intensity of playing with these Cavaliers. He had his moment of clarity Sunday. He spoke of his good luck to spend his formative N.B.A. years playing with an impresario.

“I watched Beethoven tonight,” Irving said. “I watched LeBron James compose a game.”

He shook his head, chuckling at the absurdity of it, amazed that James had a “triple-double in Game 7 of an N.B.A. final”: 27 points, 11 rebounds and 11 assists.

Irving got at what so many miss when they complain that James does not commandeer games like a Michael Jordan or a Kobe Bryant. James has a point guard’s temperament; he will spend quarters orchestrating, trying to get his team to play as one.

“I can’t do it by myself, so that was my mind-set,” James said. “Like Jay Z said, you’ve got to stay low and keep firing.”

So it was in the first two quarters as James pitched the ball to Kevin Love, the power forward who can seem uncomfortable in his playing skin. Love was wide open at the 3-point line, yet he missed each shot. By game’s end, however, he had pulled down many rebounds. In the fourth quarter, Love spun into the lane and hit a sweet push shot.

He did so off a pass from James.

“He protects every single one of us,” Love said.

The Warriors go into the books as having collapsed on the cusp of victory, up by three games to one. That narrative is flawed, not least because they played a fine last game. All season, they dispatched opponents in a hail of precision passing and 3-point shooting.

In the first quarter, Irving hounded Curry beyond the 3-point line. So Curry dipped beneath him and put up that most improbable of shots, a teardrop 3-pointer.

It slapped through the net.

Yet Curry and Klay Thompson struggled with their shooting. And Curry made some unaccountably sloppy plays, like a behind-the-back fourth-quarter pass that sailed out of bounds rather than into Thompson’s hands. Afterward, he was in no mood, after nine months of playing, to cut himself a break.

“It is extremely hard to win a championship,” he said. “That’s why you pour Champagne on yourself.”

Draymond Green played like a man possessed. He drained six 3s, and in the absence of the team’s injured center, Andrew Bogut, he was often the center. He is just 6-7 and 230 pounds, but he was like a knight on the parapets, swinging his mace at all comers.

Yet he lives with the knowledge that his Game 5 suspension in the finals might have been the turning point, as his team lost a home game it expected to win.

James walked into the postgame news conference wearing a cut-down net like a necklace. His two boys took seats at either side of him; he carried his toddler daughter, Zhuri, in his arms and kissed her between each question and answer.

He spoke of the sorrowful history that is Cleveland’s sports legacy, rattling off the lowlights like any fan, if a tiny bit inaccurately (John Elway’s drive was 98 yards).

“You could look back to the Earnest Byner fumble, Elway going 99 yards, to Jose Mesa not being able to close out in the bottom of the ninth, to the Cavs went to the finals — I was on that team — in 2007, us getting swept,” he said, adding, “For us to be able to end this, to end this drought — our fans deserve it.”

James’s sense of history extends to his sport. On the riser, he handed the championship trophy to a teammate and set off to find the great Boston Celtics center Bill Russell, for whom the Most Valuable Player Award of the N.B.A. finals is named. James gave Russell, the snowy-haired old shot blocker, a long hug.

Later, as cleaning crews moved through Oracle Arena and the press emptied into the parking lot, James stood in the Cavaliers’ locker room, a cigar in one hand, a bottle of Champagne in the other. He was loose and funny, and he looked younger than he had in years. He regaled teammates with tales of past championship games, and he chased his daughter, who darted like a rabbit about the boxes in the room.

He posed for a last photo. Then he put up that big hand that had made that flying block: Enough.

“I got to shower,” he said. “We got to get back to Cleveland. We’re going home.”


