


In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Francine Prose and Benjamin Moser discuss the difficulties of getting lost in reading after a certain age.

By Francine Prose

An adult reading experience may be a “dip” compared with a child’s “soak.”

One of the hardest things to remember about childhood, unless you are fortunate enough to spend time around a child, is the fact that, for many children, the line between reality and the imagination is thinner and more porous than it is for most adults. When a 4-year-old talks to her mermaid doll, she is talking to a mermaid. I remember inspecting my cereal bowl for the tiny gremlins that set off the mini-explosions that went snap, crackle and pop. The child who opens the cover of a Dr. Seuss book is not just reading the first page but entering a world populated by grotesque but giddily good-humored creatures.

The age at which I fell most passionately in love with reading, at around 9 or 10, roughly coincided with the time when I somehow sensed that the reality-­fantasy border was about to tighten — and perhaps close forever. My desire to continue to live in my imagination contributed to my love for fairy tales and myths, the most fanciful genre. Among my favorites were “East of the Sun and West of the Moon,” a collection of Norwegian tales with marvelous illustrations by Kay Nielsen, and a volume of Greek myths, which I still own. I also loved books, preferably by authors such as E. Nesbit and Edward Eager, in which children discover a garden or find a magic object or take the hand of a governess — and enter a parallel world in which wishes can be granted. Reading those books, I was those children, their wishes were my wishes. I wanted to recreate, in a shoe box, the miniature domesticity of “The Borrowers.” There’s a chapter in “Mary Poppins,” “John and Barbara’s Story,” about babies who forget how to speak to a starling when they get older. Even then, I sensed it was telling me something dire — something the grown-ups either didn’t know or wouldn’t admit — about what I was going to lose.

Like everything else, the way we read changes with time and age. The books I find engrossing now still have the power to make the world around me vanish. But I can’t inhabit them as I did with my childhood favorites. I love rereading “Middlemarch,” but I never imagine I live there. Not for a heartbeat do I think I’m Karl Ove Knausgaard.

A neurologist friend says that adults are likelier than children to cross-­reference when they read, to compare people and things in a book with people and things they know, which is why an adult reading experience may be a “dip” compared with the child’s “soak.” I enjoy reading a book written centuries ago and discovering a character almost exactly like someone I know. And so I am cross-referencing: My attention is divided between the fictional character and the real-life counterpart.

Another obstacle to immersion may have to do with my being a writer. I’m more conscious than I was as a child of how something is written, though now when I look at my childhood favorites, they seem clear, at once graceful and straightforward. It would never have occurred to my child self to think about how a book had done in the press and on the market.

Despite everything, immersion still happens. I started the recent novel “Mr. Splitfoot,” by Samantha Hunt, and there I was. Lost. The “real world” seemed only marginally more real than the scary religious cult in upstate New York, where the novel is partly set. Though it wasn’t a pleasant place, I was thrilled to be somewhere I would never, in real life, want to be.

As a child, I loved it when a book took me somewhere else. I still do, but I’m more surprised and grateful now to be transported by words on a page from one world to another. Perhaps because, as grown-ups, we value what is harder won.

Francine Prose is the author of 20 works of fiction and nonfiction, among them the novel “Blue Angel,” a National Book Award nominee, and the guide “Reading Like a Writer,” a New York Times best seller. Her new novel is “Lovers at the Chameleon Club, Paris 1932.” Currently a distinguished visiting writer at Bard College, she is the recipient of numerous grants and awards; a contributing editor at Harper’s, Saveur and Bomb; a former president of the PEN American Center; and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

◆ ◆ ◆

By Benjamin Moser

I’ve reluctantly discovered that I don’t really want to read more books. I want to read the same books.

Like many people who later become writers, I read fanatically as a child. Unlike most, I had a mother who owned a bookstore. That meant there were no real limits to what I could read, or when; which in turn meant that I worked my way through the children’s books and soon graduated to adult books, and then to the classics. Perhaps, like so many precocious kids, I wanted to read adult books because I wanted to grow up.

Adult books meant a more intense reading experience, and the bigger — the more like “Les Misérables” or “The Count of Monte Cristo” or even “War and Peace” — the better. A real classic offered the satisfactions of children’s books — of getting lost, of solving a mystery, of going somewhere else — but they were bigger, longer, more. They took me somewhere else, and I wanted to be transported. The problem was: Reading transported me into writing.

Most readers are content to stay readers, which is probably best. Writing, like drug use, escalates. Not every constitution can stand it, especially when you resolve to make writing a job. That usually entails making reading a job, since most writers live off some form of professional reading: reviewing, translating, editing, teaching. If this would have sounded dreamy to my zealous 14-year-old self, the reality, I discovered, was less electrifying.

For me and for many writers, the problem is not that things one does for a living are less fun than hobbies pursued in the off hours, or that the more one has read the higher one’s standards become — though both are true. The problem is that the deeper you go into your own writing, the harder it becomes to enter someone else’s. If pursued seriously, writing demands a kind of obsessive concentration that came, at least for me, to preclude reading.

Now, the shelves beside my bed are littered with books I have guiltily abandoned like so many New Year’s resolutions. I bought them all hopefully. I would have devoured them as a teenager. But only rarely can I concentrate on reading other people’s books while trying to write my own. Every once in a while, I take a final guilty glance at those good intentions, those volumes with bookmarks stuck around Page 49, and chuck them.

As I’ve grown older, I’ve reluctantly discovered that I don’t, in fact, really want to read more books. That doesn’t mean I don’t want to read. I find, though, I want to read the same books. The same pile survives my purges every time. I want to read my Hebrew Psalter and “The Greek Anthology.” I want to read Emily Dickinson and Clarice Lispector; Ronsard and La Rochefoucauld; the “Shobogenzo” and “The Tibetan Book of the Dead.” If my library disappeared and I had only those books, they would be more than enough.

What these survivors have in common is that they do not try to drag me into a narrative. I can open them to any page and read words — as many or as few as I like — that clean my brain rather than stuff it. The longer I write, the more I realize that stories are the last thing I need. What is missing are not stories but the words to tell them. These books give me those words — and they help me, like the music I listen to while I write, not by transporting me but by supporting me.

Benjamin Moser is the author of “Why This World: A Biography of Clarice Lispector,” a finalist for the National Book Critics’ Circle Award, and the general editor of the new translations of Clarice Lispector at New Directions. A former New Books columnist at Harper’s Magazine, he is currently writing the authorized biography of Susan Sontag. He lives in the Netherlands.


