


Stephanie Danler was ready to start drinking.

“Hey, Chris, can we open these?” she asked Chris Bordeaux, an aptly named manager of Uva, a cozy wine and spirits store in Brooklyn’s Williamsburg neighborhood. Ms. Danler, a petite blonde with a heart-shaped face dominated by piercing ice-blue eyes, pointed to two bottles of wine chilling in a bowl.

On a sunny afternoon late last month, the Los Angeles resident (she moved there from Brooklyn in January) had cause to celebrate at one of her old neighborhood haunts. Her first novel, “Sweetbitter,” published on May 24, was generating excitement in both literary and foodie circles. (It cracked The New York Times’s hardcover fiction best-seller list at No. 14 on June 3.)

A bildungsroman about a naïve young woman who gets an advanced education in eats, drink, sex and drugs after landing a job at an elite Manhattan restaurant, “Sweetbitter” is the first of a two-book deal that Ms. Danler, now 32, signed with the publisher Alfred A. Knopf for a high-six-figure sum in late 2014.

The novel offers a dishy but acutely observed insider’s view of the goings-on behind the scenes at a temple of fine dining, one Ms. Danler freely acknowledges is modeled on the estimable Union Square Cafe. She worked there as a backwaiter (essentially a backup to the waiters) for a year after moving to New York in 2006, following her graduation from Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio.

Later that evening, she would head to BookCourt, an independent bookstore in Brooklyn’s Cobble Hill neighborhood, for her first public reading and a Q. and A. with Gabrielle Hamilton, the chef and owner of Prune and a best-selling author. (“She’s one of my idols, in food and in writing,” Ms. Danler said nervously, adding that when she was still looking for restaurant jobs, she’d twice sent résumés to Prune.)

At BookCourt, Ms. Hamilton praised “Sweetbitter,” saying, “It’s so damned good!” (She would call it “the ‘Kitchen Confidential’ of our time” in a review of the book in The New York Times.) But why, she asked Ms. Danler, did she choose to write a novel rather than a memoir.

Ms. Danler, who divorced in 2015, replied that fiction gave her the freedom to knead and reshape her experiences rather than merely recounting them. “I used a lot of facts from my real life, so I didn’t have to research anything,” she said, “but the liberty of writing it as fiction was so amazing. It got to be this rich composite.”

But back to the wine store. Ms. Danler’s visit there was a homecoming of sorts. She worked at Uva on weekends a few years back while earning her M.F.A. in creative writing at the New School and writing “Sweetbitter.”

Before that, the shop had been her go-to wine store when she first moved to Williamsburg. “Uva had affordable wines, between $10 and $15,” she said. “And since I had a job now at Union Square Cafe, I wanted to keep up.”

She did more than keep up. Her post-Union Square Cafe résumé includes certificates earned from the Wine & Spirit Education Trust at the International Wine Center and stints at Tinto Fino, a wine store now closed, and as beverage director and then general manager of Tía Pol, a well-regarded tapas bar in Chelsea. (She also worked as a waitress at Buvette.)

Not bad for a girl who, to borrow Ms. Danler’s own line from “Sweetbitter,” once selected her wines by the animals on the label. “In college, I drank Yellow Tail like everyone else,” she said, referring to the inexpensive Australian wine with a kangaroo on its bottles.

“Jordan!” she hollered over to Jordan Rodman, a Knopf publicist who was escorting Ms. Danler to publicity events. “She just got me to admit to drinking Yellow Tail. This is a disaster.”

Wandering the racks at Uva — no Yellow Tail in sight — Ms. Danler pointed to bottles as if hailing old friends. “Oh, look, here are Juras!” she said, waving at a display of wines from the Jura region in France. “It was a wine geek favorite a few years ago.”

She sees a symbiotic relationship between her appreciation for wine and food and love of language. “Food and wine lends itself to adjectives, to metaphor,” she said. “All you’re doing when you’re describing wine — I mean, there aren’t really strawberries in Beaujolais — is drawing metaphors and making allusions. It’s so personal.”

Time to try some wine. Mr. Bordeaux opened the winemaker Arianna Occhipinti’s SP68 Bianco 2013, which is a white wine from Sicily priced at $30, and Lucien Aviet’s Arbois Trousseau Les Bruyéres 2014, a red from the Jura that sells for $35.

Ms. Danler called both delicious. She especially admired the light crimson hue of the Bruyéres. “Oh my God, look at the color on this!” she said. “There’s a Trousseau in my book, too, but not this one.”

She took another sip and grinned: “I could do this all day, just drink wine and talk about it.”


