


Nani Ma was standing in a white sari outside her hut, a bare concrete block with a tin roof, when I arrived. The villagers who told me about her had described her accurately — a slender British woman in her late 60s who radiated calm. For 16 years she had meditated alone in a cave in the Indian Himalayas. Recently she had broken her vow of silence and moved to this hut in Uttarkashi, in the foothills of the mountains. I had hiked four kilometers through a dense forest to meet her.

Six months earlier, in late 2012, I had left my job in New York to learn meditation, first in a Sivananda ashram in southern India, then in a forest ashram in the Uttarkashi district. I grew up in Shimla, also in the Himalayas, and always thought I would return one day to live a silent, contemplative life. My mother’s death from cancer fast-­forwarded the plan 20 years. I wanted a more urgent answer to my questions about the nature of life, suffering and death. But despite practicing six hours of yoga and meditation every day for months, I hadn’t glimpsed the transcendence I read about in the Buddhist and yogic scriptures. Now I had a rare chance to ask a saint what more I could do.

Nani Ma’s kind face was marked with bright splotches of red, and she was mostly bald. For a period of years she had subsisted on two bottles of cow’s milk that the villagers left for her every day. Perhaps living on a milk-only diet irritates your skin and makes you lose your hair. Her good temper was intact, though. She greeted my intrusion with a warm smile, as if she had been expecting me. I bowed and touched her feet. She went inside her hut and got me water in an earthen pot. I was sweating after hiking down steep trails for a few hours and took it gladly. We sat down on a rock in front of her hut next to the Ganges River. Across the river, the mountains rose high above the mist, a colossal tower of green speckled with snow.

Unlike the grim, bearded yogis I knew from my childhood, she was open and welcoming. But words failed me. They seemed too limited and impersonal to articulate the questions in my mind: What have you learned about the nature of reality while living in complete silence? Your face looks so serene — are you enlightened? What does enlightenment feel like and how does one achieve it?

She filled the silence by asking me questions about myself in a gentle, smiling voice. I told her I left India to pursue a corporate career in the United States a decade ago. Now I was back for spiritual reasons, but in the six months I spent meditating in these ashrams, all I thought about was petty material concerns, like whether I would have a job when I returned to New York and whether my fiancée and I should have a traditional Indian wedding. I was tired of my trivial thoughts and was thinking of taking more drastic measures like living in a cave alone for a month.

In the middle of my rant, a mechanical whirring sound came from the hut.

Nani Ma excused herself. She returned a few minutes later with a sheet of paper and a cellphone in her hand.

“I have to make a phone call,” she said.

I stared at her. “Of course,” I said. “I’ll leave.”

“I’m on the board of a hospice now,” she said. “We have a meeting, and I’ve received two prayers for review.”

I stood up from the rock, wondering vaguely how she managed to get a cellphone connection so soon after spending 16 years in a cave. It took me three weeks of submitting and resubmitting documentation about my identity and residency, as well as references, before finally being granted a connection.

“Thank you for your time,” I said. “Can I support the hospice in any way?”

Nani Ma’s face brightened.

“Oh, yes,” she said with a broad, toothless smile. “Come inside for a minute.”

I followed her inside her hut, stooping to enter through the small wooden door. On one side of the 6-by-10-foot room was a mattress with a brown blanket and five or six articles of clothing in a neatly folded pile. Opposite the bed were a saucepan, one clay glass, a bag of rice and a printer.

Nani Ma bent down and got a packet of greeting cards from under the printer. She showed them to me with delight.

“The children in the village designed them,” she said. The cards had a picture of a long-­stemmed marigold flower on them with “Ganga Prem Hospice” written under it.

“We sell these to raise funds,” she said. “Do you want to buy one?” The packets were 50 rupees (about 75 cents) each.

Nani Ma had returned to the world. It occurred to me that maybe it was time for me to do the same. I bought 30 cards and went on my way.


