


SANTA CLARA, Calif. — Trent Baalke is not ruling out the possibility of striking a trade for quarterback Colin Kaepernick, although Baalke, San Francisco’s general manager, is adamant that he still hopes to see Kaepernick working in the system of Chip Kelly, the 49ers’ new coach.

While Baalke has been in touch with Kaepernick, he said Wednesday that they had not spoken in person even though both are at team headquarters. Kaepernick is rehabilitating from three operations and attending team meetings during the voluntary portion of the off-season program.

Kaepernick was granted permission to meet with the Denver Broncos after his agents requested a trade during the off-season.

“I think you have to know all the circumstances that go into it, and I’m not going to get into all the hypotheticals or the circumstances surrounding it,” Baalke said at Levi’s Stadium. “I’ve maintained from Day 1, as has the head coach, we would love to get him out there and work within this system with this coaching staff. That’s not changed. I said that in February and here we are today still saying the same things.”

Kaepernick met with John Elway, the Broncos’ general manager, late last month at Elway’s Denver home, and the Super Bowl champion Broncos could be a fit. Still, Kaepernick is due a guaranteed $11.9 million this season, and he might not want to restructure his deal for any less.

Baalke said he was not sure if Kaepernick wanted to leave the 49ers. Kaepernick has not spoken to the news media.

“I can’t get into what his feelings are,” Baalke said. “I’ve not addressed them directly with Colin. That’s just not something that we’ve done at this point.”

Kaepernick is recovering from operations on his right thumb, his left knee, and his nonthrowing left shoulder, the last to repair a torn labrum, which landed him on season-ending injured reserve after he lost his job to Blaine Gabbert, a first-round draft pick in 2011.

Gabbert took over in November for Kaepernick, who completed 59 percent of his passes with six touchdowns, five interceptions and a 78.5 rating before losing his job. When the team’s 5-11 season ended, Gabbert said that he expected to be the starter in 2016.

Kaepernick went 2-6 in eight starts last season, raising questions about whether the quarterback who guided the 49ers to a runner-up Super Bowl finish after the 2012 season was still the team’s best option under center.

Baalke and Kelly are eager to see if he is — provided that he sticks around.

“He’s still here,” Baalke said. “Right now, he’s out there, he’s practicing, he’s doing good in his rehab — that seems to be progressing well. He’s going to all the meetings, he’s very into it, he’s very attentive, he’s working hard. The coaches are excited about it, just as they are about getting a chance to work with all these guys. And there’s really nothing else to report.”

Also Wednesday, Baalke said that the retired 49ers right tackle Anthony Davis would not show up to join the team until he has been reinstated to the N.F.L.

Davis, who walked away from football last June at age 25 after a head injury, has said he plans to file for reinstatement.

Davis, out of Rutgers, was the 49ers’ first-round draft choice — the 11th overall pick — in the 2010 draft. He was affected by a concussion late in the 2014 season.

On April 1, Davis posted on Twitter, “Dealing with Trent is giving me a headache.”

“Gave him a headache?” Baalke said during a meeting with reporters. “It’s like me speaking to you, it gives me a headache!”

“I’m not going to get into our conversations within the media,” Baalke added. “We’ve had several text messages back and forth, and that’s the extent of the conversation. There’s nothing more to add to it than that. You have to ask him.”

Noting that the off-season program was voluntary, and that Davis was not a member of the N.F.L., Baalke pointed out that “he can’t show up until he gets reinstated.”


