


KIEV, Ukraine — A group of United Nations inspectors investigating allegations of torture in Ukraine has suspended its work, the team’s leader said this week, citing a lack of cooperation from government security services.

Sir Malcolm Evans, leader of the four-member team from the United Nations Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, said in a statement Wednesday that his group had been denied access to sites under control of Ukraine’s domestic intelligence agency, known as the SBU.

The end of the team’s weeklong trip a day earlier than scheduled comes at a time when Ukraine’s government is trying to demonstrate that it can be a bastion of European values, even as it is engaged in a bloody conflict in eastern Ukraine with Russian-backed rebel militias.

Most of the accusations of rights abuses in the war have involved the rebels. But the United Nations team had been in Ukraine since May 19 trying to investigate what rights groups have said are signs of detainee abuse by the SBU.

After prisoner exchanges in the east between government forces and rebels, some detainees have left Ukrainian jails limping and saying they had fingers or ribs broken by guards.

In a report published in March on extrajudicial detention and torture in Ukraine, the Office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights cited the case of a 74-year-old woman who was detained and beaten because her son had been accused of terrorism.

Another detainee reportedly had a plastic bag placed over his head, and was then hit in the face, head and body. Later, his son was taken to a separate room from which he could hear his son’s screams, the report said.

Natalya I. Sevostyanova, a deputy justice minister in Ukraine, said on Thursday that the United Nations investigative team had been denied access to SBU centers in Mariupol and Kramatorsk. Both are front-line towns that have been under regular shelling by rebel artillery that has killed dozens of civilians.

Vasyl S. Hrytsak, the SBU director, denied that detainees were being held at the local offices of the security services in the two towns. He could not permit the United Nations team to visit, he said, because the offices held weapons and documents that he was not obliged to share with the agency.

“If you arrive, for example, in the United States and ask to come to the C.I.A. or the F.B.I., to visit a basement or an office, do you think they will ever let you do it?” he told the Ukrainian news media.

The government of President Petro O. Poroshenko has received Western support in its fight against rebel militias, including nonlethal assistance from the United States in the form of medical aid and communications equipment, including radios.

Ukraine is a party to the United Nations Convention Against Torture and signed the Optional Protocol as well, which allows United Nations inspectors to make unannounced visits to any detention center. The investigative team’s leader, Sir Malcolm, said his committee “expects Ukraine to abide by its international obligations.”

International organizations are rarely granted access to rebel detention centers, such as a sprawling former art gallery converted into a prison in Donetsk.

Some United Nations representatives have been detained themselves. One employee, Yury Suprun, has been held since April 12 by the Donetsk People’s Republic. According to Mr. Hrytsak, the SBU director, Ukraine provided the United Nations mission with access to about 600 detainees, compared with only four people held by separatists.


