


For years, Jermaine Himmelstein, 24, has held a sign offering “Free Hugs” in public places like Times Square and Washington Square Park, a seemingly kind offer that could brighten the days of tourists and lunch-breakers.

For years, it hasn’t worked like that. The sign is a lie; Mr. Himmelstein has frequently accosted people who don’t tip him, in some cases assaulting them. Far from spreading joy, he was described in a 2013 profile in The New York Times as “a creepy legend.”

On Thursday, he was arrested and charged with robbery after punching a 22-year-old Canadian tourist, a woman, in the face at 46th Street and Broadway in Times Square, sending her to a hospital with severe swelling to her face, the police said. She had taken a photo with Mr. Himmelstein and refused his demands to pay him, the police said.

While being escorted out of a police station on Thursday, he told reporters: “I was aggressively asking for tips,” according to NBC New York.

A man who answered the phone at a number listed for Mr. Himmelstein’s parents said he had no comment and hung up.

In the 2013 profile, he described the kind of situation that would lead to violence, like the time he approached a female New York University student with his sign in Washington Square Park.

“She says, ‘I have a boyfriend,’ and this and that,” Mr. Himmelstein recalled. Her apparently “thinking I’m desperate, having no friends,” upset him, he said.

“I went and got a can out of the trash and filled it with water and I marched right back to her and threw it right in her face until her face was swollen,” he said. “Then I got a cup of ice coffee and I threw it at her.” He was arrested and charged with assault.

There have been several other episodes. The police said he had been arrested 16 times, including in a similar encounter on April 17.

NBC New York reported that his past incidents include one on April 29, when he was accused of assaulting a 25-year-old woman waiting for a subway train, screaming, “You will respect me when I knock you out.” In 2013, he told a woman before assaulting her, “I assault people when I’m mad.”

The City Council has worked to rein in the tip-reliant performers of Times Square, aiming to corral costumed characters and topless painted women known as desnudas into designated zones.

In 2013, Mr. Himmelstein’s parents said they had been unaware of their son’s behavior. His mother, Denise Himmelstein, said her son was autistic and “comes from a home where we give him hugs,” she said.

“Please tell every woman in America, I apologize,” she said at the time. “Any woman walking through that park, I apologize.”


