


EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — As the Giants’ scouts and front-office personnel surveyed the wide receivers available in the N.F.L. draft, a familiar name rang out when they assessed Oklahoma’s Sterling Shepard.

At 5 feet 10 inches, and with the playmaking skills that enabled him catch 86 passes last season, Shepard drew comparisons to Victor Cruz, their own star.

On Friday, with the 40th overall selection and the ninth of the second round, the Giants selected Shepard, giving Eli Manning another target.

Shepard could ultimately replace Cruz if Cruz is unable to regain his health. He sat out the 2015 season after tearing the patellar tendon in his right knee in 2014. General Manager Jerry Reese went so far as to call him “young Victor Cruz.”

Marc Ross, the Giants’ vice president for player evaluation, said that Shepard’s stature, quickness and “make-you-miss” skills were “very similar” to Cruz’s, adding, “But I never like to say a guy is the next somebody or compare him like that. But I can definitely see why the comparisons are made.”

The selection, however, was a surprise for Shepard, who had 86 receptions for 1,288 yards and 11 touchdowns last season and finished his career with 233 receptions for 3,482 yards and 26 touchdowns.

Though the Giants made themselves intimately familiar with his résumé, watching nearly every one of his snaps, they did not make their interest known in the months leading up to the draft. Shepard did not interview with the team during the week before the Senior Bowl or during the scouting combine.

Though his slight size drew speculation that he would play only in the slot, the Giants said he could play any wide receiver position. Coach Bob McAdoo tried to play down the similarity to Cruz, saying that Shepard’s frame belied his aggressive and physical playing style and reminded him of Packers receiver Randall Cobb, whom he coached while with Green Bay.

“It’s basketball on grass,” Ross said. “Guys throw the ball. You need athletes, you need space, you still need to block, and you got to protect. But the more athletes you have out there — it’s not ground and pound anymore. We throw the ball, and that’s our system, and a lot of teams do that."

But with Cruz at a pivotal point in his career, it is not hard to think that the Giants have drafted his replacement. Cruz burst into stardom in 2011 but has not reached those heights since. He has not even played in a game since Week 6 of the 2014 season.

In the third round, the Giants took Boise State free safety Darian Thompson, who set a Mountain West Conference record with 19 interceptions, further shoring up a pass defense that allowed the most passing yards in the N.F.L. last season. He will join Landon Collins, the safety the Giants traded up for in the second round last spring.


