


MILAN — A black car pulled up outside of 12 Via Gesù, Milan’s “via dell’uomo” (or men’s street, lined with men’s shops) on Saturday, and out stepped a tiny blonde in a spill of ruffles, accompanied by a Jack Russell terrier with its own entourage of staff members.

Donatella Versace had arrived.

She picked her way into the Versace headquarters, negotiating the pebbled stone of the courtyard in her stilettos and refusing a waiter’s offer of a paper cone of french fries with an upturned hand.

Earlier that afternoon Ms. Versace had shown her new men’s collection, preceded by a film by Bruce Weber, a campaign shot in Chicago with the models Gigi Hadid and Karlie Kloss. She had returned to Via Gesù, once her brother Gianni’s home and now the company headquarters, for a party during men’s fashion week to celebrate the collaboration and Mr. Weber.

But the talk of the show had been the soundtrack, music – both classics and unreleased tracks – by Ms. Versace’s late friend Prince. “Donatella would like to use this special occasion as an opportunity to share this incredible music from a dear, and much missed friend,” read a statement from the company.

On the runway, Ms. Versace sent out a few female models along with the usual brawny guys, in outfits that were distinctly Prince-inspired: his skintight suits, his ruffled blouses. Ms. Versace was wearing an all-black version of one of these looks herself, a seasonless tribute that might conceivably have a future in stores.

Ms. Versace waxed reminiscent about her friend, who died in April. Prince was meant to attend her couture show in January, but she thought little of it when he wasn’t able to.

“I had no idea” he was unwell, she said, with a shake of her head. “I went to Paisley Park so many times.”

On the soundtrack was a remix of “Kiss,” and tracks of the singer bleating out “Versace” and Donatella’s name.

“He sent me those songs five months ago,” Ms. Versace said. “He sent me music all the time. People look for the vault — I am the vault!”

Then Mr. Weber arrived and the courtyard dinner in his honor could begin. Ms. Versace teetered off to greet him and dinner was served.

The D.J. played a few Prince hits, but as guests sat to eat and live musicians played, a man appeared in a leather jacket, which he summarily removed and, muscular and stripped to the waist, began to sing “Core ‘Ngrato,” an old Enrico Caruso standard.


