


Isaiah Thomas scored a career-high 42 points, and the host Boston Celtics held on to beat the Atlanta Hawks, 111-103, on Friday night in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference first-round series.

Evan Turner, inserted into the starting lineup, had 17 points and 7 assists. Amir Johnson added 15 points and 7 rebounds as the Celtics closed to two games to one in the best-of-seven series.

Playing by far their best first half of the series, the Celtics led by as many as 20 points before that margin was mostly erased by a 12-0 run by the Hawks in the third quarter. The Celtics then survived a frenetic fourth quarter that included three ties and a pair of lead changes.

Jeff Teague had 23 points for Atlanta. Kent Bazemore and Dennis Schroder each finished with 20.

In an effort to find some early energy following lethargic opening quarters in Games 1 and 2, Celtics Coach Brad Stevens started Turner in place of Marcus Smart, and Jonas Jerebko in place of Jared Sullinger.

The increased Boston quickness showed itself early, with the first points of the game coming from Jerebko’s tip-dunk off Thomas’s missed layup. Boston went on to build a double-digit first-half lead. The Hawks whittled away at it but shot just 12 percent from the 3-point line in the half.

Along with the quickened offensive pace, tempers were tweaked at times.

Thomas and Schroder were issued double technical fouls following a brief face-to-face moment. Thomas had to be restrained by Sullinger. Sullinger was called for a flagrant foul on Schroder later in the period. That was almost immediately followed by a flagrant foul on the other end by Paul Millsap on Sullinger. Then, early in the fourth quarter, Schroder was called for a flagrant foul on Thomas.

SPURS 96, GRIZZLIES 87 Kawhi Leonard scored 32 points, and San Antonio won at Memphis to take a three-games-to-none lead in their Western Conference first-round series.

The Spurs are a win away from their ninth postseason series sweep and their third against Memphis. They finished the game on a 13-6 run in the final 3 minutes 41 seconds, and Leonard, the two-time defensive player of the year, scored 13 points in the quarter as he shot 11 of 22 for the game and 6 of 9 from 3-point range.

LaMarcus Aldridge added 16 points and 10 rebounds. Danny Green and Manu Ginobili each added 11 points for San Antonio.

Zach Randolph led Memphis with 20 points and 11 rebounds on 6-of-21 shooting. Matt Barnes added 17 points and 11 rebounds, while Vince Carter had 11 and JaMychal Green was 5 of 5 for 10 points.

CLEVELAND 101, DETROIT 91 LeBron James had 20 points and 13 rebounds, and Kyrie Irving made two 3-pointers down the stretch to help the Cleveland Cavaliers move a game away from a first-round sweep of the host Detroit Pistons.

Irving scored 26 for Cleveland. Andre Drummond scored 17 points for the Pistons, who fell behind toward the end of the third quarter, and whose late rally came up short. The Cavs lead the best-of-seven series by three games to none, with Game 4 coming up Sunday night.

Down by 9 in the fourth quarter, Detroit went on an 8-0 run, forcing the Cavaliers to call a timeout. Irving responded with a 3-pointer, and J. R. Smith added another to make it 95-90. Irving made it an 8-point game with a 3-pointer in the final minute.

A raucous, towel-waving crowd tried to inspire Detroit.

The Pistons have now lost 11 straight playoff games against Cleveland, and they have lost nine in a row over all in the postseason.

MISSED CALL HELPED ROCKETS The N.B.A. said that Houston’s James Harden should have been given an offensive foul for pushing Golden State’s Andre Iguodala before Harden’s winning shot Thursday night in Game 3 of the teams’ first-round playoff series. The basket, with 2.7 seconds left, gave Houston a 97-96 win and cut the Rockets’ deficit to two games to one in the best-of-seven series.

The finding was announced in the N.B.A.’s report on the final two minutes. The report also found four other incorrect calls in that period. Game 4 is Sunday, and Stephen Curry of Golden State said he would be very surprised if his sprained right ankle kept him out of it. Curry was injured in the series opener and missed the last two games. He was on the bench for Game 2 but watched Game 3 from the locker room because he had not taken a suit to Houston. Although he was still listed as questionable for the next game, Curry expressed confidence that he would play, saying, “I will not be going to any suit store.”

MCCOLLUM HONORED Portland guard C J McCollum won the N.B.A.’s Most Improved Player Award in his first season as a starter for the Trail Blazers, after improving his scoring average by more than 14 points over last season. McCollum, a third-year player from Lehigh, averaged 20.8 points per game. Charlotte’s Kemba Walker was second in the voting by a panel of 130 writers and broadcasters, Giannis Antetokounmpo of Milwaukee was third and Stephen Curry, last season’s M.V.P., finished fourth.

DURANT LAUDS BROOKS Kevin Durant said he was happy that Scott Brooks, hired this week as coach of the Washington Wizards, was back in the N.B.A., a year after Brooks was let go by Oklahoma City. Durant, who played for Brooks for seven seasons, said Brooks was a “great coach, someone that I really got to know and appreciate.”

Asked about the theory that the Wizards had hired Brooks to lure him closer to his hometown in free agency this summer, Durant said: “I ain’t really into theories. I’m focused on the Mavericks.” Oklahoma City plays Dallas in Game 4 of their first-round series Saturday night.


