


John Tavares, the Islanders center and captain, is still only 25, but he has a pretty good knack for tracking things — loose pucks in the crease, for one, and landmark victories for his star-crossed hockey team, for another.

Because Tavares was able to steady a wobbly puck and wrap the rebound of a shot past Florida Panthers goaltender Roberto Luongo at 10 minutes 41 seconds of the second overtime Sunday night, the Islanders won their first N.H.L. playoff series since 1993.

The Islanders will now face Tampa Bay in the second round, and they are likely to be viewed as underdogs, even though the Lightning do not have center Steven Stamkos or defenseman Anton Stralman and finished with fewer points in the regular season than the Islanders. The Lightning lost in the Stanley Cup finals last year.

As hard as it may be to believe, Tavares has been an Islander for seven seasons, but that is just a portion of the franchise’s 23-year wandering through the desert for playoff success. He understands what the fans have endured. And now, he said, it is time to move on.

When he played hockey as a child in Ontario, he said, he dreamed of winning the Stanley Cup, not just one of four playoff rounds.

“We want to enjoy tonight, but this isn’t over,” Tavares said Sunday as he sat at his dressing-room stall at Barclays Center in Brooklyn. “We want to keep this thing going. We have a special group. We believe we can do something special.”

In two of the past three seasons, Tavares has been one of three finalists for the Hart Trophy, awarded to the N.H.L. player “most valuable to his team.” Pittsburgh’s Sidney Crosby and Washington’s Alex Ovechkin, who have each won the Hart Trophy multiple times in recent years, have received much more attention, in large part because their teams have been more successful.

But look again: Tavares, Crosby and Ovechkin are still in the running for the Stanley Cup, and with the Penguins facing the Capitals in the second round, no more than two will make the conference finals.

The Islanders have come far since Tavares joined the team in 2009 as the No. 1 overall draft pick, in part because the core of the team has stayed together, and it has learned a lot.

Last April 27, the Islanders had a chance to advance to the second round of the playoffs. They took all of 11 shots on goal — none by Tavares — and lost to the Washington Capitals, 2-1.

Two years earlier, they split the first two games of a series against the top-seeded Penguins, but they lost the final two games, the second in overtime at home. These experiences have served as building blocks.

“I think we put that to good use this year,” said center Frans Nielsen, an Islander since the 2006-7 season. “We knew what we had to do. We knew it was going to be a long series, and it was going to be a grind. But we just kept going at it.”

And they went at it for as long as it took. Of the Islanders’ four victories over the Panthers, the Atlantic Division champions, three were in overtime and the final two were in double overtime.

“I think it gives a group confidence,” said Jack Capuano, the Islanders’ coach since November 2010. “It’s just a matter of maturity for our young players and how they have grown as a group, and that’s what it’s about and what you want to see. I just think it’s going to get us some confidence knowing that we can win at any type of hockey we play.”

Through 53 minutes Sunday, Tavares had no shots on goal, and the Islanders had no goals. With 1:40 remaining in regulation, Capuano pulled goaltender Thomas Greiss for an extra attacker. With 54 seconds left, Tavares pushed a rebound under Luongo’s pads to tie the score.

In the second overtime, Tavares caught up to the rebound of his own hard wrist shot, made sure he had control of the puck as he zipped behind the net, then beat a scrambling Luongo with a backhand wraparound to end the game.

“Once he was going around the net, I knew it was over,” said Kyle Okposo, Tavares’s longtime linemate.

Florida Coach Gerard Gallant later said of Tavares, “He’s a star player in this league, and he comes up big when he has to.”

But the Islanders are not just Tavares. Thomas Hickey and Alan Quine won games in overtime in the series. Tavares finished with six shots Sunday — of 51 for the Islanders.

“It means a lot to do this with basically the same group as when we were young pups,” Okposo said. “It’s fun to do it with this group.”

Greiss, a 30-year-old German who spent most of his career as a backup, was not thought to be evenly matched with Luongo, a 37-year-old veteran, but Greiss outplayed him. Tavares helped by scoring five goals in six games.

“He’s the leader,” Greiss said of Tavares. “He drives the engine.”

Okposo, Nielsen and the veteran fourth-liner Matt Martin become unrestricted free agents after the season. So the group could begin to dissolve soon. Perhaps that is why Tavares thinks these Islanders are capable of a long run.

“We realize how hard it is to win a series,” Tavares said. “This is hard. It’s going to get harder. But I know our group is ready for it. So I look forward to the next challenge.”


