


A federal judge ruled on Tuesday that prosecutors must release a list of people who were believed to have been connected to plans to close New Jersey approach lanes to the George Washington Bridge in 2013 but who were not charged with a crime.

A group of news organizations, including the publishers of some of New Jersey’s largest newspapers as well as The New York Times, asked Judge Susan D. Wigenton of United States District Court in January to unseal a letter listing the names of so-called unindicted co-conspirators, who were believed to have had knowledge of, and joined in, the plans to cause major traffic congestion in Fort Lee, N.J., over several days in September 2013.

Judge Wigenton agreed that the public had the right to know, noting that the people who have been connected to the case were public employees, politicians or appointed officials.

“The underlying events that gave rise to the indictment have been extensively covered by the media, such that even persons tangentially involved have already been identified and exposed in the press,” Judge Wigenton wrote. “There is very little that is private about the lane closures or the lives of the people allegedly connected to them.”

It is unclear when the names will be released, though the lawyer representing the news organizations sent a letter to the judge on Tuesday urging that the letter with the names be provided immediately.

A spokesman for Paul J. Fishman, the United States attorney for New Jersey, who had opposed the release, declined to comment on Tuesday.

Bridget Anne Kelly, the former deputy chief of staff to Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, and Bill Baroni, who had been the governor’s top staff appointee at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, have been charged with nine counts related to the scandal and are awaiting trial. Another former official at the Port Authority and an acquaintance of Mr. Christie’s, David Wildstein, pleaded guilty to two counts of conspiracy for his role in the lane closings.

The long-running scandal has hung over Mr. Christie, clouding his presidential aspirations, and could dash any hopes of his becoming the running mate of the presumptive Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump. The trial for Ms. Kelly and Mr. Baroni is set to begin in September, and it has the potential to loom over the final stretch of the campaign.


