


David Backes gave St. Louis a big gift on his 32nd birthday with another overtime goal to send the Blues home even with the Dallas Stars in their second-round Stanley Cup playoff series.

Backes, the Blues’ captain, got quite a serenade of “Happy Birthday to You” from his teammates after scoring off a rebound during a power play 10 minutes 58 seconds into overtime of Game 2 on Sunday for a 4-3 road victory.

“I want to know what they did with the money their parents gave them for voice lessons,” Backes said with a smile.

After blowing a two-goal lead while being outshot by 13-2 in the third period, the Blues took advantage of their second power-play chance in overtime. Backes followed up Alexander Steen’s shot 17 seconds after the Stars’ Antoine Roussel was called for interference.

“The thing that impressed me more than anything was the way we played in the overtime — outstanding,” Coach Ken Hitchcock said. “We went into attack mode and stayed on it the whole time. I was really impressed.”

Instead of heading to St. Louis trailing by two games to none, the Blues go home tied in the best-of-seven matchup between the top two teams in the Western Conference. Game 3 is Tuesday night, with Game 4 also in St. Louis on Thursday before the series returns to Dallas for Game 5 on Saturday.

Roussel slammed his stick when exiting the penalty box after Backes scored to end the game. Asked later if the penalty had been the right call, Roussel responded: “I don’t know. They have a tough job. It’s not easy to be a ref out there.”

Until Backes scored, Antti Niemi had stopped 19 consecutive shots after relieving Kari Lehtonen to start the second period.

Blues goalie Brian Elliott had 31 saves, stopping big shots by Jason Spezza and the Stars’ captain, Jamie Benn, about a minute apart in overtime.

St. Louis had a quick extra-man chance in overtime, but Niemi stopped three shots in that two-minute span.

SHARKS 3, PREDATORS 2 Joe Pavelski scored the tiebreaking goal with 2:40 left in regulation, and Martin Jones stopped 36 shots to lead host San Jose over Nashville as the Sharks took a two-games-to-none lead in their second-round series.

Logan Couture added a power-play goal, and Joe Thornton scored an empty-netter to put San Jose in control with the series shifting to Nashville for Game 3 on Tuesday night. San Jose won the most road games in the N.H.L. this season and all three of its games in Los Angeles in eliminating the Kings in the first round.

The Predators’ Mattias Ekholm tied the game earlier in the third, and Ryan Johansen scored for Nashville. But the Predators head home from California in much worse shape than they did in the first round when they won the first two games in Anaheim on the way to beating the Ducks in seven games.

After Ekholm erased San Jose’s lead in the third, the Sharks’ top line delivered when it mattered most. Joe Thornton slid a cross-ice pass to Matt Nieto, whose initial shot was stopped by Pekka Rinne. But Pavelski batted the rebound in for his sixth goal of the playoffs to give the Sharks the lead.

Thornton’s subsequent empty-net goal proved crucial when Johansen scored for Nashville with 3.6 seconds left.

Rinne, who made 21 saves, had helped keep Nashville in the game long enough to get the equalizer midway through the third. With San Jose leading by 1-0, Rinne robbed Nick Spaling with a pad save on a two-on-one with San Jose short-handed.

A few minutes later, Ekholm got the equalizer when his shot from the high slot got past a screened Jones to make it 1-1.

The Sharks scored first after an odd penalty late in the second. Nashville’s Roman Josi tried to rush off the ice after a bad line change to avoid a penalty for too many players but jumped into the Sharks’ bench because he could not reach his own in time. The move shocked the San Jose players but did not avoid the penalty.


