


When Joe Morton was just starting out as an actor, his grandmother came to see him in the original Broadway production of “Hair.” At that performance, he played the cop who ended the first act by informing all the naked “tribe” members that they were under arrest.

After his line, his grandmother stood up and announced proudly, “That was my grandson.”

Nearly a half-century later, audiences don’t need to be told who Mr. Morton is. His Emmy-winning turn as the villainous Rowan Pope on ABC’s popular “Scandal” and leading roles in films like “The Brother From Another Planet” and “Terminator 2: Judgment Day” have taken care of that.

New York theatergoers will get the chance to be reminded that Mr. Morton also has serious stage chops — he was last seen on Broadway in “Art” in 1999 — when he burrows deep into the soul and psyche of the sharp-witted comedian and activist Dick Gregory in “Turn Me Loose.” The new biographical play, written by Gretchen Law and directed by John Gould Rubin, is in previews at the Off Broadway Westside Theater and is scheduled to open on May 19.

In “Loose,” Mr. Morton is onstage for 90 minutes in what is essentially a one-man show that visits key moments in Mr. Gregory’s life. “I’m not doing an impression of Dick Gregory in terms of trying to create his voice and his style,” Mr. Morton said. “But everything I am doing is based on who he is and what he’s done.” (A second actor, John Carlin, pops up to set the scene as a nightclub M.C. or heckler, a journalist, a backstage flunky and more.)

During an interview late last month at a lounge upstairs at the Westside Theater, Mr. Morton, 68, easygoing and sipping from a cup of coffee, said that he jumped at the chance to play Mr. Gregory when the project first came his way three years ago.

“It’s like somebody saying, ‘How’d you like to play Martin Luther King, but with humor?’” Mr. Morton said. “What Dick Gregory was able to do, and what this play is able to do, is to use art to talk about politics, about social change, and to talk about it not just to an exclusively black audience.”

Three readings and one workshop production later, “Turn Me Loose” now focuses on Mr. Gregory during the 1960s, a tumultuous period during which the comic achieved his greatest success with nightclub and TV appearances, comedy LPs and a best-selling autobiography, but also found himself drawn ever deeper into the civil rights movement and other social causes. (He even ran for president as a write-in candidate in 1968, pulling in 47,000 votes.)

Mr. Morton said: “The play is about a man whose conflict is: Either I’m going to become rich and famous, or I’m going to give it all up and become an activist. It has to be one or nothing. It can’t be a little bit of both.”

Mr. Gregory, 84, still makes 200 appearances a year and is still out there protesting. He has given both the play and Mr. Morton his blessing.

“When I look at the hottest play on Broadway, [‘Hamilton’], and he’s been dead for 200 years, at least I get to be played onstage while I’m still alive,” Mr. Gregory said by phone from Washington. He name-checked Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and Medgar Evers, all of whom he knew, and said he hoped the show would introduce younger audiences to the civil rights movement and its accomplishments.

“Turn Me Loose” gained additional celebrity luster when the musician John Legend; his producing partner, Mike Jackson; and their production company, Get Lifted Film Company, signed on to produce. And Mr. Legend has written a song for the show.

“I loved the idea of a theater experience that was so funny and yet had such a powerful message,” Mr. Legend said by phone from Los Angeles. “Dick Gregory was such an important person, and he still is.”

Scheduling the production was the hard part, given Mr. Morton’s ties to “Scandal.” In effect, he is spending his summer vacation in New York, having squeezed in two weeks of rehearsals in Los Angeles with Mr. Rubin even as he was shooting his final scenes on “Scandal” for this season.

He and Christine Lietz, his companion and business partner (Mr. Morton is twice divorced and the father of three grown children), have settled into a rental apartment in Midtown and are living out of suitcases for the duration. “Christine and I call ourselves globally homeless,” he said, explaining that he currently has no fixed address but goes where work takes him.

Shonda Rhimes, the writer and producer who created “Scandal,” says viewers should never confuse Mr. Morton with Rowan Pope, who’s often a less-than-exemplary father to his daughter, Olivia (Kerry Washington). “If Olivia Pope had been raised by Joe Morton instead of Rowan Pope, we wouldn’t have a TV show, because Olivia would be whole and happy and mentally healthy,” Ms. Rhimes wrote in an email.

Back at the Westside Theater, a day after the interview, Mr. Morton paced the stage during his first rehearsal in New York. Dressed in the sort of black suit, white shirt and skinny black tie that Mr. Gregory wore, Mr. Morton made it all the way through the play without a script. Afterward, the production crew applauded. He dipped into a curtsy. “Not terrible,” Mr. Morton said, “but I was dropping lines that I’ve never dropped before.”

Mr. Rubin, the director, reassured Mr. Morton, saying it was a good start and they still had a week before facing an audience.

That Mr. Morton dropped even one line would surprise Ms. Rhimes, who gives him aria-like monologues as Rowan Pope. “I’ve written a brand-new, two-page monologue for Papa Pope at 7 a.m., and he’s delivered it word perfect an hour later, adding nuances I never even imagined,” she wrote. “With Joe, the marathon he’s running always looks like a sprint.”


