


Q. When did you know you wanted to be a surgeon?

A. I knew as a little girl watching the surgeons on the TV show “MASH.” Even though they didn’t look like me, I liked their ability to help someone who was injured or sick and almost immediately change the person’s health status. At the same time, my parents bought a set of encyclopedias that came with a medical encyclopedia as a bonus book, and I liked the transparencies of bones, muscles and blood vessels.

You had a double mastectomy yourself in 2013. How did that change the way you approach your job?

As a physician, I better understood what I was really asking of my patients. It’s one thing to say, “O.K., get your diagnostic mammogram, ultrasound, M.R.I. and PET/CT scan, and I’d like to see you back here in a week.” But in real life that can be a tremendous burden to patients, especially depending on the resources they have. It also helped me rethink how we could support patients better. Also, I struggled trying to figure out what my advocacy should be.

What did you decide?

First, that I would share my unique cancer experience as a survivor and health care provider to all those groups that were interested, including our community, faith-based and health fair partners, as well as survivor and medical organizations. Second, that I would focus my advocacy on sharing my experience of health disparities and the need for patients to participate in research as an investment in the future.

What were you like as a patient?

When my late mother was diagnosed with lung cancer, the one thing I learned from her is that it’s O.K. to let people who love and care about you take care of you when you really need it and are vulnerable. If I hadn’t had that experience, I would probably not have been a good patient, but I was determined to let go and not direct my care.

What is the favorite part of your job?

Spending time with my patients and getting to know them as people. The operating room is my oasis where I am most comfortable, but outside of that, being with my patients and knowing I have an impact is the best part of my job.


