


SHANGHAI — When Han Feng returned to her homeland a decade ago, she moved into one of Shanghai’s most historically significant buildings almost by accident.

Days after landing in the city, the financial capital of mainland China, after 20 years spent making a name for herself as a fashion designer in New York, Ms. Han ran into an old friend at a flea market.

“She suggested I come and be her neighbor at the Jin Jiang Hotel,” Ms. Han said. “I signed the lease the next day, then left town to go back to New York for three months.”

After moving to New York in 1985, with little English, Ms. Han began her professional career as a sales assistant at Bloomingdale’s. She soon started making and selling scarves out of her home and then introduced her own ready-to-wear line, becoming a staple at New York Fashion Week by the mid-1990s.

As her fashion reputation grew, Ms. Han was also called upon to design costumes for opulent productions of “Madame Butterfly” (one of them was performed at the Metropolitan Opera in New York in 2006), as well as movies, such as the film interpretation of Amy Tan’s novel “The Bonesetter’s Daughter” and a remake of “The Karate Kid” in 2010.

Ms. Han still has a loft in New York, but she moved her atelier to Shanghai in 2005, and now works exclusively on a made-to-measure basis with a list of loyal clients, many of whom have been wearing her designs for decades.

Her workspace is located downstairs from her apartment in Grosvenor House, a grand old apartment building and one of the two main buildings in the Jin Jiang Hotel complex.

The Jin Jiang Hotel has been one of Shanghai’s premier residential addresses since it opened in 1929 as Cathay Mansions. The Grosvenor House building followed in 1934.

Owned by Victor Sassoon, one of the most colorful characters of Shanghai’s early 20th-century jazz age, the first Cathay Mansions building was the tallest in the city when it was constructed. In its heyday, a raft of playboys, diplomats, journalists and businesspeople lived there.

After the Communist revolution in 1949, Cathay Mansions was renamed Jin Jiang Hotel and became a government guesthouse. In Mao Zedong’s China, this was the hotel du jour for dignitaries visiting Shanghai.

Its high point came in 1972, when President Richard Nixon and Premier Zhou Enlai of China signed the Shanghai Communiqué in the Jin Jiang’s Grand Hall, the first step in normalizing relations between the United States and the People’s Republic of China.

“It’s such a well-known building for Chinese people,” Ms. Han said. “Actually, my parents like to tell their friends that their daughter stays in the Jin Jiang Hotel.” She added that her parents were still surprised that she is allowed to live at the famous address.

Ms. Han’s one-bedroom apartment, on the eighth floor of Grosvenor House, measures 140 square meters, or about 1,500 square feet, and is a colorful expression of Ms. Han’s personality, with each room painted a different shade and much of the furniture custom-made, or picked up from local bric-a-brac stores.

“I really love it here,” she said. “It’s given me the opportunity to experiment with color and décor. What I really love about China is that it’s so easy to custom make everything.”

These days, with a one-bedroom apartment in the Grosvenor House building renting for about 30,000 renminbi, or $4,560, a month, depending on the floor, journalists have largely been priced out.

The building’s residents now are more likely to be consuls general and businesspeople.

Celebrities, such as the cosmetics entrepreneur Yue-Sai Kan, have also called Grosvenor House home, and the transgender dance star Jin Xing lives there with her family.

Born in Nanjing, on the cusp of Mao’s Cultural Revolution, a young Ms. Han moved to Hangzhou, a little over 100 miles southwest of Shanghai, to attend the China Academy of Fine Art just after Deng Xiaoping’s economic policies opened China to the world in the early 1980s.

Her art school education led her to become a collector of Chinese contemporary art, and many of the pieces hanging in her apartment are the creations of her classmates.

“I bought their art mainly because I wanted to support them,” she said. “Maybe these pieces I bought for one thousand or two thousand dollars, but now everyone is so famous!”

The openness of the living and dining room, a rarity in older Shanghai apartments and the result of Ms. Han’s decision to remove archways between the rooms, is immediately apparent on entering the apartment.

Natural light floods the south-facing living room, with one wall dominated by two of the immersive oceanic oil paintings by the Chinese artist Shi Zhiying.

The dining room, with a large table fashioned from a former staircase and an Art Deco-influenced molded ceiling, has been the scene of many dinner parties, where Ms. Han enjoys bringing people together for good food, wine and conversation.

“At night I see friends; I like to put people together,” she said. “I like to know more creative people. I enjoy that.”

Just off the bedroom is Ms. Han’s private retreat, a fuchsia-walled reading room, where books and magazines piled high around an armchair and a low ceiling combine to make the space a veritable cocoon. A fireplace and a hot plate — for making tea — complete the cozy feel.

“In winter I sit in here a lot,” Ms. Han said. “It makes me feel very comfortable. I can sit here with friends and exchange ideas, or be by myself and I am very happy here.”


