


Responses to David Samuels’s profile of Ben Rhodes will be featured in next week’s issue.

RE: PROSTITUTION

Emily Bazelon wrote about the growing movement of sex workers and activists that is making the decriminalization of sex work a feminist issue.

Thank you for titling Emily Bazelon’s article “Should Prostitution Be a Crime?” Since there is no one this side of the Taliban who isn’t trying to get rid of archaic laws that arrest and imprison prostituted people, the title makes clear that Bazelon has created a false dichotomy. What is absent from her article is the real world. The pimps, brothel owners and traffickers who buy and sell other people’s bodies are the force trying to decriminalize the entire global sex industry. Is that what she has in mind?

Bazelon also dismisses the only model that offers services to prostituted people, and penalizes sex buyers only with a fine and learning the realities of the global sex trade. This has been more successful than any other model because it recognizes the power difference between buyer and bought.

Bazelon is an accurate reporter elsewhere, but on this subject, she divides where actually there is agreement. Gloria Steinem, New York

Is it a stretch to say that a cover story might be indicative of a paradigm shift in mainstream conversation about prostitution? The article in The New York Times Magazine is a small gain but a big deal — an actual cover story, in an actual newspaper, written by a reporter with name recognition, that centers the voice of current and former sex workers.

One complaint about the article was that the description of the activists as a “fractious bunch” felt belittling and dismissive. Fraction is bound to occur within a community as diverse and mammoth as the sex-work community. Unfortunately, Bazelon did not include, or even acknowledge, why our community is so huge. Not all sex workers sell sex: Cam performers, porn performers, strippers and sensual-massage workers are some other examples of sex workers.

We’re not saying we think Emily Bazelon’s reporting was perfect. We’re not even saying we’re impressed by it. We’re saying that the hard work of simply existing as a sex worker in a public space might be starting to pay off. Caty Simon and Josephine, editors of Tits and Sass, a blog run by sex workers

Bazelon states that I once wrote that “any woman who claimed to have chosen prostitution was acting pathologically – ‘enjoyment of domination and rape are in her nature.’ ” This statement does not express my view of women; on the contrary, it expresses my view of how men who buy sex view women. In our article, my co-author and I were discussing sexist attitudes that were harmful and that support prostitution. The quoted statement was actually our citation of important work by Andrea Dworkin, the feminist writer and survivor of prostitution, who was explaining the ideology that makes prostitution possible: a sexism that insists that women like domination and rape. Prostitution is a sexist, racist and classist institution that harms those who are sold for sex. Assuming that women enjoy the rapelike sex and abuse of prostitution, sex buyers’ attitudes are indeed based in sexist notions about women’s nature. Sex-trade predators cause women harms that cannot be separated from prostitution itself, regardless of its legal status. Melissa Farley, Prostitution Research & Education, San Francisco

In her recent article, Emily Bazelon trumpeted International Justice Mission’s minimal funding under the Bush administration, failing to note that I.J.M., a nonpartisan organization, has also been funded under the Obama administration. United States government funding for I.J.M. totals less than 2 percent of the organization’s budget. Further, we were disappointed that the piece cites a comment made in a private meeting nearly a decade ago as a valid explanation of I.J.M.’s practices.

Bazelon’s article focuses on the pros and cons of decriminalizing prostitution. I.J.M.’s focus, in contrast, is on the enslavement and sexual exploitation of children and adults, which is legal nowhere. Surely no one wants it to be. Holly Burkhalter, Senior Adviser for Justice System Transformation, I.J.M.

Emily Bazelon’s article, while comprehensive, fails to recognize much of the serious economic research that ad­­dresses what decriminalization in the United States would look like.

In a recent paper, we use the fact that a Rhode Island District Court judge unexpectedly decriminalized indoor prostitution in 2003 to calculate causal estimates of the impact of decriminalization on the composition of the sex market, reported rape offenses and sexually transmitted infections. While Rhode Island’s decriminalization increased the size of the indoor sex market, reported rape offenses declined 30 percent, and female gonorrhea incidence declined by 40 percent. Your readers should be aware that strong empirical evidence for decriminalization is mounting. Manisha Shah, Associate Professor, U.C.L.A., and Scott Cunningham, Associate Professor, Baylor University


