


FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, the byline with an article in some editions on March 20 about the Islamic State’s preparations for the terrorist attacks in Paris in November misspelled, in some copies, the surname of one of the reporters. She is Laure Fourquet, not Fouquet. The error was repeated in a reporting credit in some copies. The errors were corrected online shortly after the article was published, but editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

INTERNATIONAL

An article in some editions last Wednesday about an accidental leak of confidential memos meant to temper news media criticism of the Egyptian government misidentified one of the Persian Gulf countries that is giving Egypt a large cash infusion to help counter its economic crisis. The country is the United Arab Emirates, not Qatar.

•

A map on April 12 with an article about a rash of suicide attempts in the Attawapiskat aboriginal community on James Bay in Canada gave an incorrect scale. The scale line represented 300 miles, not 50.

•

An article on April 11 about presidential elections in Peru in which Keiko Fujimori, the daughter of an imprisoned former president, was in the lead misstated, in some editions, her finish in the first round of presidential voting in 2011. Ms. Fujimori finished second, not first. (A runoff is set for June 5 in this year’s election.)

NEW YORK

An article on Monday about the Rutgers 250, a variety of tomato being resurrected by Rutgers University, reversed the locations of two men’s farms in New Jersey. John Hauser’s farm is in Old Bridge and John Giamarese’s farm is in East Brunswick.

BUSINESS DAY

Because of an editing error, the DealBook column on Tuesday, about the background of Steven Mnuchin, Donald J. Trump’s national finance chairman, misstated the ownership of the bankrupt movie company Relativity Media. Mr. Mnuchin’s movie company, Dune Entertainment, and RatPac Entertainment, the company of James Packer and Brett Ratner, were investors in Warner Bros. movies, and Mr. Mnuchin was briefly co-chairman of Relativity. Neither Mr. Ratner, Mr. Packer nor RatPac had any relationship with Relativity.

SPORTS

An article on Saturday about four gray colts that competed in the Kentucky Derby referred incorrectly to the odds of a gray foal being produced when one parent is gray and when both parents are. If both parents are gray, there is at least a 75 percent chance — not a 75 percent chance — the foal will be gray. If one parent is gray, there is at least a 50 percent chance — not a 50 percent chance — the foal will be gray.

•

An article on Tuesday about Reece Whitley, a 6-foot-8 Olympic hopeful in swimming, referred incorrectly to two classes the 16-year-old is taking at William Penn Charter School. They are advanced courses in chemistry and algebra, not Advanced Placement courses. The error was repeated in a picture caption.

OBITUARIES

An obituary last Wednesday about the literary critic and historian Daniel Aaron misidentified the subject he taught at Smith College and Harvard. It was English, not history. The obituary also erroneously attributed a distinction to Professor Aaron. He was one of the first people to be granted a doctoral degree in American civilization by Harvard, not the first. (Henry Nash Smith was the first.)

•

An obituary on Tuesday about the actress Sylvia Kauders misstated her birth name. She was born Sylvia Wolinsky, not Wolinksy.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


