


Westgay, a frisky gay dance party in the West Village, ended last summer when the building was sold to condominium developers.

PrettyUgly, a twink-filled dance party at the Diamond Horseshoe in Times Square, ended its run this year. New owners, new directions.

JB Saturdays, a party in Hell’s Kitchen that drew about 1,600 shirtless gay men every week for three years, stopped in January.

And in February, Escuelita, a Latin-flavored gay dance club that throbbed for decades near the Port Authority Bus Terminal, shuttered its doors because of declining attendance.

Seemingly overnight, New York City has become a real-life “Footloose” — at least for dance-happy gay men who feel as if they have nowhere to boogie these days. While smaller gay bars abound (there are at least 17 in Hell’s Kitchen alone, by my count), the number of large gay clubs and weekly dance parties has waned in recent years.

“It’s tragic,” said Adam Barta, 36, a singer who lives in the Bronx. “People used to have to show up to a dance club to have a social life. In this digital age, clubs have been usurped by the right swipe.”

Night life veterans point to a variety of reasons, including cultural shifts, real estate pressures and technology.

Brandon Voss, 36, a club promoter and co-producer of several gay parties including Zoo, which ended last year, said that the demand for dance parties has declined. “The new generation just doesn’t support large dance clubs,” said Mr. Voss, who no longer regularly hosts dance parties. “They spend money on special events I do, like my RuPaul’s Drag Race, Pride and Halloween events. But the days of the weekly dance party are over, at least for now.”

Mr. Voss also blames the advent of hookup apps like Grindr, as well as music streaming services like SoundCloud and Spotify for replacing D.J.s as the way to learn about new music. “Why pay an expensive cover charge and deal with rude bouncers when you can just swipe on your iPhone?” he asked.

Susanne Bartsch, who in 2014 hosted four weekly gay-friendly dance events and now has only one (a summertime party at Le Bain at the Standard), agrees that technology has upended gay night life.

“Social media changed the landscape of going out,” Ms. Bartsch said. “One doesn’t have to have dancing to be part of flirting and hooking up anymore.”

The reasons gay men flocked to the dance floor have changed, too. In the age of same-sex marriage and transgender rights, gays no longer rely on nightclubs as safe places to congregate. Indeed, instead of all-night dances, Mr. Voss now hosts a Sunday brunch at Señor Frog’s in Times Square. And it’s been packed.

“Who would have thought a drag queen brunch at a Mexican restaurant would be easier than a Saturday night dance party?” he asked.

To be sure, there are still opportunities for dancing. There are monthly parties like Brüt, a leather-flavored bash at Santos Party House. Weekly dance parties include Strut, which takes place Tuesdays on the cozy downstairs dance floor at Acme, and 11:11, a raucous party hosted by the promoter Ladyfag on Fridays on East Houston Street.

Moreover, the Monster, a longstanding gay bar in Greenwich Village, has a dance floor, as does Icon, an unpretentious club in Astoria, Queens. And every year in March, the Black Party draws thousands of “circuit queens” to a cavernous space (now in Brooklyn).

But this pales in comparison to the dance scene of the 1990s and early aughts, when there were dance-friendly parties nearly every night of the week, including Monday at Sugar Babies, Tuesday at Beige, Wednesday at Limelight, Thursday at Boy Bar, Friday at Don Hill’s, Saturday at the Roxy and Sunday at Body and Soul.

Promoters who are still in the game say that the economics of dance clubs have changed.

Brian Rafferty, who runs a medium-size gay Saturday night dance party called Trade at Undr, a club in Hell’s Kitchen, blames real estate for the dancing slowdown. “As condos go up, clubs close down,” he said. “Beige was closed after a condo was built next to it and filed noise complaints.”

Besides, bars have cheaper admission and drink prices. “Sad and absolutely true,” said John Blair, a veteran night life promoter who drew throngs to the Roxy, Splash and other discos for years.

Mr. Blair now does one monthly dance party at Stage 48, but his primary site, which opened last November, is an intimate lounge on Ninth Avenue called Rise Bar. It’s the type of place where professional gay men in button-down shirts gather after work and generally sit still.

“Everyone kept saying we were crazy doing another bar in Hell’s Kitchen,” he said. “But I really think for now that is all that can actually make money.”


