


WASHINGTON — President Obama, Hillary Clinton and other Democrats are rallying around proposals to expand Social Security and increase benefits, a sea change after three decades dominated by concern over the program’s rising costs.

The Democrats’ new consensus was driven by the populist election-year politics of Senator Bernie Sanders and by a realization that many workers have neither traditional pensions nor any significant retirement savings.

Mr. Sanders campaigned hard on promises to expand Social Security. Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, helped set the tone as well, breaking with Republican orthodoxy by vowing not to cut Social Security benefits. That position puts him potentially at odds with Republican lawmakers eager to rein in entitlement programs, though an aide has suggested that he might be flexible on the issue.

The Democrats’ proposals would amount to the biggest changes in Social Security since 1983, when the program faced a financial crisis and Congress enacted measures recommended by a bipartisan commission headed by Alan Greenspan. To save the program, spending was trimmed, taxes were raised and the eligibility age was set to increase slowly as the population ages.

Since then, many Republicans and some Democrats have expressed concern about the growing cost of entitlement programs, including those for retiring baby boomers, and have discussed proposals to trim Social Security further.

“Social Security is going broke,” House Speaker Paul D. Ryan has declared.

In budget negotiations in 2011 and 2012, Mr. Obama seriously considered proposals to curtail future Social Security benefits by changing the way cost-of-living increases were calculated. He included a similar proposal in his budget request in early 2013, in an unsuccessful effort to achieve a bipartisan agreement on deficit reduction.

The calculations that drove those efforts have not changed. In their last report, in July 2015, the trustees of Social Security, including four administration officials, said the program’s old-age and disability insurance trust funds could be depleted in 2034, and could then pay just 79 percent of promised benefits unless Congress took action.

But the politics have shifted. Mr. Obama summarized the new Democratic consensus in a speech in Elkhart, Ind., on June 1.

“It’s time we finally made Social Security more generous, and increased its benefits so that today’s retirees and future generations get the dignified retirement that they’ve earned,” Mr. Obama said. “And we could start paying for it by asking the wealthiest Americans to contribute a little bit more.”

Democrats appear likely to include those proposals in their platform. “Senator Sanders, working with other progressives, has transformed the debate, so that expanding Social Security is today a central and consensus tenet of the Democratic Party,” Nancy J. Altman, the president of Social Security Works, an advocacy group, said at a hearing of the platform-drafting committee on June 9.

Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas and chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, said the Democrats’ stance was not a surprise. “Whenever there’s a problem with a federal program,” Mr. Brady said, “the president’s answer is to raise taxes and throw more money at it.”

Mr. Sanders has long pushed for the expansion of Social Security and made that a major theme of his bid for the Democratic presidential nomination. The party’s new consensus gave Mr. Sanders reason to crow.

“A few years ago we were told that the debate on Social Security was not whether we were going to cut it, but by how much,” said Warren Gunnels, the policy director for the Sanders campaign. “Many of us stood up and fought back.”

Now, he said, after Mr. Obama’s remarks this month in Indiana, “we are all unified as Democrats, and the issue is not whether we’re going to expand Social Security, but how much we’re going to expand it.”

Sixty million people receive Social Security benefits totaling more than $74 billion each month. So even small changes can have big implications.

At one point, just before the New Hampshire primary in February, Mr. Sanders challenged Mrs. Clinton’s record on Social Security and suggested that she might support increasing the age at which people become eligible for full retirement benefits. (That age, originally set at 65, increases gradually and is already scheduled to reach 67 for people born after 1959.)

Responding immediately on Twitter, Mrs. Clinton denounced the comments as “false innuendos” and promised: “I won’t cut Social Security. As always, I’ll defend it, & I’ll expand it.”

Specifically, Mrs. Clinton says, she would increase benefits for widows and those who take time out of the paid work force to care for a child or a sick family member. She would require the wealthiest Americans to “contribute more” through higher taxes. And she says she would fight efforts to privatize Social Security, reduce annual cost-of-living adjustments or increase the age for collecting full retirement benefits.

Mr. Obama highlighted other reasons for the Democrats’ renewed focus on Social Security. “A lot of Americans don’t have retirement savings,” he said, and “fewer people have pensions they can really count on.”

More than 110 House Democrats — out of 188 total — have endorsed a resolution supporting policies to “protect and expand Social Security.”

Democrats have offered a number of proposals to alter the formula for calculating Social Security benefits or financing the program, but have not endorsed a specific legislative package. One proposal would increase benefits for everyone, with extra help for those considered most vulnerable. Another would increase the cost-of-living adjustment to reflect the fact that older Americans tend to use more health care services. Another proposal would impose payroll taxes on workers’ earnings above $250,000 a year.

In the Senate, Democrats are digging in against a Republican nominated by Mr. Obama to serve a second term as a public trustee of Social Security, a watchdog over the finances of the program. Democrats say the nominee, Charles P. Blahous III, who served as a trustee from 2010 to 2015, has undermined public confidence in the program by exaggerating its financial problems. He was an architect of President George W. Bush’s failed plan to let people put some of their payroll taxes into personal retirement accounts.

Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, described Mr. Blahous as “an anti-government zealot.” Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, said, “Mr. Blahous has shown over the course of his academic career that he is personally ideologically opposed to the fundamental promise of Social Security.”

Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and chairman of the Finance Committee, dismissed the criticism of Mr. Blahous as “partisan rants” meant to whip up support and help raise money for Democrats in an election year.

“This firestorm is about politics, pure and simple,” Mr. Hatch said.

By a vote of 14 to 12 on June 8, the Finance Committee recommended the confirmation of Mr. Blahous, over the objections of all Democrats on the panel.

The trustees supervise the preparation of a detailed annual report on the financial outlook for Social Security and Medicare. The reports are trusted and frequently cited by members of both parties, including Mr. Ryan, who has called “the explosion of entitlement spending” the “greatest threat to our nation’s long-term economic prosperity.”

Mr. Trump may have opened a fissure in his party, just as Democrats unite. He assured Iowa voters in December that “we’re not going to cut your Social Security,” and at a Republican debate in March, he said, “I will do everything within my power not to touch Social Security, to leave it the way it is.”

But in his 2000 book, “The America We Deserve,” Mr. Trump referred to Social Security as “a huge Ponzi scheme,” suggested raising the age for full benefits to 70 and said, “Privatization would be good for all of us.”


