


The C-suite leans right.

Republican candidates have drawn overwhelming support from the highest-paid chief executives in the country this election cycle, according to an analysis by the Center for Responsive Politics conducted for The New York Times.

That may not be so surprising, given the Republicans’ reputation as the party of business. But none of the people on this year’s highest-paid list contributed to the campaign of Donald J. Trump, a fellow businessman and the presumptive Republican presidential nominee.

Their unwillingness to support Mr. Trump, at least so far, is a further indication that the party’s new standard-bearer is struggling to connect with some of its most influential constituents.

Together, the 200 best-compensated C.E.O.s and their spouses gave more than $6.5 million to Republican candidates and groups supporting their campaigns, but less than $1 million to Democratic candidates and groups.

Leslie H. Wexner, chief of the company that owns Victoria’s Secret, along with his wife, Abigail, were the top political donors among those included on the Equilar 200 Highest-Paid C.E.O. Rankings.

Ms. Wexner gave $1.5 million to groups that supported Ohio governor John Kasich’s bid for the Republican presidential nomination. In doing so, she was supporting the hometown candidate: L Brands, the parent company of Victoria’s Secret, is based in Columbus, Ohio. Mr. Wexner gave $500,000 to a group supporting the campaign of Jeb Bush and nearly $100,000 to national Republican committees.

The second-most-prolific political donors among the top-paid chieftains were Robert J. Hugin, the recently retired chief executive of the drug company Celgene, and his wife, Kathleen. Mr. Hugin gave $250,000 to a “super PAC” supporting New Jersey governor Chris Christie’s unsuccessful bid for the Republican presidential nomination and nearly $200,000 to national Republican committees.

Most of the other biggest political donors — including Stephen A. Wynn of Wynn Resorts and his wife, Andrea; John B. Hess of the Hess Corporation and his wife, Susan; Rupert Murdoch of 21st Century Fox; and Meg Whitman of Hewlett Packard Enterprise also supported Republicans by a wide margin.

Salesforce.com’s leader, Marc Benioff, was the top donor to Democrats among the high earners. Along with his wife, Lynne, he contributed $173,400, most of that to national Democratic committees.

But even among the big donors supporting Democrats, few of the chief executives supported Hillary Clinton, who is closing in on the Democratic nomination for president, and none contributed to her rival, Bernie Sanders.

Mrs. Clinton received just $56,000 in contributions from the top-paid chiefs in the country. Her super PAC, Priorities USA Action, received no contributions from the group, not even from Mr. Benioff, who has publicly said he supports Mrs. Clinton.

Among the other candidates drawing support from the C.E.O.-class were Rob Portman, Republican senator from Ohio; Kelly Ayotte, Republican senator from New Hampshire; and Chuck Schumer, Democratic senator from New York.

Chief executives of public companies are not always big political contributors. They must balance the risk of appearing partisan with the interests of their companies. And many of the best-compensated chief executives have much of their net worth tied up in stock, which can complicate the impulse to write big checks to favored candidates.

Nonetheless, the Center for Responsive Politics analysis reveals a clear willingness among some of the country’s richest business leaders to exert their influence on democracy, and a clear propensity to support Republicans.

Like many of the Republican party’s top donors, however, the best-paid C.E.O.s in the country remain wary of throwing their support behind Mr. Trump, even as the Republican National Committee scrambles to shore up big money for his candidacy.

Ms. Whitman gave more than $200,000 to groups that supported the failed bid by Mr. Christie to become the Republican presidential nominee. After Mr. Christie threw his support behind Mr. Trump, Ms. Whitman criticized him and assailed Mr. Trump.

“Donald Trump is unfit to be president,” Ms. Whitman said in February. But that didn’t end her political spending. The next month, she donated $100,000 to a super PAC devoted to defeating Mr. Trump.


