


Beyoncé’s new visual album “Lemonade,” released on HBO late on Saturday and causing paroxysms of rapture across the Internet ever since, has been called many things, among them: an ode to “female solidarity,” a portrait of “Southern gothic empowerment,” “an emotional odyssey,” “a love letter to black women” and a series of “fashion statements.”

Which of these things is not like the others?

If you guessed the last, you are correct. Though Fashion (capital F) has been trying to claim Beyoncé since, well, forever, she is not its creature, and this album proves it. It is the anti-Coachella: the opposite of a musical event leeched of meaning by branded commercial enterprises. Indeed, it crushes branded commercial enterprises under its powerful feet.

True, its 12 videos are full of fashion names, including Peter Dundas for Roberto Cavalli, Saint Laurent (the dress and shoes in “Denial”); Hood by Air and Yeezy (coat and top in “Don’t Hurt Yourself”); Rosie Assoulin (off-the-shoulder peach top); and Phelan (worn by Zendaya).

But it is also full of names most people have never heard of: the Kuwait designer Yousef al-Jasmi (the crystal bodysuit in “Sorry”); the New York-based Zana Bayne (the leather cone bra worn à la Nefertiti); the Lebanese designer Nicolas Jebran (a high-necked orange ball gown with jet embroidered geometry). It is packed with historical references and vintage pieces; white (lots of white) wedding dresses (including her own) and slip dresses and lace high-necked Victorian body suits; a courtlike dress remade in African print jacquard and chopped short at the front; a tulle shroud; tribal markings — you get the idea.

All together these create a world of intense visual richness and power that is unidentifiable by logo or look. And all of it has the effect of elevating the whole out of a world ruled by designers and recognizable global names and into a personal aesthetic statement.

Recently, it has become trendy once again for musicians to team up with brands for their tour wardrobes — this year Adele is being outfitted by Burberry; Florence Welch by Gucci — and it would not have been surprising if, for a project such as “Lemonade,” Beyoncé had chosen to work with a single designer. (At the very least, there’s probably a compelling financial reason for such collaboration, and it is more efficient.)

But if that had happened, said designer would have been stamped with Beyoncé’s endorsement, and her name would have been forever linked with that designer. Some of her influence would have rubbed off, and some of the focus on her work would have, too.

Many of the stories that appeared about the most recent Coachella festival focused more on the fashion than on the music, to the extent that the fashion messaging overwhelmed the music messaging, and it began to feel a bit like an extended ad campaign.

By contrast, on “Lemonade,” the clothes support the point, or points; they are not the point. Which is as it should be — and is totally in line with Beyoncé’s past approach to fashion. In their breadth and diversity and unpredictability, the costumes emphasize the idea, embedded in the lyrics as well as the album’s narrative chapter structure (Intuition to Denial to Anger to, ultimately, Hope and Redemption), that the power in this world belongs to Beyoncé and to her alone. That includes the power to decide, to declare her feelings and needs and pain, to decide to go back on her promise to leave and to stay, to — yes, even this — choose what she wants to wear that expresses all of the above.

(O.K., maybe after some discussion with her stylist, Marni Senofonte.)

The clothes serve the woman. Which, in fact, is what all fashion should do. As a result, although it did not take its cues from the catwalk, it is possible the album may have a knock-on effect on the catwalk — that next season we will suddenly see a lot of high-necked shredded Victoriana that likewise takes the uniform of hothouse fragility and inverts it so that it becomes a statement about strength.

In the meantime, however, it is worth reminding ourselves of that truth every once in a while. If we forget, Beyoncé is here to remind us.


