


This article is part of our spring gallery guide.

A TIME traveler from the early 1990s would be astounded to behold the gleaming new city of high-rise condo buildings that’s grown up in the formerly industrial neighborhood of Chelsea, where once the only place to see art was the old Dia headquarters on West 22nd Street. He or she would be astonished, as well, by the Whitney Museum of American Art’s shiny new edifice in the meatpacking district, just below West 14th Street, and by the hundreds of galleries populating the Chelsea art district’s core — from around West 17th to West 29th Streets, and mostly between 10th and 11th Avenues. Things are still in flux here, as rising rents have been squeezing out some galleries and will continue to do so as leases come due for renegotiation; on the other hand, Hauser & Wirth, now on West 18th Street, is constructing its own new building on West 22nd Street. Even if Chelsea has passed its peak of three or so years ago, for viewers who want to see a lot of art in every conceivable contemporary mode and at every level of quality in a short time, it’s still the place to go.

ANDREW KREPS This gallery is showing the work of the Detroit native Michael E. Smith. Except for a video showing someone modeling sneakers underwater, from the ankles down, the works in this enjoyably mystifying show have a decidedly scruffy appearance. But the installation’s pared-down elegance focuses attention on, for example, a pair of basketball-size spheres coated in black, tarry material and, adjacent, a dirty red garden hose swooping in two long arcs, from end to end of one wall. The 52-foot-long white plastic tube stuffed with shoe soles titled “Cake”? The back of a circular light fixture with wads of tissue attached? What do such objects mean? If you like having your mind teased, you should see this show.

ANTON KERN Anne Collier produces large, sumptuous photographs of photographic imagery found on old record album covers, post cards, posters and advertisements, with a gimlet eye for representations of female beauty and sex appeal. The program sounds academic, but in Ms. Collier’s hands, it has a personal and mournful, albeit restrained, tenor. In the rear gallery hangs a seven-and-one-half-foot-tall black-and-white photograph of a naked woman, seen from behind, standing in shin-deep ocean waves — it’s called “Positive (California).” On an adjacent wall, a framed photograph shows a diary open to a page bearing a simple form titled “Things I Want to Accomplish,” with blanks to fill in at six months, five years and 20 years. It’s a poignant meditation on existential anxiety and spiritual aspiration.

DAVID ZWIRNER “The Secret Agent,” by Stan Douglas, on view at the West 19th Street branch of this gallery, is a riveting six-screen film installation, a nonlinear, postmodernist adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s novel “The Secret Agent,” about a terrorist bomber operating in England in 1886. Mr. Douglas sets his version in mid-1970s Portugal in a time of political upheaval. Featuring scenes played by professional actors, episodes are projected onto one or another screen at different times, creating a continuous feeling of tension and paranoia during the overall 54-minute duration. A conspiracy to bomb the Marconi installation near Lisbon, an international telephone exchange, comes to light. Mr. Douglas’s play with the conventions of the cinematic espionage thriller is heady and gripping. Zwirner’s gallery at 537 West 20th Street is presenting a survey of Mr. Douglas’s photography from the late ’90s to the present, including recent mural-scale works envisioning his hometown, Vancouver, in the late 1940s.

MICHAEL ROSENFELD Theodore Roszak (1907-1981) is best known as a Modernist sculptor of futuristic constructions and expressionistic welded-steel works. An amazing exhibition here, “Theodore Roszak: “Propulsive Transfiguration, a Survey of Drawings From 1928 to 1980,” reveals him to have been one of the 20th century’s great draftsmen. In large, mostly black-and-white works from the 1950s on, Mr. Roszak channeled Bosch, Dali and pulp science fiction to create visions of terrific spiritual turbulence, weirdness, horror and ecstasy.

ELIZABETH HARRIS By turns hedonistic and severely formal, “Thornton Willis: Step Up” offers boldly frontal paintings of squares and rectangles, rendered with a sensuous touch, that recall geometric abstractions of the mid-20th century, like those of Hans Hofmann. Mr. Willis, who will be 80 next month, breathes fresh life into Euclidean Modernism.

JAMES COHAN Three intense movies by Omer Fast, an internationally celebrated video artist, mix documentary fact and surrealistic fiction with formal ingenuity and political urgency. One, “5,000 Feet Is the Best” (2011), intersperses segments from an interview with a drone pilot suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and dreamlike sequences featuring an imaginary drone pilot in therapy. “Continuity” (2012) is an unnerving, disjunctively told tale of a young, troubled soldier welcomed home from war duty in Afghanistan by his strange, excessively loving parents. A sequel to “Continuity,” “Spring” (2016) is a single projection divided into five rectangles of different dimensions, sometimes showing one scene altogether, sometimes different images simultaneously. This complicates what is already a Freudian tangle of incestuous intrigue, itself a metaphor for a world of social pathology.

LUHRING AUGUSTINE Janet Cardiff and George Bures Miller are presenting the most entertaining and technically impressive show in Chelsea right now. The first of two installations is “The Marionette Maker,” a tour de force of mechanically animated puppetry inhabiting a travel trailer. A diminutive theater built into the caravan’s exterior presents a little man playing the piano and a tiny diva who sings an aria from Tchaikovsky’s opera “None but the Lonely Heart.” Inside, along with dozens of moving puppets, a life-size woman cast from Ms. Cardiff’s body dozes like Sleeping Beauty. It is altogether magical. “Experiment in F# Minor” (2013) consists of 72 old speakers, of many different makes and sizes, on a plywood table. Out of them pours music sounding like part of a rock opera, filling the gallery with physically palpable sound and transporting symphonic harmonies.

FLAG ART FOUNDATION Betty Tompkins is known for the monumental photorealist paintings and drawings that she began making in the 1970s, copying from pornographic imagery. In 2000 and 2013, she circulated an email asking people to send her slang words and phrases describing women. She selected 1,000 submissions and memorialized each in the form of a small painting of block-lettered words, in many cases on abstract backgrounds simulating abstractions by famous male painters, like Jackson Pollock and Barnett Newman. By turns comically vulgar and hatefully sexist, all are presented in this raw and incendiary show, “Women Words, Phrases and Stories.”

CARA GALLERY Agostino Arrivabene’s “Hierogamy,” through Saturday, is a weird outlier. In an expert imitation of an old master’s manner, this Italian artist paints bizarre images suggesting mushroom-induced visions of a 19th-century alchemist.

Barbara Kruger’s rueful mural, “Untitled (Blind Idealism is …),” appears on a wall facing west and overlooking the High Line at West 22nd Street. In giant white block letters on a black ground, it proclaims, “Blind Idealism is Reactionary Scary Deadly,” with the words reactionary and scary overlaid by red crosses. It’s a modification of words by the writer Frantz Fanon, who originally declared, “Blind Idealism is reactionary.” Either way, it’s a thought that fanatics should take to heart.

Milk & Hops This small shop, with limited counter space and a handful of tables,lists its craft beer offerings on a chalkboard above the bar. (Who wouldn’t want to try Bronx Brewery’s Get Rich or Dunkelweizen and Pipeworks’ Da Fuzz?) Cheese, the other star here, is incorporated into most sandwiches. Consider picking up goods for a picnic at the nearby Hudson River Greenway. 166 Ninth Avenue, at West 20th Street; 212-989-1999.

Lupulo The U-shaped bar at the center of this Portuguese restaurant on the eastern edge of Chelsea beckons guests. (As do the aromas wafting from the kitchen.) An eclectic mix of international and national breweries yields the 16 beers on tap and the 30 featured bottles. 835 Avenue of the Americas, at West 29th Street, 212-290-7600. — NICOLE HERRINGTON


