


The conductor Seiji Ozawa, who has been suffering from ill health this spring, has canceled his plans to return to the Tanglewood Festival this summer because of a “lack of physical strength,” the Boston Symphony Orchestra announced on Thursday.

Mr. Ozawa, 80, said in a statement that he was disappointed not to be coming to Tanglewood, the idyllic summer festival in the Berkshires where he studied as a young man, led the Boston Symphony Orchestra during his 29 seasons as its music director and now has a concert hall there named for him. It was to have been his first appearance there since 2006.

“I am very, very sad and sorry that I will have to miss this summer’s Tanglewood,” Mr. Ozawa said in a written statement, adding that he missed the grounds, his friends and colleagues, and playing tennis at his house in West Stockbridge. “I am concentrating on eating and I am gaining more body strength now. I am so much looking forward to returning to Tanglewood SOON.”

Mr. Ozawa has suffered from ill health in recent years. In 2010 he announced that he had esophageal cancer, and canceled concerts to focus on treatment. The following year he canceled his appearances at Carnegie Hall so he could recover from surgery to repair herniated discs.

The orchestra said that Mr. Ozawa had developed a fever that led him to lose weight in April from overwork during a monthlong stay in Europe, where he performed with the Berlin Philharmonic in Germany and the Seiji Ozawa International Academy Switzerland in Paris. His immune system weakened further after he returned to Japan and continued working, the orchestra said.

Mark Volpe, the managing director of the Boston Symphony, said in a statement, “We wish Seiji a speedy recovery and look forward to his return to Tanglewood in future seasons.”

A replacement conductor will be announced for his July 5 concert featuring young musicians both from his Swiss Academy String Quartet Ensemble and the Tanglewood Music Center. Jacques Lacombe, who was originally to have shared a July 9 concert of the Boston Symphony Orchestra with Mr. Ozawa, will now conduct the entire concert.


