


RIO DE JANEIRO — In one verbal assault from the podium of Brazil’s Congress, Jair Bolsonaro told a fellow legislator that she was not worthy of being raped by him. “You don’t merit that,” said Mr. Bolsonaro, a former army parachutist.

In another episode, the congressman described his abhorrence of homosexuality. “I would be incapable of loving a gay son,” said Mr. Bolsonaro, 61, the father of five children. “I prefer that he die in an accident.”

Then Mr. Bolsonaro justified his vote last month for the impeachment of President Dilma Rousseff by praising Col. Carlos Alberto Brilhante Ustra, who oversaw the torture of dissidents during Brazil’s military dictatorship, which lasted from 1964 to 1985.

Colonel Ustra, who died last year at the age of 83, embodied “the dread of Dilma Rousseff,” Mr. Bolsonaro proclaimed, his reference clear: Ms. Rousseff, an operative in a guerrilla group in her youth, repeatedly endured brutal torture sessions at the hands of Colonel Ustra’s colleagues.

Such venomous statements might signal the end of a politician’s career in some places. But not in Brazil, where Mr. Bolsonaro’s rising national prominence reflects a veering to the right and growing vitriol as disillusionment with the political establishment grows.

He is already one of the most influential politicians from Rio de Janeiro, where in 2014 he was elected to a seventh four-year term in Congress with more votes than any other legislator. Now, Mr. Bolsonaro is surging among those eyeing the presidency in 2018.

Mr. Bolsonaro, in excoriating immigrants, promoting gun ownership and defending the torture of drug traffickers, says his time is coming as a disgraced political elite reels from the upheaval surrounding efforts to oust Ms. Rousseff.

“I plan to collaborate with the destiny of my country,” Mr. Bolsonaro said in a wide-ranging interview, detailing his presidential ambitions and expressing admiration for leaders of the Republican Party in the United States, including Donald J. Trump.

Mr. Bolsonaro, who bellows his opinions as if chiding a subordinate, is drawing some comparisons to the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, for his appeal to disillusioned voters. “Just like Trump, Bolsonaro is tapping into reservoirs of resentment to emerge as a leading anti-establishment figure,” said Esther Solano, a scholar of international relations at the Federal University of São Paulo who studies conservative movements in Brazil.

Many Brazilians still consider a Bolsonaro presidency a remote, even nightmarish possibility, trying to laugh off his rise through jokes.

A fixture on the fringes of Congress, Mr. Bolsonaro has expressed extreme views since the 1990s, when he said dictatorship-era soldiers should have killed Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the once-exiled sociologist who was Brazil’s president from 1995 to 2002.

But the rancor on the streets of Brazil’s cities, where protesters have vented antigovernment fury over the last year, is now bolstering right-wing politicians around the country.

Mr. Bolsonaro, who is often greeted with raucous applause in airport lobbies and street rallies around Brazil, placed fourth among potential presidential candidates in a public opinion survey in April by Datafolha, a polling company.

With 8 percent support, Mr. Bolsonaro ranked ahead of Vice President Michel Temer, with just 2 percent. Mr. Temer, of the centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, is maneuvering to assume the presidency if Ms. Rousseff is suspended in a Senate impeachment vote this month.

Some Brazilians were comforted that Mr. Bolsonaro’s overall support remained in the single digits. (Reflecting broad disenchantment with Brazil’s political class, the front-runners in the poll, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former president, had the support of only 21 percent, and Marina Silva, a former environment minister, had 19 percent.)

Still, closer evaluation revealed some surprises in the poll, conducted on April 7 and 8 in interviews with 2,779 people. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus two percentage points.

Mr. Bolsonaro emerged as the preferred candidate among the richest Brazilians, securing 23 percent of support among those with the highest incomes, Datafolha said. Among Brazilians with a college education, Mr. Bolsonaro placed second with 15 percent support, behind only Ms. Silva, according to Datafolha.

Such findings caused jaws to drop around the country.

“Jair Bolsonaro is now the preferred presidential hopeful of a sizable part of the Brazilian elite,” said Fernando de Barros e Silva, the editor of Piauí, a magazine focusing on Brazilian politics and culture. “This is a portrait of the terrible moment we’re enduring.”

Mr. Bolsonaro is reveling in the moment. He emerged from obscurity as a young army officer in the 1980s when he was acquitted by a military tribunal on charges of plotting to plant small bombs in public buildings to pressure authorities to raise soldiers’ pay.

He used that newfound attention to win a seat in Congress and has carved out a specialty in Brazilian politics by praising the country’s authoritarian military figures while staking out positions that his opponents call misogynistic, homophobic or racist.

As a member of the conservative Social Christian Party, part of the influential evangelical caucus in Congress, he expresses alarm, for instance, about the refugees coming from Syria and other countries, a relatively small number. He argues that “the scum of the world is arriving in Brazil, as if we didn’t have enough problems to resolve.”

In the interview, Mr. Bolsonaro reserved special ire for Haiti and Haitian immigrants to Brazil, describing with revulsion the poverty and sanitary conditions he witnessed on a trip to Port-au-Prince, Haiti’s capital, where Brazil has maintained a peacekeeping force.

“I saw women there offering sex without, excuse me for saying, any hygiene whatsoever,” said Mr. Bolsonaro, also contending that Haitian immigrants to Brazil were bringing diseases to the country.

Alarming to many in a country where socially liberal policies like affirmative action and legalization of same-sex marriage recently expanded, Mr. Bolsonaro’s positions appeal to a growing legion of supporters.

“The moral values that he promotes, his conservatism, are what I want for my children,” said Antonio Carlos Pires, 26, a nurse in São Paulo who expressed admiration for Mr. Bolsonaro at a recent antigovernment protest.

Some, however, remain appalled by Mr. Bolsonaro.

Minutes after Mr. Bolsonaro praised a reviled torturer during the impeachment vote, Jean Wyllys, a leftist congressman from Rio, spit on him on the floor of Congress. (Reflecting the state of decorum in Brazil’s Congress, Eduardo Bolsonaro, 31, a congressman who is Mr. Bolsonaro’s son, then spit on Mr. Wyllys.)

Mr. Bolsonaro’s plaudits for the dictatorship have his critics questioning why he should enjoy special judicial standing as a congressman, ensuring that lawsuits against him over hateful remarks advance at a snail’s pace in the Supreme Court.

“He uses his immunity to explicitly threaten ending democracy in the country while defending heinous crimes,” Míriam Leitão, an economic historian and commentator, wrote in the newspaper O Globo. Ms. Leitão, 63, who was tortured as a young dissident in 1972, added, “Should democracy really have to coexist with someone who threatens it?”

Democracy seems to be a flexible concept for Mr. Bolsonaro, who refuses to even describe Brazil’s long period of military rule as a dictatorship. What about the 1964 military coup that toppled a civilian government? “A revolution,” he said.

Asked to name the Brazilian politician he most admired, Mr. Bolsonaro hesitated and then said: “President Médici,” referring to Emílio Garrastazu Médici, the dictator whose rule from 1969 to 1974 was marked by economic growth as well as human rights abuses that were so widespread that it was known as the “Years of Lead.”


