


Among the many peculiarities of the 2016 election, this one ranks high: The presumptive Republican nominee has signaled that he would spend more, and make the deficit larger, than President Obama.

You read that correctly.

Republicans have devoted years to attacking Mr. Obama as a debt-expanding spendthrift, even as the deficit has declined by more than two-thirds as a share of the economy since 2009. Yet primary voters sidetracked those concerns in backing Donald J. Trump as their candidate to succeed him.

The combined effect that Mr. Trump’s spending and tax-cut commitments would have on the size of government and the volume of red ink confounds veterans of Republican policy debates.

“There is no way,” said Douglas Holtz-Eakin, an economic adviser to President George W. Bush, “to describe him as a fiscal conservative.”

Mr. Trump has made cultural conservatism, not fiscal restraint, the leading edge of his campaign from the beginning.

His calls for a wall along the Mexican border and a temporary ban on the entry of Muslims have rallied voters unsettled by the changing face of the United States. The massacre in Orlando fueled those concerns and Mr. Trump’s insistence on a more muscular national security stance.

Yet Mr. Trump also relishes the opportunity to break the party’s ideological mold, calling himself “different from most Republicans.”

The outlines of his agenda — he has provided few specifics — prove it.

Like many Republicans, he accuses Mr. Obama of weakening United States defenses. Mr. Trump says the Pentagon can spend existing funds, about 16 percent of the federal budget, more efficiently, but he has also vowed to spend more.

Republicans typically try to offset Pentagon increases with proposed cuts elsewhere. The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, for instance, calls curbing Medicare and Social Security expenditures vital to restoring fiscal responsibility.

Even Mr. Obama has conceded the need for some curbs on benefits as part of a bipartisan “grand bargain” on the budget.

Not Mr. Trump. He opposes restricting benefits for Medicare and Social Security, which together represent roughly 40 percent of the budget.

Mr. Trump also breaks with other Republicans by embracing large-scale spending on infrastructure, to create jobs and drive growth by modernizing roads, bridges and airports.

Mr. Trump’s embrace of major spending proposals isn’t new. In 2009, he praised the economic stimulus bill that congressional Democrats and Mr. Obama enacted over fierce Republican opposition.

His position on health care spending remains fuzzy. Last fall, Mr. Trump vowed to “take care of everybody” after repealing Mr. Obama’s health plan, “much better than they’re taken care of now.”

Later, assailed by primary rivals for failing to provide details, he posted some familiar Republican health policy proposals on his website.

To be sure, Mr. Trump could spend more in some areas without increasing the deficit, by making big cuts in other programs or increasing taxes. But the cuts he identifies remain vague (“waste, fraud and abuse”) or confined to small corners of the budget.

And instead of tax increases, Mr. Trump proposes a gigantic cut in personal and business tax rates, which he maintains would stimulate so much economic growth that it wouldn’t increase the deficit at all.

But the conservative Tax Foundation estimates that, even accounting for economic growth, such a cut would add $10 trillion to the deficit over 10 years. That would more than double the $9.2 trillion in deficits that the Congressional Budget Office projects through 2026 under current policies.

In turn, higher deficits would increase spending for interest on the debt — the same debt Mr. Trump says he wants to reduce.

All this flummoxes policy analysts long committed to reducing debt and deficits.

“Hillary Clinton has barely mentioned the debt,” said Maya MacGuineas, president of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a centrist watchdog group. “She has a long list of increased spending. But to her credit, she pays for her spending. What she wouldn’t do is make it worse.”

As for Mr. Trump, she said, “the good thing that he’s done is acknowledge the debt.”

At the same time, “he’s laid out policies that would push us in the wrong direction, make the situation worse,” Ms. MacGuineas added. “Much, much worse.”


