


BOSTON — A few minutes after his team’s latest defeat, Yankees Manager Joe Girardi sat rigid in the visiting manager’s office at Fenway Park, once again trying to explain the team’s anemic offensive production.

The pitching has not been perfect, as Saturday’s 8-0 defeat at the hands of the surging Red Sox would indicate. But the offense has been the real culprit. The Yankees have produced 74 runs, the fewest in the major leagues. They have scored two or fewer runs in five of their last six games, have been held scoreless over their last 13 1/3 innings and have lost four games in a row. People are starting to demand explanations.

In baseball, however, clear explanations for teamwide batting slumps are often elusive. Girardi said after Friday’s loss that it was too early to panic, but as the calendar turns to May, it is fair to ask exactly when that time might be.

After all, panic is probably preferable to apathy.

“At some point, you’ve got to turn it around,” Girardi said. “You don’t want to get too far down. So, I mean, enough is enough.”

The Yankees have had slow starts before and ended up making the playoffs, and there are still five months to get back on course.

But for now, the Yankees are just not a good team. In April, they were 8-14, which puts them in last place in the American League East and on pace to lose more than 100 games. That would be catastrophic for a team with a payroll in excess of $200 million.

It is the first time in Girardi’s nine seasons as manager that the team has been six games under .500.

Saturday was another example of the futility. The Yankees managed just five hits while the Red Sox had no problem churning out 13 hits and eight runs to cruise to victory.

Red Sox center fielder Jackie Bradley Jr. had a double and two triples in consecutive at-bats, with three runs batted in. He also had a key two-run double on Friday.

And for the second night in a row, designated hitter David Ortiz bashed a long home run, sending a Johnny Barbato pitch several rows into the bleachers. It was his fifth home run of the season and the 49th of his career against the Yankees.

Before Friday’s game, Ortiz promised a 6-year-old boy with a heart ailment that he would hit a home run for him, and he produced a two-run, tiebreaking shot in the eighth inning to propel the Red Sox to a win.

On Saturday, Rick Porcello, the revived Red Sox starting pitcher whom Girardi watched on video before bedtime following the Yankees’ loss on Friday, improved to 5-0 with seven shutout innings. But at the moment, most pitchers are doing well against the Yankees.

“We’re playing from behind, it seems, like almost every game recently,” Yankees left fielder Brett Gardner said. “That’s not the fault of our pitchers. That’s the fault of our offense.”

Although Gardner is not the sole culprit, he accepted much of the responsibility for not doing enough at the top of the batting order. He went 0 for 4 Saturday and is batting .254. Jacoby Ellsbury, the leadoff batter, also went 0 for 4 and is batting .235 with a .278 on-base percentage.

“Obviously, up at the top of the lineup Jacoby, and I haven’t done a good job of setting the table recently,” Gardner said. “It all starts with us, and we’ve got to do a better job.”

Another person who may start to sense the weight of responsibility is the batting instructor Alan Cockrell.

Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman is loath to fire coaches in the middle of a season, which may help keep the pressure off Cockrell.

“We still have quite a few games left,” Cockrell said. “It’s still relatively early.”

Cockrell added that the best approach with proven veteran hitters was to allow them time to find their groove, rather than to undertake an overhaul of their swings.

“We have an accomplished group,” Cockrell said before the game. “We’re not going to try and reinvent the wheel with these guys. They’ve been through times where it trends down a little bit. We’re not going to change what they’re doing. Just get a good ball to hit and hit it hard and do what the situation asks for. I saw that the last three or four days, and that’s all you can do.”

Girardi also had some thoughts before the game, when he was asked if he was finding it difficult to shake off the disappointment and frustration of each successive loss at the end of the nights.

That led him to describe, in some detail, his nightly routine.

“I brush my teeth, I put my retainer in, I take my contacts out and I start to prepare for the next day,” Girardi said, adding that that means watching film of the opposing team’s next starting pitcher.

Perhaps that is too much information for fans simply wanting to know why hits and runs are so elusive for the Yankees.

“You just say tomorrow is the day you turn it around,” Girardi said after the game. “You come in with the right attitude and you do your work and you say: ‘It’s got to stop. Let’s go.’ ”


