


Tampa Bay forward Brian Boyle was showered with boos Friday evening when the Lightning took the ice against the Islanders at Barclays Center for Game 4 of their N.H.L. Eastern Conference semifinal series.

No surprise there.

During pregame warm-ups on Tuesday, Boyle skated across the Islanders logo and mixed it up with defenseman Travis Hamonic.

But the play that made Boyle villain No. 1 for Islanders fans came in overtime when Boyle flattened defenseman Thomas Hickey with a big hit at the blue line. Boyle then took a loose puck, passed to Victor Hedman and tapped in the rebound after Hedman’s shot missed.

Game over.

The official on the play either overlooked Boyle’s hit or was too busy managing a game that is now being played at the speed of light, by athletes with larger and better-conditioned bodies, built like machines.

Bigger, faster and stronger than in the past, hockey players are also just as committed as their predecessors were to getting away with as much as possible.

Boyle, the Lightning center, is 6 feet 7 inches. So is goalie Ben Bishop. So is defenseman Andrej Sustr.

The size of a professional football field has remained the same since the N.F.L. came into existence in 1920. The standard size of a basketball court has not changed in more than 50 years. Hockey has been played on a 200-by-85-foot rink over the last 50 years. With bigger and faster athletes playing on rinks and fields and courts whose dimensions have remained constant for decades, every sport — not just hockey — is impossible to referee without the all-seeing eye in the sky.

There was a time when an official’s word was sacrosanct, unimpeachable, irrefutable and undeniable. The official was the absolute authority.

No longer.

With the expanding use of video replay, it’s now common to have multibillion-dollar leagues issuing apologies and admitting that the officials on site blew a crucial call.

This is not a case of sudden humility. The innovation that was supposed to be an entertaining bauble for fans has become a second-guessing Cyclops that has imprisoned the sports industry.

“What’s changed all this is technology and the access by fans to games,” Lightning Coach Jon Cooper said after practice Thursday.

A couple of decades ago, two cameras might have covered a game. Officiating mistakes happened, but they were less likely to be noticed. Today, 20 cameras are trained on a game — cameras trained on the blue line for offsides, or on players to monitor legal and illegal hits. What the naked eye might have missed is being seen by millions.

“So now, you’ve got all these eyes focused on our game, and it does nothing but back you into a corner,” Cooper said, referring to the officials.

The decline of the referee and the rise of the electric eye is a boon to fans. “This probably gets them more engaged,” Cooper said. “Whether it makes them mad or sad or enraged, it keeps them engaged.”

Hockey, like its violent cousin, football, finds itself in the precarious position of trying to achieve a delicate balance of making a rough game appear safe while giving the fans what they crave. What they want is blood: hard hits and bone-crunching checks.

The N.H.L. amped up the sport by removing the red line, combating obstruction, hooking and holding. Couple that with more athletic players competing in a confined space, and there will be lots of crowd-pleasing, rock-’em sock-’em action — not to mention an increasing number of injuries.

“You did everything to speed up the game and nothing to slow down the game,” Cooper said. “It makes the game exciting and fun, but there’s a negative to that.

“When they hit harder, skate faster, eventually injuries are going to happen.”

Fans, in large part, want the unsafe. In hockey, officials walk a thin line about which bone-jarring hits to allow, and which to penalize.

Replay was quickly used in Game 4. With 10 minutes 49 seconds left in the first period, Ryan Stromer’s redirected shot on goal was credited as a save, although the shot appeared to carry Bishop into the net. The official wanted to make sure, and after a five-minute consultation, the call on the ice was upheld.

Still, getting it right with the naked eye seems to be growing increasingly rare. Officials miss a lot. We always knew they did, but the video now confirms it.

The prevalence of instant replay has reduced officials to waiters who drop the puck, take care of the ball during breaks or try to prevent players from fighting.

This week, the N.B.A. acknowledged that officials had missed five calls in the final 13.5 seconds of a game that the Oklahoma City Thunder won by a point over the San Antonio Spurs. Last season, the N.F.L. admitted that officials had missed several crucial calls in a playoff game.

Owning up to mistakes is all well and good, but if I am a fan of the team that has been victimized by a call that cost it the game, the apologies do me no good.

When it comes to a critical error, how far are leagues willing to go not only to get it right, but also to make it right? How far are we from the day when leagues will actually change a game’s result?

“I don’t know if there is any way that you can do that,” Cooper said. “Technology is where it’s at, but ultimately I’m a true believer in the idea that humans are playing the games, humans should officiate the games.”

For the time being, in Brooklyn, Islanders fans just wanted Brian Boyle to get what they thought he had coming to him.


