


Michael Pietsch is the C.E.O. of Hachette Book Group, and well known for his work editing David Foster Wallace and Donna Tartt, among many others. But in 1980, he was just another young assistant at Scribner fighting to have his voice heard, when he tried to acquire “The River Why,” a debut novel by David James Duncan about a young fly fisherman on a spiritual quest in the Pacific Northwest.

“I still have David Duncan’s submission letter with the word ‘NO’ in my boss’s handwriting,” Pietsch said in an email interview. Pietsch wrote to Duncan at the time, telling him of Scribner’s concerns about marketability, and of the director of publishing’s idea that “at half its present length the novel would probably be just as good and much more likely to make us some money.” Duncan wrote back that he had come close “to cutting the novel in half — from top to bottom, with my chain saw — mailing both halves and inviting your director to take his pick, right half or left.”

The Sierra Club published the book, which has become a cult classic, in 1983. It was the first work of fiction the environmental outfit had ever published. More than three decades later, the Sierra Club folded its publishing program, and Pietsch seized his chance, reissuing “The River Why” with a new afterword by Duncan.

Pietsch called the book “The Big One That Got Away,” but another big one is on its way. Pietsch has acquired Duncan’s third novel, “Sun House,” which Little, Brown aims to publish in 2017. If that schedule holds, it will appear 25 years after Duncan’s last novel, “The Brothers K,” a book with its own sizable cult of readers, about a large family, baseball, religion and the Vietnam War.

Pietsch calls “Sun House” “another big, ambitious, comic and serious novel, about faith and ultimate questions” involving “a gang of oddballs who form a kind of farm/art/spirit commune. I’m having the time of my life working with David at last.”

Quotable

“I came from a very formal, old-school background that said you can never write about yourself. I thought: Well, I’m never going to be a real reporter anyway. I might as well just set myself on fire.” — Jillian Keenan, author of “Sex With Shakespeare,” in an interview with Vogue

No Romantic

This week, Heidi Julavits reviews “In Gratitude,” a memoir by the prolific author Jenny Diski, who died in April at 68. In a 2008 interview with the Scottish newspaper The Herald, Diski spoke of her calling in unromantic terms. “At some level there is no point in writing,” she said. “The world really doesn’t need more half-good books. I’m totally arrogant, but I’m not arrogant enough to think I’m good enough. And in a sense, that’s what keeps me writing. Every book I write is a failed book. I feel that very strongly. Otherwise why write another one?”


