


HOUSTON — James Harden scored 35 points, including the game-winner with 2.7 seconds left, and the Houston Rockets took advantage of Stephen Curry’s absence to secure a 97-96 victory over the Golden State Warriors in Game 3 of their first-round playoff series on Thursday night.

The victory cuts Houston’s deficit to two games to one in the best-of-seven series. Game 4 is set for Sunday in Houston.

Shaun Livingston stole a pass from Trevor Ariza, and Ian Clark’s layup put Golden State up by 1 point with 10.6 seconds left. Harden then took the ball to the other end and stepped back for the jump shot to win the game.

Golden State had a chance to win after that, but Draymond Green dribbled the inbounds pass off his foot and out of bounds.

Marreese Speights came off the bench to lead the Warriors with 22 points, and Klay Thompson had 17.

The Warriors blew out Houston in the series opener with Curry on the court and pulled away late in Game 2 to go up two games to none even with Curry, last year’s most valuable player, watching from the bench with a sprained right ankle. Curry was not on the bench with the team for Thursday’s game, and it was unclear where he was during the game.

After Coach J. B. Bickerstaff pleaded with his team to be “nastier,” the Rockets were much more aggressive and scrappy than they had been in the first two games, and they led by as many as 17 points in the first half.

Dwight Howard added 13 points, 13 rebounds and 2 blocks for Houston, and Michael Beasley finished with 12 points.

Andre Iguodala made a 3-pointer to cut the lead to 93-92 with about 2 minutes 45 seconds remaining, and Clark gave Golden State its first lead since 2-0 on a jumper that made the score 94-93.

Beasley gave Houston a 95-94 lead with two free throws with 41 seconds left.

Golden State, which set the N.B.A. record for wins in a regular season with 73, had won 14 of 15 and six straight over Houston before Thursday night’s loss.

Golden State used an 8-1 run, led by 6 points from Livingston, to cut the lead to 81-80 with nine minutes remaining. Harden scored the next 5 points to power a 7-0 run that pushed the lead to 88-80 midway through the quarter.

Curry was feeling better on Thursday and wanted to play, but the Warriors decided that the possibility that he would reinjure his ankle before it was fully healed was not worth the risk. Coach Steve Kerr said the team would have a better feel for Curry’s availability for Sunday after seeing how he responds to the next two days of practice.

Houston led by 12 points in the third quarter before a 10-2 spurt by Golden State, with 6 points from Speights, cut the deficit to 78-72 entering the fourth quarter.

The Rockets led by 31-18 at the end of the first quarter, thanks to 14 points from Harden. Howard was active early, moving from several feet away to leap and block a shot by Festus Ezeli that caused Howard to crash to the court in the first quarter.

Houston was up by 16 with about two and a half minutes left in the first half before Golden State scored the last 9 points of the second quarter to cut the lead to 55-48.

Things became testy in that span after Howard picked up his third foul, tangling with Andrew Bogut while fighting for a rebound. Howard received a technical when he threw the ball into the stands in frustration after being called for the foul.


