


In 2009, Alberto and Joylyn Estrella bought a one-bedroom at Oro, then a brand-new high-rise condominium in Downtown Brooklyn.

“We bought at the bottom of the real estate crash, so we were able to negotiate a great deal,” Mr. Estrella said. The price was $400,000.

The couple loved the convenient location. “The neighborhood was developing and flourishing,” Mr. Estrella said. His wife used the building’s gym. He enjoyed the pool and the basketball court, where he would shoot hoops or join pickup games.

His work, in the banking field, sent them to São Paulo, Brazil, for two years. Shortly after they returned, Ms. Estrella became pregnant.

“We fell into that trap of ‘we’re having a baby, we need all the space we can get,’ ” Mr. Estrella said. So they put the unit on the market. It sold for $760,000 a year ago, just before their son, Alessandro, was born, and they moved to a two-bedroom rental nearby at Bklyn Gold while pondering their next step. Their rent was around $3,700 a month.

Alessandro slept in their room and didn’t consume much space. They ended up using the second bedroom for storage.

The Estrellas, both in their early 30s, missed being homeowners. Concerned that both interest rates and housing prices would rise, they felt that buying in a lively Brooklyn neighborhood was a good long-term strategy.

Last summer, they went on the hunt for a two-bedroom with good closet space and a washer-dryer. Their price range was up to $900,000 or so.

“It was important to be close to cafes and restaurants,” said Ms. Estrella, who is pursuing a graduate degree in international relations at New York University. “I get a lot of writing done in coffee shops.”

Family-friendly Park Slope called to them. A two-bedroom in great condition, at a small co-op building on Fifth Avenue, was listed at $749,000, with a monthly maintenance fee of around $700.

They deliberated. Their online search criteria had called up alarmingly few choices, and they saw that selling prices were often above listing prices. “Every time we asked to make an appointment, the broker would say, ‘That one is off the market,’ or ‘It’s already in a bidding war.’ The brokers were saying you need to be really competitive to even have a chance,” Mr. Estrella said.

So they fell into a second trap, the feeling that “there is nothing else out there,” he said. They bid $805,000 for the Fifth Avenue place. But as soon as their offer was accepted, the couple had second thoughts. The lobby had no place to park a stroller. The second bedroom was just 80 square feet.

“In order to have a washer-dryer, they took away the coat closet,” Mr. Estrella said. “My wife has a lot of coats. People make sacrifices, and I don’t know if that’s one of the ones I’d make.”

They withdrew their offer, believing it was too high. The apartment sold for $785,000.

In Brooklyn Heights, they considered a co-op on Montague Street listed at $699,000, with maintenance of slightly more than $1,100 a month. The large living room window, right on the street, tempted passers-by to peek. They envisioned endlessly adjusting the shades.

It wasn’t a true two-bedroom, either. The place had been billed as a one-bedroom with an office or nursery, but the windowless space had been created with a pressurized wall. The couple moved on, and the apartment sold for $700,000.

At another Brooklyn Heights co-op, a bathroom had been enlarged at the expense of the master bedroom, now “tiny to the point that if you had a queen bed and two night stands, you could barely walk around,” Mr. Estrella said.

In Ditmas Park, Brooklyn, the couple visited a 2007 condominium building. Two-bedrooms there were in the high $800,000s; the common charges of around $500 a month included negligible taxes. The building had a tax abatement that was to expire shortly, at which point taxes would soar to more than $1,000 a month.

Three of the building’s 12 units were for sale, “I guess because the tax abatement was up and people wanted to get out of there,” Mr. Estrella said.

They were finding that two-bedrooms weren’t all that much larger than one-bedrooms — and layouts were often strange. Some were in less-than-pristine condition, requiring money for upgrades. Many of the places they saw were a tedious and slow subway ride away from Manhattan.

So they checked out 388 Bridge, which opened in Downtown Brooklyn in 2013. It was what they had wanted all along — a new tower right downtown, one subway stop from Manhattan.

Ms. Estrella realized how much she liked “having the services of the building and being in an area where you are steps away from everything.”

Only a few units in their price range remained. They decided they could live with a one-bedroom that was around 100 square feet larger than their place at Oro. It had the requisite washer-dryer and closet space.

The couple bought the apartment this past winter for $945,000. Monthly charges are a bit more than $800.

They are looking into creating some kind of corner nook for Alessandro, whose crib is now in the bedroom. “We know there’s an expiration date,” Mr. Estrella said.

They don’t have the pool and the basketball court they had at Oro, but they gained a playroom and a playground. Mr. Estrella swims at a gym near his Midtown office and, at the moment, rarely plays basketball. At Oro, “I had my own basketball,” he said. “I left it on the court as a parting gift.”

Their building is filled with children. “Alessandro has a lot of kids his age he can play with,” Mr. Estrella said. “We didn’t have that in any other building we looked at.”


