


ROME — On a perfect May afternoon, with the Roman sunlight glinting off the ancient arches of the Colosseum, Officer Pang Bo adjusted his sunglasses and began his patrol. More or less. He walked around. He looked at tourists, and a few tourists looked at him. He posed for a few photographs.

In his dark-blue uniform and cap, Officer Pang is a top supervisor in one of China’s biggest police departments, in the southern metropolis of Guangzhou. But for two weeks, he and three other Chinese police officers are in Italy with strict orders: to protect Chinese tourists.

That is, even if it isn’t completely clear how four Chinese cops divided between Rome and Milan can make a difference. Or what the tourists need to be protected from.

“The first day when we patrolled, the Chinese tourists saw us, and they were amazed,” said Officer Pang, 44.

Tourist season is in full bloom in Italy, and few countries are more important suppliers of tourists than China. Nearly three million Chinese visit Italy every year, a figure that is steadily rising, as Italy has become one of the top European destinations for Chinese tourists, along with France.

In 2014, Chinese tourists spent 468 million euros (or about $569 million) in Italy, according to the Bank of Italy, and Italian leaders are trying to nurture closer economic ties to China. That was the year the two countries signed a bilateral police cooperation agreement, the first of its kind between China and a European nation.

But for some Chinese tourists, Italy and other European countries can mean anxiety and confusion. The recent terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels have raised security concerns for tourists coming to Europe, including Chinese visitors. And reports of petty crime are fairly common in Rome (and in cities like Barcelona and Paris), especially of pickpockets preying on Chinese tourists known for carrying cash.

Such thefts are amplified on Chinese social media, as some travelers spin dark tales of stolen wallets, lost passports and Italian swindlers. These are problems that can arise for travelers from any country, except Chinese also face a cultural and linguistic divide in knowing how to seek help.

“It’s our duty to make Chinese fall in love with Rome and Italy,” said Alessandro Zucconi, the president of the Young Hoteliers Federation in Rome, who agreed that “misunderstandings” sometimes occur between the two cultures. “They are not like the Germans, who mostly come knowing our culture and literature better than we do.”

Enter Officer Pang and his cohort.

Beginning last week, they split into two-man teams in Rome and Milan. So far, it is not exactly tough police work.

Officer Pang and his partner, Li Xiang, have bumped into several Chinese tour groups but none have reported any problems. The Chinese officers do not have arrest powers in Italy, but they are paired with Italian officers who could arrest someone, except no arrests have been needed.

“So far, no,” said Officer Pang, who once worked as a peacekeeper in Bosnia and who speaks English, French, Mandarin and Cantonese. “We just help the people. Most of them say, ‘Oh, I’m very glad to see you. I’m glad you are here.’ ”

In China, the police are not always beloved in an authoritarian country where the ruling Communist Party exists above the law and can use the domestic legal system as a tool for maintaining political and social control.

But Chinese leaders are keenly sensitive to Chinese public opinion and eager to demonstrate their efforts to safeguard citizens overseas. In recent days, the state media outlets Xinhua, China Daily and Global Times have carried reports on the police program and quoted Italian officials lavishing praise on China.

“We are telling Italian citizens that their state is joining hands with a great country,” Italy’s interior minister, Angelino Alfano, told Xinhua, adding with a flourish that “China has a fundamental role in the world’s destiny.”

Which is true. Italy once played a fundamental role in the world’s destiny but is now a medium-size nation with a rich cultural heritage trying to stimulate economic growth after a two-decade slump.

Tourism is a critical sector. In a report this year, Italy’s Foreign Ministry cited the need to improve services for Chinese visitors, such as to provide more signs in Mandarin and also to be sensitive to the “perception of petty crime risks.”

Italian police officers are supposed to visit China next year — it is unclear if Italians need special protection in China — and officials have spoken of broader cooperation in the future.

Italian leaders are certainly eager to deepen economic ties. Prime Minister Matteo Renzi recently announced an agreement with Jack Ma, the executive chairman of the e-commerce giant Alibaba, to promote Italian wines in the Chinese market.

Italian officials note that police teams from Spain, Poland and other countries, including the United States, have visited Rome. The New York Police Department sent over officers in December.

Out on the streets of Rome, Officer Pang and Officer Li strode down one of the capital’s busiest shopping streets, Via del Corso, parting a sea of tourists. When they came upon two young women from China, they stopped, chatted and posed for selfies.

One of the women, who would identify herself only by her surname, Fang, was an exchange student at a local university. Though she had not experienced any problems in Rome, she seemed pleased to see Chinese officers on the streets.

“They make me feel very safe in another country,” said Ms. Fang, 20.

Officer Pang acknowledged that four officers were not likely to make a big impact. But he said more officers could possibly come in the future. And clearly the publicity was raising awareness. Officer Pang said he had granted interviews to news media outlets from around the world.

He praised Rome and reminisced about his first visit 14 years ago, when he came as a tourist. Had he encountered any problems? Thick chested and beefy, Officer Pang looked out from behind his reflector shades, and then laughed.

“No, no problems,” he said.


