


If someone had told me that in the near future, my head would be grazed by the enormous wings of a turkey vulture, I might not have believed it. I might also have worried about how much future I had.

But I learned that you don’t have to be dying to have this experience — just sitting on a lawn at Astor Court at the Bronx Zoo.

That’s where Kern, the vulture, stars in “Birds in Flight,” which Phung Luu, director of Animal Behavior & Conservation Connections, presents twice daily on weekends. The morning show usually focuses on tropical species, and the afternoon one on raptors. You should plan to attend both — and to duck. Although vultures fly disconcertingly low (the better to smell you, my dear), almost all of the dozen or so species will swoop over your head.

Sponsored by far more mechanical fliers — JetBlue — the shows feature both natural and trained behaviors. Mr. Luu tosses grapes in the air to show how well Eeyore, a silvery-cheeked hornbill, can catch insects on the fly. While some stunts have a circusy feel — Rizzo, a rose-breasted cockatoo, deposits crushed cans in a recycling bin — they do not involve risks to the birds, several of which were rehabilitated after injuries. Saffron, for instance, a lovely red-tailed hawk who was hit by a car, is missing part of her right wing.

The half-hour shows rely frequently on audience volunteers. One Saturday, a small boy held twigs for two black-throated magpie jays, which added them to a nest set up nearby, and a little girl fed a piece of apple to a green aracari. My own adult daughter, Marisa, became a living perch for sun conures.

The best moments, though, tend to be unscripted. As Mr. Luu put it, “This is a controlled situation — the bird is in complete control.” When Scarlett, a red-shouldered hawk, took off into the sky, she was immediately harassed by Bronx grackles that resented her invading their turf. Scarlett, regally unfazed, calmly circled and eventually landed off to the side of spectators, where she proceeded to chow down on a mouse.

Amid all the fun, Mr. Luu and his staff deliver a serious message: Many bird species are endangered. To aid their survival, the shows accept donated bills, which are placed in a collection box by a charming team member: a double yellow-headed Amazon parrot.

(Saturdays, Sundays and Memorial Day, at 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m. Through June 19. Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, 718-367-1010, bronxzoo.com.)


