


KABUL, Afghanistan — The children’s gathering point is the grave of one Bibi Jawaher. She has been dead for 27 years, the inscription on her headstone so faded that you have to run your fingers over it to fully make out her name and the year of her death.

But the central location of her resting place, on a little hill in the middle of the sprawling Kart-e-Sakhi cemetery in western Kabul, gives the pack of young hustlers a sweeping view of potential customers visiting the thousands of graves dotting the mountain skirt.

There is the middle-aged jeweler making his weekly pilgrimage to his mother, who died of cancer; he pays extra to have her grave washed with the precision of a sponge bath. There is the mother haunted by nightmares that the grave of her 15-year-old son, who killed himself over failed love, is engulfed in flames. She comes regularly to check on the headstone, which bears a portrait of her son in a jacket and tie, and offers the children a small amount to ritually sprinkle water on it.

The sprinkling of water on graves is an old tradition in Afghanistan, believed to keep the memory of the dead fresh and to help absolve them of the sins they committed in life.

Right over Bibi Jawaher’s body, the children wait with their large buckets, filled from the well of a nearby shrine and carried in on their backs. Once they spot a client, they rush in with smaller buckets, often fighting one another along the way.

But in the end they always keep to their unspoken code: When one reaches a client, the rest back off, immediately scanning the field for the next opportunity.

The children look for fun where they can, but their business is serious. It puts food on their families’ tables. They make about 10 afghanis for each small bucket they pour — the price of a loaf of bread, about 15 cents. On lucky days, they will get much more in tips, some as big as $10 or even $20, forever marking that grave as auspicious, distinct in their memory.

They have come to rely on a harsh reality of Afghan life: After decades of war and staggeringly frequent tragedy, more and more Afghan families have some business or another in Kabul’s cemeteries, where an ever-larger slice of everyday life is now centered.

“Ajmal usually pours water without asking for permission,” said Jamshid, 10, who teams up with him on busy days. It is an effective tactic: Once the water is poured, the mourner must pay.

“Who says I do that?” protested Ajmal, who is also 10. “O.K., maybe I did it once. Or two times.”

Behind them, another boy was straddling Bibi Jawaher’s headstone like a toy horse.

“We don’t leave her dirty like that,” Jamshid said about their graveside base. “We wash the grave with the remaining water before we go home.”

Kart-e-Sakhi cemetery comes to life on Thursdays and Fridays, the Afghan weekend. Specific grave markers have become the landmarks for new communities, some transitory, others more persistent.

Children with chapped hands play marbles by the grave of Zaher Turkman. Two men smoke a joint near the grave of Sayed Rohullah Sadat. (They turn out to be policemen.) A university student wearing a blue jacket, lecture notes in hand, paces between graves, trying to memorize them ahead of an exam.

The cemetery is a godsend for young lovers, a place of privacy where, with a buffer of assumed mourning around them, they can speak on their phones uninterrupted by the harassment that is otherwise too normal here. In one tucked-away corner, a pair of teenage girls sit on the edge of a grave, one of them on her phone, smiling and blushing. A cotton-candy seller moves around on his bicycle.

Every weekend, there are cockfights by the grave of Sayed Faqir Hussain. Men sit in a ring, and the trained birds are brought in under the arms of their owners. Presiding over the games, as godfather and referee, is Said Gul Agha, who goes by the nickname The Mechanic, his weekday vocation.

The Mechanic used to have 10 fighting roosters of his own, but he had only two left. Sitting on the edge of a grave, he was intently wrapped up with every move, at once thrilled and anxious as the birds tangled their necks together and delivered blows.

“Bring it for the next round before it gets cold!” he called to one owner who was wiping the blood from his bird’s face. “If the bird’s body doesn’t hurt, it won’t learn how to fight.”

The graves at Kart-e-Sakhi have become remarkably ornate lately. There were always poetry and flower patterns, but now there are massive headstones with etched portraits, and even posters hanging on the railings enclosing the graves.

On the edge of the cemetery, behind a row of small shops and eateries, is the grave of “The Martyr Commander Mahdi Ghazniwal Bakshi.” A police officer, he was 23 at the time of his death, ambushed by the Taliban in southwestern Afghanistan.

Two flags fly over his grave, one of the Afghan state and the other a martyrdom banner, and between them is a poster of him wearing black shades, a military radio in one hand and an AK-47 rifle in another.

Inside the railing, right behind a headstone bearing an etched portrait, hangs another poster of Commander Mahdi. He is shown lounging on a couch, wearing Levi’s sneakers and a gold bracelet. At the foot of the headstone is a withered rose, most of its petals stolen by the wind.

“He had 60 girlfriends,” said his uncle Ezatullah Nabizada, who came one day to crouch by the grave and pay his respects. “And he was married.”

The new crop of ornate headstones is largely the work of one artist, Muhammad Zahir, who signs his address and phone number at the bottom of each work.

Mr. Zahir spent 25 years as a laborer in Iran, where he learned to build sculptures, fireplaces and fountains out of stone. Etching headstone portraits was a small part of his business.

When he returned to Afghanistan more than a decade ago, he first tried the sculptures, the fireplaces and the fountains. They sold during the gush of money that came with the massive international military presence, but sales dropped, and then halted.

“We were left making these headstones,” he said, “because death is easy here.”

Depending on the size and the quality of the stone used, a grave, which includes a headstone and frames of stone for the slab, costs $250 and up. The most expensive one Mr. Zahir made, for more than $3,000, was for a police general in the north.

One late autumn morning at his outdoor studio, his lead artist, covered in the white dust of sawed marble, was busy with the headstone of a 22-year-old police officer, Cmdr. Zabiullah Qasemi. In his portrait, Commander Qasemi is wearing thick sunglasses. Except for puffs of hair on his temples, he is bald, which makes for extra work in etching the black marble.

The women buried at the cemetery do not receive such luxuries.

Even in death, they are hounded by misogyny. Their own names rarely appear on their graves, let alone their portraits or any poetry.

“Here lies the late mother of Muhammad Raza.”

“Here rests the daughter of Muhammad Haidar.”

In a small but overpopulated and unplanned city like Kabul, the logistics of dealing with death at such a rapid rate over three decades has brought dilemmas.

“We are facing a lack of space for graveyards in the city,” said Abdul Rahman Ahmadzai, the director of the department of the Afghan Ministry of Religious Affairs that oversees the roughly 30 cemeteries in Kabul, 12 of them huge ones like Kart-e-Sakhi.

Since the civil war, which began in the 1980s, unplanned graveyards have popped up all across the city. In the 1990s, when factional fighting intensified, people could hardly move out of fear of rockets, so they often buried their loved ones in any plot of land they could find. Now, each grave site is a land dispute for the government to solve.

“Our policy is that anywhere that bodies are buried automatically becomes government property,” Mr. Ahmadzai said. “If it is people’s property, the government gives them property elsewhere.”

Mr. Ahmadzai’s department has been working to acquire land in the districts outside the city’s gates and move the cemeteries there. And he has rigidly enforced the space limit for individual graves: 1.5 meters by 2.5 meters, about 5 feet by 8 feet, a dimension he says is called for under Shariah.

One noon late in the fall, as the pressure cooker at Mr. Ahmadzai’s office in central Kabul grew louder with the noise of a simmering beef stew, a worker from the presidential palace came with a demand. He wanted a few meters around his father’s grave enclosed for a mausoleum of sorts, and he had written the details on a piece of paper that also noted the approval of the minister of religious affairs, Mr. Ahmadzai’s boss.

Mr. Ahmadzai read the request, and then apologized. As a matter of policy, he could not sign off that much space for one grave.

“My father was a university lecturer on Islamic issues for 40 years,” the man argued. “For his service, doesn’t he deserve that much space?”

After the visitor mentioned a powerful member of Parliament, Mr. Ahmadzai seemed to cave in, assigning an inspector to go check the site. But later, in private, he said the inspector would make the same recommendation: It cannot be done.

His inspectors are his eyes and hands across the city, measuring the grave plots and reporting offenders. It falls to them to stop encroachment on cemetery lands, and to try, however futilely, to enforce proper behavior.

Mr. Ahmadzai knows about the children’s water hustle in Kart-e-Sakhi, of course. That goes on everywhere, and there is a comforting tradition behind it, he said: “Spraying water is good, because if the dead had sinned, we know that even the smallest plant praises God, and the water may help plants and weeds grow.”

The young hustlers themselves, ranging in age from 5 to 13, have more temporal concerns on their minds, mostly. They have been roughened by competition, hard circumstances and the crowd they mingle with.

One Thursday evening late in the fall, the children waited for business at Bibi Jawaher’s grave. The cemetery was quiet. One boy, Edris, his clothes dirty, his face chapped and snot dangling from his nose, sat astride the poor woman’s headstone, rocking back and forth. (On a visit just a week later, Bibi Jawaher’s headstone would be found broken to pieces.)

Edris looked no older than 6, but when asked how old he was, he counted his fingers and said 22. What grade was he in? “This much,” he said, showing the fingers of both hands: “22.”

“He is here all day, and he goes home with us in the evening,” Ajmal said. “When his family changes him into new clothes, he doesn’t like it. He changes back into dirty ones and comes out here.”

Nearby, a boy named Imranai suddenly smacked one of his cousins in the face. Chaos erupted. Several children tangled up in a fight in the dirt, cursing one another’s mothers and sisters, some crying.

“I told him to go to work and stop wasting your time, and he cursed my sister!” Imranai said, explaining the reason for what would be one of several fights that evening. He wore bright yellow sweatpants, and fixed a stylish kerchief around his neck.

“I have worked 60 afghanis today. How much have you worked?” the cousin shot back. Imranai, bent on keeping up the intimidation, jumped at the boy again. The younger cousin dropped his bucket, water splashing everywhere, and picked up two small rocks, assuming a firing position.

“They curse their own aunts, their own mothers — as if they are not all from same family,” Ajmal said, happy to look down at them. He was interrupted again. He wrinkled his nose up and sniffed the air.

“Is that weed?” he said, stretching the word out over several beats as he scanned the graveyard to see who was smoking it.

At the end of the day comes the most important ritual. The children lay out all their bills on a dry grave for sorting. Their fathers are either poor, or abroad for labor. Ajmal’s father is a gatekeeper at a university, for example. Jamshid’s is a gardener.

Khushnuma, 6, is one of youngest of the group, and she comes to the cemetery with her sister, who is even younger. She said her father was in their hometown in Laghman, an eastern province, and would return soon. The boys said she did not know that her father was actually in Iran.

“He is bringing me a Galaxy phone,” she said. A dirty apple, an offering from some mourning family, bulged out the pocket of her pink jacket.

Khushnuma has a go-to tactic that never seems to fail. “If they don’t pay her, she just starts crying,” Ajmal said.

Khushnuma smiled. “I have worked 80 afghanis today” — about $1.20 — “all on my own,” she said, clicking her tongue in satisfaction.


