


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Many of you will be cooking outdoors this weekend in keeping with the shared social custom of our nation, firing up the grill in celebration of Memorial Day. Some of you will call that feast a cookout. Some of you will call it a barbecue.

Is there a difference? You bet there is, especially if you’re calling it a barbecue, which as Jenée Desmond-Harris pointed out a few years ago on The Root, is a word steeped in the cultural and racial history of the United States. This year, let’s all try to use it correctly. For a cookout, grill anything. (“Say Anything!”) But for a barbecue, you need to cook things low and slow, in a smoky braise, until it collapses. (Serve it with macaroni and cheese and pickleback slaw.)

I’m thinking jerk ribs, off a recipe I learned last summer from the New York chef Harold Dieterle, watching him work it in an outdoor prep kitchen just off a parking lot in Montauk. They’d go nicely with David Tanis’s recipe for coconut rice with peas and a side mound of John Willoughby and Chris Schlesinger’s simple slaw.

But I think a lot of things. Burgers could be good this weekend. Have you tried Mark Bittman’s recipe for curry-spiced lamb burgers? Or Jonathan Reynolds’s recipe for a “Bobby Flay burger” – which is essentially a Cuban sandwich reimagined as a burger by a redheaded Catholic school kid with a passion for flavor? How about a salmon burger? Or how about heating a cast-iron pan on your grill and making a diner burger?

Chicken could be a good call as well. I have a neat new recipe for chicken wings that are smoked, then grilled. It’s consistently beating all comers in my early-season grilling matchups. Or you may try Melissa Clark’s recipe for sweet and spicy grilled chicken breasts. Or pull out the big propane hob and fry some chicken outdoors.

Whatever you cook for protein, and however you cook it, do leave room for dessert. Kim Severson’s recipe for frozen fudge pops works on a weekend like this one. So does Melissa’s recipe for twice-baked sour cherry pie.

Many more recipes to cook this weekend can be found on the Cooking site and apps. (Like, maybe you want some vegetarian options?) Save the ones you like, and then cook them, rate them, leave notes on them and share them with friends and family. Did you know you can even save recipes from places that aren’t Cooking into your recipe box using our handy clipping extension? Try it out on this Bon Appétit recipe for the chicken Parmesan served at Pietro’s steakhouse in Manhattan, which the cool kids – really! – order as a side dish for steak.

Please reach out for help if you get into trouble along the way. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com. Have a nice holiday.


