


Many Ticketmaster users were thrilled to discover that they were given vouchers for free and discounted tickets, the fruits of a 13-year-old lawsuit against the company over its fees.

But how and when those vouchers can be used has befuddled people, and confusion has only grown since Ticketmaster released $5 million worth of free tickets this week. Those tickets were quickly claimed, leaving most people unable to redeem their vouchers and feeling pretty irritated.

A spokeswoman for Ticketmater declined an interview request, but Ticketmaster said on Wednesday it would release an additional $5 million worth of free tickets. Here’s what we know about how the process works.

Anyone who bought tickets using Ticketmaster’s website between Oct. 21, 1999, and Feb. 27, 2013, should have received between one and 17 vouchers.

If you’re logged in to your Ticketmaster account, you can check to see how many are available to you here.

There are three types, each with a different value:

A $2.25 discount on any ticket.

A $5 discount toward UPS delivery.

Two free tickets for general admission seating at venues owned or operated by Live Nation Entertainment, which owns Ticketmaster.

You can’t use the vouchers on just any Ticketmaster order. The company has selected specific events for which they qualify throughout the United States, which means the shows near you might be awfully limited.

The company set up a webpage listing which events would be eligible, with more than 430 initially listed. Free tickets for Alabama Shakes, Weezer, Bob Dylan, Def Leppard, Snoop Dogg, Steely Dan and The Cure were briefly made available in the first batch of concerts.

A lot of people on Twitter, at least, were not thrilled with the selection.

Ticketmaster said it would add more shows, and you can sign up for email notifications when it does so.

It’s not looking good, based on how quickly the first $5 million was given away, and how many complaints there have been about vouchers not working. The odds are a lot of people will never get the chance to claim their free tickets.

This part gets into the weeds a bit, but if you’re curious, read on. The company said on Tuesday it would provide $10 million in ticket vouchers for concerts through May 2017.

How many free tickets become available beyond that amount depends on how many of the $2.25 and $5 discount codes are used. The settlement requires Ticketmaster to pay out $42 million over four years, and no less than $10.5 million per year. Should the use of $2.25 and $5 discount codes fall short of those targets, Ticketmaster would make up the difference by releasing more free tickets.

Attempts to use the codes for discounts or free tickets on two listed events — Kenny Chesney in Virginia Beach, and the San Francisco Symphony — returned error messages on Tuesday. Many people have reported similar struggles.

Ticketmaster sent an estimated $386 million worth of discount codes to nearly 57 million people, according to Steven Blonder, a leading attorney on the lawsuit and a principal at the law firm Much Shelist.

Recall that the company is obligated to pay out only $42 million, and it becomes apparent that most of the vouchers will never be redeemed.

Unlike the free-ticket vouchers, you can use these toward any event sold through Ticketmaster.

You can also stack them together if you have multiple codes for a larger discount on a single order, Mr. Blonder said.

In 2003, two men who had bought tickets to Wilco and Bruce Springsteen concerts filed a joint lawsuit arguing that Ticketmaster’s fees were excessive and misleading.

The lawsuit was later granted class-action status, and in 2011 the two sides reached a preliminary deal on a settlement that called for Ticketmaster to return money to fans.

“Since the lawsuit was brought, Ticketmaster has changed the way it describes its fees and charges on its website so we get more clarity and transparency,” Mr. Blonder said.


