


Doctors who perform abortions in Oklahoma will not face felony charges after the State Senate adjourned for the year on Friday without trying to override Gov. Mary Fallin’s veto of a bill to make the procedure a felony crime. Anti-abortion Republicans in the Republican-controlled Legislature wanted Senator Nathan Dahm to try for the two-thirds vote needed in both chambers to override the Republican governor’s veto. It is a felony for non-doctors to perform abortions. Governor Fallin has signed numerous anti-abortion bills, but said Mr. Dahm’s bill was vaguely worded and would not survive a legal challenge. The Senate president pro tem, Brian Bingman, said he did not believe Mr. Dahm had the 32 Senate votes needed. (AP)

The parents of a woman killed on a San Francisco pier by a man who was in the United States illegally filed a wrongful-death lawsuit Friday against the city and two federal agencies. In their suit, the parents of Kathryn Steinle accuse the San Francisco Sheriff’s Department of failing to notify federal immigration officials that it was releasing Juan Francisco Lopez-Sanchez from jail last year. They are also suing Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the federal Bureau of Land Management. A B.L.M. ranger reported that a gun had been stolen from his car in downtown San Francisco. Mr. Lopez-Sanchez says he found the gun and it fired when he picked it up, unintentionally striking Ms. Steinle in the back. The killing thrust San Francisco into the national debate over immigration. It is a “sanctuary city” where undocumented immigrants without criminal records are generally protected from federal deportation agents. (AP)

Chief Justice Roy Moore is suing the state agency that filed ethics charges against him. His lawyers filed a federal lawsuit Friday against the Alabama Judicial Inquiry Commission, asking a court to order his immediate reinstatement as head of Alabama’s court system. The suit says a law that led to Chief Justice Moore’s automatic suspension when charges were filed against him this month is unconstitutional. The lawsuit also cites news reports and reporters’ questions about possible charges against him in claiming that the commission violated confidentiality provisions. The commission filed a complaint accusing Chief Justice Moore of willfully failing to respect the authority of federal court decisions that cleared the way for same-sex marriage. (AP)


