


The Mets adjusted to irregular roles on Tuesday. One player, Michael Conforto, started, even though the left-hander Brandon Finnegan was on the mound for the Cincinnati Reds. A majority of Conforto’s success since he moved to third in the batting order April 15 — a .378 average with 10 runs scored, 3 home runs and 8 R.B.I. — has come against right-handed pitchers.

More intriguing was the insertion of Kevin Plawecki as the starting catcher. Plawecki got an unexpected audition to stake a claim for extended time behind the plate when Travis d’Arnaud was put on the 15-day disabled list with a right rotator cuff strain.

And then there was the curious case of Yoenis Cespedes. A bruised right leg had sidelined Cespedes since last Friday, but in the seventh inning, with the Mets trailing by 3-0, Plawecki hit a key single that moved Juan Lagares to third base with one out.

Manager Terry Collins wanted Cespedes to pinch-hit, but could not find him. He asked Lucas Duda to stand in the on-deck circle as Cespedes bided his time.

“I said, ‘I’m not putting you in, but go on deck,’ ” Collins said. “So he went up and stood on deck. He could have ordered a hamburger by that time.”

Eventually, Cespedes stepped to the plate and smoked a three-run homer on the first pitch he saw, rallying the Mets to a 4-3 win at Citi Field.

“All I kept hearing was he’s coming, he’s coming, he’s coming,” Collins said. “He finally got there.”

Just as soon as Cespedes made a cameo, he vanished and did not speak to the news media after the game.

Cespedes’s personality has been enigmatic at times, similar to the career of d’Arnaud.

During Game 1 of last year’s National League Championship Series, d’Arnaud had quite a memorable home run himself, taking Jon Lester deep and bruising Citi Field’s red home run apple in center field. The next day, clever stadium workers placed a large white bandage over the spot where the ball landed.

But lately, d’Arnaud, in his fourth season with the Mets, has not been bruising anything but himself. He is now on his third trip to the D.L. since the beginning of last season.

Various ailments have been an albatross on d’Arnaud’s promising career. For years, d’Arnaud, 27, has been hailed as an above-average offensive catcher and was a focal point in the trade the Mets made with the Toronto Blue Jays in December 2012 that sent off the reigning Cy Young Award winner R. A. Dickey. (That deal also brought back Noah Syndergaard.)

Complicating d’Arnaud’s future is the emerging presence of Plawecki, 25, who is recognized as a sound defensive backstop and who Collins said would become the primary starting catcher in d’Arnaud’s absence.

In the fourth inning, with the Mets trailing, 1-0, Plawecki threw out Adam Duvall trying to steal second base.

“That’s why he made the team, because the history said there’s going to be playing time here and at-bats here,” Collins said. “I think Kevin does a good job; I think he handles our pitching staff very well.”

Even before the Mets acquired d’Arnaud, his medical history included back and knee injuries. In 2013, he began his tenure with the club with a fracture in his left foot.

Last April, d’Arnaud fractured his right pinkie finger. Two months later, he sprained his left elbow and struggled at the plate in the second half of the season. His postseason home run was a symbol of what the Mets had always hoped for from him, but those flashes have been too rare.

Collins was asked before the game if he was worried he might never see d’Arnaud play at his peak. He said that it had been tough to keep d’Arnaud on the field but that he still believed in his potential. “Are we going to get to see it?” Collins said. “You can only hope the answer to that will be yes.”

But Collins, while not wavering in his faith in d’Arnaud, also declared that a prime opportunity now awaits Plawecki.

“This is not the first time this has happened to Travis,” Collins said, later adding, “I don’t think he looks over his shoulder, but neither did Wally Pipp,” referring to the Yankee first baseman usurped by Lou Gehrig.

“He never looked over his shoulder, either. This is an opportunity for Kevin to show people what he can do. We’ll see how it goes.”


