


A retired New York City correction captain was convicted Friday of all charges for ordering the brutal beating of an inmate at Rikers Island in 2012.

The retired captain, Gerald Vaughn, was found guilty of first-degree attempted gang assault, the most serious offense, in a case that helped expose a pervasive culture of violence at Rikers. He was also convicted of other charges, including attempted assault, assault and official misconduct.

The verdict was delivered Friday morning by Justice Steven Barrett in State Supreme Court in the Bronx. Justice Barrett also convicted two other correction officers, Harmon Frierson and Dwayne Maynard, who were not directly involved in the beating, of official misconduct, but acquitted them on two other charges.

The three defendants are part of a group of nine current and former Rikers correction officers who were tried together in connection with the beating of the inmate, Jahmal Lightfoot, and an effort to cover it up. The other officers chose a jury trial, and on Tuesday, five of those officers were convicted of the attempted gang assault and other charges. Another officer was acquitted in the cover-up.

The judge announced his verdicts without any explanation, in a courtroom packed with correction officers — including several of the defendants who had learned their fate Tuesday — and their supporters. Mr. Lightfoot sat in the back row, and watched the proceedings intensely but did not express any emotion.

Afterward, Mr. Lightfoot said the verdicts would send a message to correction officers that abusing inmates would not be tolerated.

“It happens all the time at Rikers Island,” he said. “It’s just that people don’t speak about it.”

The judge’s verdicts bring to a close a criminal trial that lasted more than two months and served as a scathing indictment of the city’s long troubled main jail complex, which has about 8,000 inmates. Critics, including Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, have called for Rikers to be closed.

The outcome was a victory for the Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, and other law enforcement officials who have struggled to successfully prosecute correction officers accused of brutality, in part because of negative perceptions and credibility problems with victims who are in jails and prisons. Ms. Clark has made prosecuting crimes committed at Rikers a priority.

The Lightfoot case was particularly significant because of the large number and the high rank of some of the officers involved. Prosecutors said that Eliseo Perez Jr., a former assistant chief for security, and Mr. Vaughn, a former captain, ordered five members of an elite correction squad to beat Mr. Lightfoot after he caught Mr. Perez’s eye during a search of inmates for weapons. They said that Mr. Perez thought the inmate was a tough guy and told the officers to kick his teeth in.

None of the officers testified during the trial. Their lawyers, who maintained that their clients had committed no wrongdoing, rested their case without calling a single witness or presenting any evidence. In contrast, the prosecution called more than a dozen witnesses, including Mr. Lightfoot.

Mr. Lightfoot, now 31, had testified in court that it was “open season” for the officers to mercilessly pummel him with their fists and boots even as he curled up in a fetal position on the floor. Afterward, he suffered fractures to both eye sockets and other injuries.

Defense lawyers countered that Mr. Lightfoot was found with a sharp metal object during the search, and then disregarded the officers’ repeated orders to drop it. They maintained from the start that Mr. Lightfoot was injured while being forcibly restrained by officers who were simply doing their jobs.

The lawyers also repeatedly sought to undermine the credibility of Mr. Lightfoot, who was sent to Rikers in 2010 after snatching a woman’s pocketbook. They brought up his ties to the Bloods street gang and previous criminal history involving drugs and other minor offenses. They suggested that he made up a story about being singled out and beaten, and hoped to gain financially from a pending lawsuit against the city over the attack.

After the beating, Mr. Lightfoot was sent to state prison. He was released in 2014.

After jurors rendered their verdicts on Tuesday, several of them explained that after reviewing all the evidence thoroughly, they had concluded that Mr. Lightfoot did not have a weapon when he was beaten.

But Renee Hill, a defense lawyer who represents one of the officers, Jose Parra, said that she did not believe the evidence in the case had risen above reasonable doubt. “I believe that the jury probably went more on emotion,” she said.

Mr. Vaughn and the other officers convicted Tuesday of attempted gang assault in the first degree — Mr. Perez, Mr. Parra, Tobias Parker, Alfred Rivera and David Rodriguez — could each face up to 15 years in state prison on the first-degree attempted gang assault charge alone.

When convicted of a felony, officers are automatically fired from their jobs under state law, according to correction officials. Even with an acquittal, an officer could still face discipline by the department, including possible dismissal.

Robert Feldman, a lawyer for Mr. Perez, insisted this week that his client was innocent and “would never do something like this.”

On Tuesday, the jury acquitted another officer, Jeffrey Richard, of taking part in the cover-up. A 10th officer, Michael Pollard, has also been charged in the beating but will be tried separately because of medical problems.


