


We asked stars and directors of this summer’s films about their own favorite summer films. Here’s what they said. (The answers have been edited and condensed.)

Three summers ago, they showed [it] at Tanglewood [the Boston Symphony Orchestra’s summer home] with David Newman conducting the orchestra synced to the film. It was absolutely exhilarating. Tanglewood was a place where [the film’s composer Leonard] Bernstein spent so many summers, and seeing the film on the grounds with musicians who probably played under him, and hearing it in the shed alongside 5,000 people, was incredibly moving. As for “Jaws,” I love those two notes! I can play them in a number of different ways, always slightly varying speeds.

— Yo-Yo Ma, cellist and star of “The Music of Strangers” (June 10)

“Top Secret!” I saw it when I was 11 or 12, and I remember thinking that I couldn’t believe adults were allowed to be that stupid and wonderful. When you’re 14, that’s the prime of liking things correctly, before you learn how to judge them or adjust the way that you laugh at comedy. And that is what I would like to retain for my life. There’s nothing as pure as that.

— Jorma Taccone, co-director and star, “PopStar: Never Stop Never Stopping” (June 3)

It was something new and different. You had all these women who were being funny. I don’t think I laughed harder at a movie in my whole life. And there aren’t a lot of movies where everybody is collectively laughing and walks away talking about moments and feels like they’ve seen something that hasn’t been done before.

— Olivia Munn, star, “X-Men: Apocalypse” (May 27)

You kind of can’t go wrong, because it’s summery and it’s inspiring and it’s two badass women driving off a cliff. I first saw “Thelma & Louise” quite late on. I was a teenager and watched it with my best friend, a boy, and [afterward] I was determined to go out and make waves. You know those movies that light a fire under you? That’s what “Thelma & Louise” did.

— Emilia Clarke, star, “Me Before You” (June 3)

That will always be the one to top. We went to opening day, the very first show at 10 or 11 in the morning, and just got completely blown away. When he’s in the cave and that boulder comes rolling down — now it’s an image we’ve seen a million times — but I’ve never in my life heard an audience go as crazy as that. People leapt out of their seats, screaming and clapping. That was the first time I went, “Maybe I want to be the guy behind the camera.”

— Paul Feig, director, “Ghostbusters” (July 15)

As a child I used to go to drive-ins with my parents. We didn’t have any money, so they’d sneak me and my mom in underneath a blanket in the back seat of the car to save the buck-fifty. The adventure of seeing “Thunderball” and of not being caught ourselves was really a living adventure. On my island in the Bahamas, I’ve set up “Dave’s Drive-in,” which magically appears on the beach. It’s an illusion. You sit on the beach with your feet in the sand watching this drive-in movie theater in honor of my parents and what they gave me as a child.

— David Copperfield, co-producer, “Now You See Me 2” (June 10)

I loved “Wet Hot American Summer,” although I haven’t seen the Netflix series, so I feel like a filthy, casual fan. The first time I watched it, I was like, “It’s cute, it’s funny.” And [my] friends in high school were like, “No, we’re going to watch it 50 more times, and it’s going to be your favorite movie.” To be honest, I would usually go over to the house of this one boy I liked, and we ended up making out the second half of the movie. So maybe it was one of those movies that was more fun to quote than to watch after a while.

— Anna Kendrick, star, “Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates” (July 8)

I saw [it] in Paris the year I went to film school in 1977. And I immediately went back and saw it again — the only time I ever did that. It was a movie I could totally buy into because it was not some superhero. It was just normal people confronted with an extraordinary thing, and this movie deeply influenced me because my movies are also like normal people who live through extraordinary adventures.

— Roland Emmerich, director, “Independence Day: Resurgence” (June 24)

When I was a kid, I would go to camp, and you didn’t get to see the summer movies always. I remember waiting all summer for “Independence Day.” I was probably 14 or 15, and it blew my mind. I was a huge Will Smith and “Fresh Prince of Bel-Air” fan. It’s a pure popcorn summer movie, the scope, the unprecedented destruction. And [Bill Pullman’s speech at the end] is one of the greatest speeches in movie history — although it’s written very bizarrely and hard to memorize. I know, because I’ve tried.

— Seth Rogen, star, “Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising” (May 20)

I think of [it] as a summer movie that didn’t fit any prototype of a typical summer movie. It represents science fiction at its best, when it can mystify us like a dream. The central character becomes more human by becoming less human. The social segregations of “District 9” become filters when we leave the theater that allow us to see our own world in sharper focus.

— Bill Pullman, star, “Independence Day: Resurgence” (June 24)

When I was little, I would watch [“Grease”] maybe every day for [all] of July or August. I was perhaps 12 and loved musicals, I was studying dance, and I knew all the dialogue and all the numbers. I didn’t have a movie theater nearby, but I would rent movies almost every day. If I love a movie, I never watch it just once. There are so many things you discover every time you watch.

— Penélope Cruz, star, “Ma Ma” (May 27)


