


ORLANDO, Fla. — One of the survivors of Sunday’s attack at the nightclub Pulse, a man closeted from his family, called his Latin American parents abroad to tell them that a close friend — who was actually his partner — had died in the bar. Their response: “You weren’t in that bar, were you?”

That attitude, a throwback to an earlier era, seemed the rare exception as relatives of those gunned down in the club, many of them Puerto Rican, mourned their deaths and celebrated their lives on the streets of Orlando.

The moments of mourning seemed to show how far gay culture has progressed from a time when it was frequently hidden from loved ones.

And so Eddie Justice, a 30-year-old gay accountant, texted his mother, Mina, “Mommy, I love you,” as bullets flew and the gunman, Omar Mateen, headed toward the Pulse bathroom where he was hiding, according to The Associated Press. Mr. Justice was confirmed dead on Monday.

In the hours since the attack, there have been countless homages on social media posted by friends and relatives, who extolled the accomplishments of their loved ones and embraced their sexual identity.

And there were the families of the anguished victims, who gathered around tables and in conference rooms to await word about whether their sons, daughters, cousins or uncles — gay or straight — had died.

It is a seismic shift from the atmosphere four decades ago after the firebombing of the UpStairs lounge in New Orleans. Back in 1973, some relatives refused to claim the bodies of their gay sons, banishing them to potter’s fields and the New Orleans community joked that the ashes of the dead would be buried in “fruit jars.” Thirty-two people died.

It is not necessary to reach that far back to feel the progress, which has galloped swiftly ahead in the past 10 years. Despite setbacks and plenty of lingering hate, a new generation of gay people and lesbians feels far less weighed down by stigma and fear in today’s rapidly evolving embrace of gay rights.

“A mother texting with her son and saying he was afraid and he was going to die,” said Juan Cantu, a theatrical director of Mexican descent who lives here and was once a Disney World performer. “That is a milestone. In my generation, I’m 42, I kept it hidden and I didn’t have the kind of relationship with my family that I would have told them that I was at a gay bar.”

But, he said, “we are not there yet.”

It was Latin night at Pulse on Saturday, which meant that a large number of Latinos — gay and straight — came out to dance salsa and listen to music; most of them were Puerto Rican (a half a million live in the Orlando area) with a sprinkling of Mexicans and Colombians in the mix. While the club advertises as a gay bar and has a large gay clientele, it has always attracted a diverse group.

Orlando has been one of the country’s most gay-friendly cities, with progressive anti-discrimination laws and aggressive advocates in Mayor Buddy Dyer and Patty Sheehan, an openly gay councilwoman. The city hosts gay days every year, huge gatherings that draw people from around the world. Also, local companies like Universal and Disney are gay-friendly. At least one shooting victim was a Disney performer.

Among Latinos, acceptance of gay culture has moved ahead less assertively. An overlay of machista culture remains, making it more difficult to come out for fear of rejection and discrimination.

“Certainly there are pockets of cultural resistance — be it the Hispanic community or the black community,” said Tim Vargas, the president of the board of GLBT Community Center of Central Florida, who is half Mexican. “Both of those have had cultural hindrances to acceptance. I do think we have made a lot of progress.”

Luis Daniel Wilson-Leon, 37, who died at the club, was harassed for being gay as a young man growing up in Puerto Rico, a close friend, Daniel Gmys-Casiano, wrote on Facebook on Monday.

Carlos Guillermo Smith, 35, an Orlando resident who is of Peruvian and French Canadian descent and is government affairs manager for Equality Florida, the statewide gay rights organization, called the massacre inside Pulse an attack on the Latino gay, lesbian and transgender community.

“When you look at the list of names of victims, 90 percent of them are young Latino men,” said Mr. Smith, who is running as a Democrat for an Orlando seat in the State House. “It is so devastating to our community because for me it is so personal, not only because this is my home, it’s my community, it’s against my identity as a gay Latino.”

As relatives waited on Sunday outside a hospital, they spoke lovingly of the young men and women who had been shot and killed, words that bespoke the transformation that has taken place.

Barron Serrano said his brother Juan P. Rivera Velazquez, 37, who loved bodybuilding and karate, had been married to Luis Conde, 39, for 13 years, a partnership he said they had worked hard to nurture. Both were Puerto Rican.

“They had a bumpy relationship, at first; it was not easy and they had ups and down, but they always forgot about their problems and stuck together,” Mr. Serrano said. “They were a very happy couple.”

Al Ferguson, the owner of a travel agency that caters to gay people, said he had kept vigil with families at the hospital in support of his friend Edward Sotomayor Jr., a Puerto Rican man who died in the shooting.

“What struck me in the room is the vast majority of family and friends there were not gay,” said Mr. Ferguson, who is gay. “There were not lots of gay people supporting gay people. There were families that didn’t care they were gay or didn’t care they were in a gay club. They loved their son and their friend. That is a phenomenon that happened in the last six, seven, eight years: public acceptance of the gay community.”


