


ALBANY — As a former aide to both Andrew M. Cuomo and his father, Todd R. Howe built a reputation as a prominent lobbyist in Albany and Washington, with top clients like the Metropolitan Museum of Art and major developers in upstate New York.

Trading on his connections as a Cuomo loyalist, Mr. Howe was seen by many as a reliable conduit to the governor’s office. Now, amid a sprawling federal investigation into the Cuomo administration’s marquee economic development projects, he has emerged as one of its top focal points.

The allegations against Mr. Howe, who has not been charged with a crime, are not clear. But a review of court documents and public records found that his professional persona masked a history of chaotic and slipshod financial dealings, including a 2003 bankruptcy and nearly $400,000 in federal tax liens and other judgments against him.

Though he looked every bit the prosperous Beltway insider, with large homes in the Maryland suburbs and children in elite New England boarding schools, he appeared to be often short of money, dodging tens of thousands of dollars in bills from a long lineup of local car dealerships and home-improvement businesses.

At one point, in 2009, he was apparently so pressed for money that he made a false bank deposit for $45,000 — a felony theft charge, to which he pleaded guilty and received a one-year probation sentence.

As the federal inquiry became public recently, Mr. Howe, 55, was fired from his job as president of WOH Government Solutions, the lobbying firm where he had worked for 14 years. Among WOH’s clients are COR Development Company, SUNY Polytechnic Institute, the developer LPCiminelli and CPV Valley L.L.C., which is building a power plant in the Hudson Valley — four entities that have been linked to central figures in the investigation. Mr. Howe was listed as a lobbyist for at least one of those clients.

Governor Cuomo has taken pains to distance himself from Mr. Howe since news of the investigation broke. On Monday, the governor’s counsel, Alphonso David, wrote a letter addressed to all executive branch agencies warning against any “lobbying communications,” including phone calls, emails or meetings, with Mr. Howe or anyone connected with his business.

“Why does that not surprise me?” Steve Klitsch, a contractor who sued Mr. Howe over an unpaid kitchen renovation bill for his $2.1 million Potomac home, said upon learning that Mr. Howe was involved in a federal inquiry. “I guess he’s now really gone big time.”

Mr. Howe did not return messages seeking comment. A spokesman for Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, declined to comment on the governor’s relationship with Mr. Howe.

His is a past littered with erratic behavior and litigation. In 2002, a bank sued Mr. Howe and his wife for failing to pay back a $90,000 home equity loan. In 2010, he was prosecuted for failing to return a rental car, a felony. He has had his wages garnished to pay off judgments in at least four cases. Over the past 11 years, he was ordered to pay nearly $15,000 to two tree landscaping companies alone.

All the while, his route through Albany and Washington kept intersecting with that of Mr. Cuomo and his inner circle.

His ties to the Cuomo family date to 1984, when he joined Gov. Mario M. Cuomo’s administration as a traveling aide. In November 1988, Mr. Howe was aboard a state-owned airplane with the governor when smoke began filling the cabin, forcing an emergency landing in the middle of the night.

When Andrew Cuomo became secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development under President Bill Clinton, Mr. Howe followed him, taking a job as Mr. Cuomo’s deputy chief of staff. He brought with him another Cuomo confidant: Joseph Percoco, whom he had first hired to work for Mario Cuomo in 1991, according to a 2010 interview in The New York Observer.

Mr. Percoco, who was one of Andrew Cuomo’s top aides until recently and had long been considered one of his closest advisers, has also been identified as one of the main subjects of the federal inquiry. Investigators are examining whether companies with business before the state sought to receive favorable treatment by improperly paying Mr. Percoco.

The two men remained close.

“We brought him down, sat him down and basically said, ‘Hey Joe, here’s what we need done,’” Mr. Howe recalled to The Observer, of their move to Washington. “And Joe again stepped into the fray.”

In 2000, Mr. Howe left the housing agency for a position at the Mortgage Bankers Association, a powerful industry lobbying group. By 2002, he had landed at WOH Government Solutions, the Washington-based lobbying subsidiary of the law firm Whiteman Osterman & Hanna, based in Albany.

His financial troubles were already mounting. He faced a foreclosure case in Maryland in 1999, another the next year and a third in 2006. Around the time he joined WOH, he and his wife found themselves in court, being sued by a contractor, Fernando Alban, over an unpaid bill for a kitchen renovation.

“He always seemed to be a wheeler-dealer,” said Donald B. Weisfeld, who was Mr. Alban’s lawyer in the case. “Money was constantly coming in and out, but neither one of us really knew what he did.”

He would not answer phone calls. Several of his checks bounced. Yet he “dressed well” and “looked like he had money,” Mr. Alban said.

Mr. Alban won a judgment against the Howes. The sum was not princely — a little less than $8,000 — but larger cases would follow.

In the bank-theft case, Mr. Howe confessed to filling out a $45,000 deposit slip without including a check, making it appear as though he had $45,000 in his TD Bank account, according to court records. He had already drawn a check for that amount to be paid to Union College, a private liberal-arts school in Schenectady, N.Y., which had been unsuccessfully trying to collect more than $35,000 from him.

When TD Bank discovered the discrepancy, Mr. Howe said he must have dropped the check he meant to deposit. He promised to get a replacement check from Fidelity Investments, where, investigators later determined, he had never had an account.

Mr. Howe pleaded guilty in April 2010 and was sentenced to one year of probation.

It was unclear what the Union College bill was for. Mr. Howe sent his children to expensive private schools, but not, apparently, to Union, according to online profiles of his children.

Having to pay tuition was one of several excuses he gave Mr. Klitsch, the Maryland contractor who won a judgment for more than $4,000 against Mr. Howe in 2009 after Mr. Howe stopped making payments on his kitchen renovation bill, Mr. Klitsch said.

Mr. Klitsch said he found that his was only the latest local business to sue the lobbyist. The list read like the Maryland yellow pages: a swimming pool technician, a lumberyard, a heating technician and so on.

“They said: ‘Steve, good luck, man. I tried suing him, and it didn’t work. Good luck!’” Mr. Klitsch recalled. “I was joking with them, ‘Why don’t we go down there, put a big sign in the yard: Todd Howe Doesn’t Pay.’ He’s a professional rip-off guy.”

Despite his jumbled finances, Mr. Howe and his wife, Sarah, a public-relations consultant, bought a $1.8 million home in Washington in June 2015.

Mr. Howe had a reliable pipeline of WOH clients, including museums in New York and upstate institutions. In the Syracuse area, to which the state has directed millions to help revitalize the local economy, he frequently worked with COR, a major developer that has received millions in state funds for multiple projects. COR, whose spokeswoman declined to comment on its relationship with Mr. Howe, is also Mr. Cuomo’s largest donor in central New York.

Since the investigation became public, however, the man who once seemed to be everywhere is nowhere to be found. Information about him and WOH Government Solutions has been scrubbed from Whiteman Osterman & Hanna’s website.


