


Patrick Vieira may not have known precisely what to expect in his first season as New York City F.C.’s coach, but he most assuredly did not expect this.

Vieira has been without the persistently injured midfielder Frank Lampard, who has yet to play a minute all season. Vieira’s reconfigured defense remains prone to errors, and he has already dropped two of his stars, Andrea Pirlo and Mix Diskerud, from the starting lineup — in Diskerud’s case, more than once — in order “to choose the best team to win football matches.”

So far, he has not done as much winning as he would like, either.

Wednesday night’s 1-1 tie with the Montreal Impact at Yankee Stadium was in some ways more of the usual for Vieira. N.Y.C.F.C. threatened to begin reversing its early-season story line with a well-crafted goal after halftime, but then surrendered a tying goal in injury time to spoil a solid effort and toss away a vital 2 points in the standings.

There were hints of normalcy as Pirlo returned to the lineup — Diskerud started on the bench for the second game in a row — but the heavy lifting was again done by the team’s grinders instead of its best-paid players.

Wednesday’s first goal was conjured by three of them, with right back R. J. Allen starting a rush out of midfield in the 51st minute. Allen fed the ball up the wing to forward Khiry Shelton, who rewarded a slashing run into the center by Tommy McNamara with a scorching cross that McNamara deftly stabbed back into the path of Allen, who had never stopped running. Allen capped the three-pass drive by slotting McNamara’s dropback past goalkeeper Evan Bush.

It was a rare offensive flourish for N.Y.C.F.C., which had managed only three goals in its previous five games. And while the hard-running David Villa nearly chipped a shot over Bush to double the lead a few minutes later, it seemed through most of the second half that Allen’s goal would decide the sometimes listless match.

Montreal’s Didier Drogba, whose talent had surely worried Vieira and his still-maturing back line, got little service and rarely threatened. When he switched jerseys in the second half to one with no name or number on the back, he became even more anonymous — until his free kick a minute into stoppage time found the substitute Dominic Oduro at the near post for the tying goal.

The result, hopeful and then frustrating, did not fix everything for N.Y.C.F.C. Although Pirlo returned to the starting lineup, he was a phantom in the midfield, creating little before he was replaced by Diskerud in the 77th minute. And the tie extended the team’s winless streak to seven games with a tough road stretch coming.

Still, for Vieira, who after last weekend’s loss at Philadelphia had said that “we are frustrated and disappointed, and there’s a lot of anger,” avoiding a loss counted as a temporary step forward.

“The only way to turn the season around is to keep doing what we are doing,” he said.


