


CANNES, France — In “Loving,” which was unveiled here on Monday to raves, the director Jeff Nichols tells the story of Richard and Mildred Loving, the interracial couple whose 1958 marriage broke Virginia’s anti-miscegenation law and eventually led to the landmark Supreme Court ruling that deemed marriage a human right.

“I truly believe this is one of the most pure love stories in American history,” Mr. Nichols said at a news conference here on Monday about the white Southern construction worker, played by the Australian actor Joel Edgerton, and his African-American wife, played by the Ethiopian-Irish actress Ruth Negga.

The Lovings wed in Washington, and returned to their native Virginia, only to be arrested. Their prison sentences were suspended on the condition that they leave the state for 25 years, a ruling they eventually defied. As the civil rights movement gained momentum, the A.C.L.U. took on their case, and in 1967 the Supreme Court ruled in their favor in Loving v. Virginia.

“The court case is fascinating; how these lawyers got this case to the Supreme Court could make a movie in and of itself,” said Mr. Nichols, who also wrote the screenplay. “I didn’t want to make that movie,” he added. “I wanted to make a movie about two people in love.”

The film has received strong reviews, with critics noting Mr. Nichols’s understated direction and strong performances by Mr. Edgerton and Ms. Negga. At the news conference, Ms. Negga was asked if she was ready to win an Academy Award.

She said that “Loving” was “the most important film I’ve ever made and one of the most important films in history, I think.” Ms. Negga, who appeared in “The Samaritan” (2012) with Samuel L. Jackson, was also in “12 Years a Slave,” but didn’t make the film’s final cut. “That was one of the most difficult phone calls I received,” she said. “But things balance out.”

“Loving” takes an intimate, oblique approach, focusing on the couple more than the larger currents of history. “There are certain moments that a lesser screenwriter or someone really drawn into the patina of Hollywood might have rearranged the truth in order to make it more Hollywood,” Mr. Edgerton said. “Let’s have them high-fiving their children in the courtroom and having a party to celebrate,” he added.

“Loving” is the second film by the director to make its debut at the Cannes Film Festival, after “Mud” (unveiled in 2012). His “Midnight Special” is now in theaters.

In making “Loving,” the director and the actors drew heavily on the documentary “The Loving Story,” which uses real footage of the couple. Mr. Nichols came to the project after his agent told him that there was interest in making a feature based on the documentary, which HBO broadcast in 2012. (There was also a 1996 television drama, “Mr. and Mrs. Loving,” starring Timothy Hutton and Lela Rochon.)

“I looked at the trailer, the trailer’s great, the trailer made me cry,” Mr. Nichols said. “I sent it to my wife. She sent me an email back and she said, ‘I really love you, but if you don’t make this movie I’m going to divorce you.’”


