


If Manager Joe Girardi’s temperament is a weather vane for the Yankees’ fortunes, then his recent testiness — with a few dashes of sarcasm — may explain how the first two weeks of the season have unfolded.

A 4-3 victory on Sunday over the Seattle Mariners provided plenty of reasons to exhale, beginning with the four-game losing streak it ended.

There was Alex Rodriguez answering his demotion in the batting order and breaking a 0-for-19 slump by slugging a two-run home run. There was Masahiro Tanaka looking like the pitcher the Yankees handed $155 million and outfielder Brett Gardner resembling a catalytic pest. And the back end of the bullpen was not bad either: Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller combined to strike out all six batters they faced.

But Girardi, who has become increasingly agitated in recent days over the persistent questions about Rodriguez, was not pleased when asked if he considered Rodriguez’s slump to be over or, with three other hitless at-bats, was he still a work in progress.

“You know what?” Girardi said at his postgame news conference. “I went and saw a shrink and had him analyze what I should analyze and went from there. That’s what I did.”

Several days earlier, Girardi protested that he was not God when he was asked why Rodriguez had slumped at the end of last season. Then earlier Sunday, Girardi explained why he had ducked a question Saturday about whether he would move Rodriguez, who batted sixth Sunday for the first time since last April, from his customary third spot in the batting order.

“Well, I don’t make decisions on a whim,” said Girardi, who last year was occasionally miffed when questioned about Tanaka and the state of his fragile elbow. “There’s a lot of times I’ll sit at this table and have an idea of what I want to do, but I haven’t had a chance to communicate with the players, so it’s not going to be given to you first. Sorry.”

If the victory did not seem to loosen Girardi, it did others. Rodriguez even tried to make a sly joke about not getting credit for driving in a runner in scoring position — the Yankees were 1 for 34 in the series. When there were only quizzical looks, Rodriguez shook his head and asked of news media members gathered around his locker, “Where are all the Ivy Leaguers?”

On a more weighty matter, Rodriguez said he had no problem with the move down in the batting order. “Sometimes you’ve got to do that, you’ve got to shuffle the deck a little bit,” he said. “Whatever it takes to win, I’m willing to do.”

The home run may quiet some of the concern about Rodriguez, but the rest of the day did little to suggest that he had solved his problems. He struck out twice and popped up in his other at-bats, though he did raise his batting average to .118.

“I wish I was hitting .300 instead of 3 for 30,” Rodriguez said of his statistics entering Sunday. Of his home run, he added: “It feels good. It’s a work in progress. You have to chip away. It’s a long season. I thought my rhythm was better all day. I only got one hit, but I felt my swings over all were better.”

There was little debate about Tanaka’s effort. It was his best in three starts this season. He allowed six hits, three runs and no walks and struck out six in seven innings. But the numbers did little to describe his misfortune. Three of the hits, bunched together in the first inning when the Mariners took a 1-0 lead, came in holes in the Yankees’ infield shift — including Robinson Cano’s dribbler toward third base.

The other runs came with the aid of Kyle Seager’s hard grounder that went through first baseman Mark Teixeira’s legs and Nori Aoki’s liner that Jacoby Ellsbury misplayed into a triple. Aoki scored when Seth Smith’s grounder just eluded the drawn-in second baseman Starlin Castro. It tied the score at 3-3 and led to the last base runner the Mariners had.

The Yankees regained the lead when Gardner singled — his third hit of the day — and raced to third on a single by Carlos Beltran, who had swapped spots in the lineup with Rodriguez. Gardner scored when Hisashi Iwakuma’s pitch skittered away from catcher Steve Clevenger.

Rodriguez’s home run usurped a story line that was of keen interest in Japan: the matchup between the starting pitchers, Tanaka and Iwakuma, former teammates with the Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles.

It was hard not to notice the similarities between the two pitchers on Sunday. Both come set in the stretch with the ball held away from their chest and make use of the same leg kick. Both rely heavily on a split-fingered fastball and sharp control. Iwakuma makes more frequent use of a hesitation in his delivery.

The two had an interesting dynamic. Although Iwakuma was the ace of that pitching staff, Tanaka was the more celebrated pitcher, owing in large part to his star turn during Japan’s high school tournament. (The event’s popularity in Japan is akin to that of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament in the United States.)

While Tanaka said in an interview Friday that he was excited for the matchup, his first against a Japanese pitcher in the major leagues, he added that it would be improper in Japanese culture to give his opinion of Iwakuma, who at 35 is eight years older than Tanaka.

“I think if it was Ichiro who was evaluating or commenting on Iwakuma, it would be totally fine,” Tanaka said, referring to Ichiro Suzuki, the 42-year-old Japanese star playing for the Miami Marlins. “But if it’s me commenting on someone who is older than I am, it’s a little bit awkward.”


