


Only thunderous cheers, not flying objects, came from the fans as the Flyers’ Michal Neuvirth skated off the ice. With how Neuvirth had played, he might have stopped those objects anyway.

After fans pelted the ice with souvenir wristbands in the previous game, Neuvirth had 31 saves and helped Philadelphia stave off a sweep with a 2-1 win over the Washington Capitals on Wednesday night.

“We talked about it: Let’s have some fun and enjoy the moment,” Neuvirth said. “We did.”

The Capitals still lead the series, 3-1, headed into Game 5 on Friday night in Washington.

Shayne Gostisbehere and Andrew MacDonald scored for the Flyers in a distraction-free game following Game 3’s embarrassing end.

“The fans were a little bit better than last game,” the Flyers captain Claude Giroux said. “It’s good to have them on our side again.”

Outstanding play in the net helped the Flyers even more.

The Flyers’ rookie coach, Dave Hakstol, shuffled his lineup for the win-or-else game. He benched the starting goalie Steve Mason for Neuvirth and moved Brayden Schenn to the top line in place of Jake Voracek.

Mason had allowed five power-play goals, including four in the third period, in a 6-1 loss in Game 3. In Game 2, his gaffe allowed Jason Chimera’s 101-foot tip-in goal, a mistake that has been endlessly replayed on blooper reels.

Enter Neuvirth, who had played parts of six seasons in Washington and who went 18-8-4 with a 2.27 goal against and a .924 save percentage in 32 games for the Flyers this season.

His only misstep came when T. J. Oshie backhanded in a rebound 2 minutes 38 seconds into the third to make it 2-1.

That was it for the Capitals.

The Flyers seemed like a new team in the first period. Neuvirth stopped all 10 shots he faced, and the team’s formerly punchless top line finally broke through.

Giroux and Wayne Simmonds — Nos. 1 and 2 in team points this season — were held without a goal or assist through the first three games. They both assisted on Gostisbehere’s blast from the point for the 1-0 lead.

Gostisbehere’s goal came on the power play, snapping the Flyers’ 0 for 13 postseason skid.

“We’re not too worried about digging out of a 3-0 hole,” Hakstol said. “We came here today to win a hockey game.”

The game was marred by a scary hit that resulted in Flyers center Scott Laughton leaving on a stretcher.

He was taken off the ice after he crashed into the boards late in the first. He went down in a heap face-first and was immobile for several minutes. There was no penalty on the play.

Laughton talked to medical personnel as they strapped him on the board. The Flyers said he was taken to a hospital as a precaution. The Flyers said he would remain there overnight and all tests had been negative.

STARS 3, WILD 2 Jason Spezza scored the go-ahead goal with his skate, Ales Hemsky and Patrick Eaves each scored on a second-period power play to give Dallas’s lagging special teams a lift, and the Stars won at Minnesota to push their series lead to 3-1.

Antti Niemi took over the net from Kari Lehtonen, who started the first three games, and made 28 saves for the Stars. They will host Game 5 in Dallas on Friday.

Jason Pominville and Charlie Coyle both scored go-ahead goals in the second period, but the Wild were not able to sustain the momentum from a spirited comeback in Game 3 for the entire night.

The Wild finished the game 6 on 4 after a high-stick penalty on Antoine Roussel and with goalie Devan Dubnyk pulled, but the Stars tightened up and allowed only one shot on target over the 84-second two-man advantage.

SHARKS 3, KINGS 2 Brent Burns and Joe Pavelski scored power-play goals in the second period and host San Jose again moved to the brink of eliminating Los Angeles from the playoffs with a victory in Game 4 of their first-round series.

Patrick Marleau added a power-play goal in the third period as the Sharks scored three times with the man advantage two nights after an 0-for-5 performance in a 2-1 overtime loss.

Martin Jones made 26 saves against his former team to put San Jose up by three games to one heading into Game 5 on Friday night in Los Angeles.

But knocking the Kings out is never easy. The Sharks blew a 3-0 series lead to Los Angeles in the first round two years ago, becoming the fourth N.H.L. team ever to lose a best-of-seven series after winning the first three games.

GRETZKY TAKES IN GAME The N.H.L. great Wayne Gretzky was at the game, along with scores of former Flyers stars such as Chris Pronger, Simon Gagne and Kimmo Timonen. They are in Philadelphia for the Ed Snider celebration on Thursday. Snider founded the Flyers and was their owner until his death on April 11.


