


OAKLAND, Calif. — Over the past four years, Andre Iguodala has been an Eastern Conference All-Star, a gold-medal-winning Olympian for the United States and the most valuable player of the N.B.A. finals.

So has LeBron James, his anticipated defensive matchup in the N.B.A. finals rematch between the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers.

But here is the point:

That is a résumé befitting a superstar shoe-company pitchman, meaning James — not so much a player like Iguodala, who averaged 7 points a game this season, with 4 rebounds and 3.4 assists.

Iguodala, the Warriors’ redoubtable swingman, fits few basketball stereotypes and positional characterizations. He is the epitome of That Essential Intangible Guy.

He can be a 6-foot-6 shooting guard, and while no great marksman, he has a knack for knocking down big shots.

He can be a small forward who can guard much bigger forwards, a defensive stalwart who bodied up on James in the 2015 finals, making life trying for the N.B.A.’s most combustible package of power and speed.

They will most likely become closely reacquainted in Game 1 on Thursday night, and Iguodala’s impact — can he again hold his own without automatic help when James posts up on the left block? — will be a key to the series.

Iguodala is a widely respected veteran who, as a budding college star on the way to becoming the No. 9 pick (by Philadelphia) in the 2004 draft, fancied himself as the next Scottie Pippen, not like Mike.

Unlike Pippen, a Hall of Fame talent who was always billed second behind Michael Jordan on six Chicago Bulls championship teams, Iguodala is at best the fourth-ranked conversation piece on the defending champion Warriors.

And that is assuming nobody wants to talk about the regular starters Andrew Bogut and Harrison Barnes, or the team’s popular coach, Steve Kerr.

“It’s incredible; it doesn’t happen in this league,” said Luke Walton, a Kerr assistant who is working his last days with the Warriors before moving south to coach the Los Angeles Lakers. “Someone with his talent and his success normally won’t accept a lesser role like he has for us.”

Iguodala is highly credentialed but hardly celebrated — not until the biggest games of the season, or the season itself, are on the line.

Take Games 6 and 7 of the Western Conference finals against Oklahoma City, in which he got into the space and head of another shoe-company darling, Kevin Durant.

Iguodala’s strip of a driving Durant late in Game 6 with the Warriors trailing by 6 resulted in a perfect long pass down the court from Iguodala to Klay Thompson for one of Thompson’s 11 3-pointers.

Facing a potential deficit of 8, the Warriors were suddenly down by only 3. The momentum changed, and the Thunder were permanently spooked.

In Game 7, Iguodala played a team-high 43 minutes after averaging 26.6 during the regular season, and as Walton noted Wednesday, “he was on the court every time Durant was on the court.”

Iguodala also started, after coming off the bench for the previous six, bringing to mind how Kerr rearranged his lineup after losing two of the first three games in the 2015 finals.

Once Iguodala was inserted last year, the Warriors won out, with his defense contributing mightily to James’s 39.8 percent shooting for the series and Iguodala’s 25 points in the Game 6 clincher cementing an improbable rise to finals M.V.P.

No player in N.B.A. history had ever won the award now named for Bill Russell without being a regular starter.

“Oh, we see him as a starter, whether he does or not,” Walton said. “We purposely try to keep him under or around 30 minutes a night during the season. He’s had some knee issues in the past, and he’s old now.”

Iguodala is only 32, just testing the limits of his prime. Walton stretched the issue, perhaps getting even for when Iguodala, then his freshman teammate at Arizona, made Walton feel creaky during his senior year.

Iguodala has spoken of the impact Walton had on him, telling the website Grantland in 2013 how he had learned from Walton “how to sacrifice yourself for a teammate.”

Walton said that was “nice to hear,” but mostly he recalled Iguodala being “as hard as anyone as I’ve had to guard.”

“It’s a big difference from an 18-year-old freshman to a 22-year-old senior, but every single day in practice we battled,” Walton said. “I knew right then he was going to be an All-Star at this level, just by the way he played the game.”

With the Warriors, it is a good thing that Walton is around to speak on Iguodala’s behalf because persuading him to praise himself is not unlike getting around him to the rim.

Reporters tried on Wednesday, phrasing and rephrasing queries about Iguodala’s role in slowing down — if not shutting down — James.

Question: Is your matchup with LeBron anything like a chess match?

Iguodala: “I don’t think it’s just me and him. It’s all part of being out there, helping the team win.”

Question: What assets would you say best help you in defending against James?

Iguodala: “Honestly, we’ve got some really smart defenders behind me. Andrew Bogut is huge for us. Draymond Green, the way he communicates is great. When you have that many guys helping that you can trust, you can pretty much buy into any defensive scheme.”

It was time to locate Walton.

“I don’t think you’ll get him to talk about that, which is part of the reason he’s been so successful,” Walton said. “Obviously, inside he knows how good he is. But ever since I’ve known him when he came in as a freshman, he’s always been about the team, the purity of the game.”

He added: “That is what made him winning the N.B.A. finals M.V.P. so special, such a beautiful thing. He did it as an unselfish player, coming off the bench for the first time in his career, probably in his life, and then being called on to start and guard LeBron.”

Somebody had to do it, said Iguodala, who added, in his most revealing admission, “Some people’s jobs are a little more dirty than others, and they may not get as much publicity.”

Not until the finals, until James. As they once again collide, remember that Iguodala, while no King, has worn the crown, won the gold and been the finals M.V.P.

His résumé speaks much louder than he does.


