


Advocates for homeless people filed a complaint with New York City’s Civil Rights Commission on Thursday accusing the Police Department of targeting people living on the street, a practice they say violates a two-year-old law that prohibits “bias-based profiling.”

In June 2015, police officers began issuing “move along” orders in the area around 125th Street in East Harlem, which had become a sprawling community of mostly homeless men, according the complaint.

The efforts grew more aggressive as up to 100 homeless people gathered in the area, turning a spotlight on the city’s homelessness crisis. Police Commissioner William J. Bratton assigned a 38-officer unit to focus on the area, and the city later started Home-Stat, a program involving several different agencies working to move people off the streets and into shelters.

But advocates for homeless people say the city’s efforts are discriminatory because people are being targeted simply for living on the street, even though they have not broken any laws. “We have the right to not have the police interrupt our daily lives,” Alexis Karteron, a lawyer for the New York Civil Liberties Union, said. “It really just boils down to pure harassment.”

The New York Civil Liberties Union and Picture the Homeless, a nonprofit in East Harlem, asked the Human Rights Commission to investigate the practice. The complaint says the police are violating the Community Safety Act, a law that took effect in 2014 with a goal of ending discriminatory profiling, including the widespread use of stop-and-frisk.

“Racial profiling was part of what was on people’s minds,” Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, said of the law. But people pushing for the law always sought to use it to protect people of different backgrounds, she said. Profiling people because of “housing status,” meaning if they have no fixed address, live in a shelter or are even perceived to be homeless, is also against the law.

In separate statements, Lt. John Grimpel, a police spokesman, and Monica Klein, a spokeswoman for the mayor’s office, said the complaint would be reviewed when it was received.

Ms. Klein said the city “respects the rights of homeless New Yorkers and has put in place a new comprehensive plan to reduce homelessness.”

Lieutenant Grimpel defended the Police Department. “The N.Y.P.D.’s outreach services and interactions involving the homeless are carried out in a lawful and appropriate manner,” he said.

City Councilman Brad Lander, a Brooklyn Democrat who co-sponsored the legislation, said on Thursday, “There’s plenty of room for a policy around homelessness that is effective, compassionate and within the law.

With few drop-in centers, concerns about safety in shelters and the dearth of affordable housing in the city, many homeless people preferred to stay on the streets. The East Harlem sidewalks had become a safe haven.

Jazmin Berges, a 32-year-old woman who now lives in transitional housing in the Bronx, said she was homeless for about three years and was a target of police profiling last summer when she was removed from Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem. She said her blankets, identification and clothes were scooped up and placed in a trash bin. “I was feeling helpless,” she said. “I couldn’t believe my property was being destroyed, and I didn’t want to get arrested.”


