


While pregnant with her first child in 2010, Ariane Goldman’s maternity wardrobe consisted of vintage caftans and muumuus and her mother’s hand-me-downs. “I was navigating the strangeness of a body and image change,” the designer remembers, “and I was still so excited about what was happening and wanted to invest in pieces for myself — but nothing spoke to me.” She soon started the clothing brand Hatch, a collection of loosefitting but carefully constructed garments for women to wear before, during and after pregnancy; now, she’s added to Hatch an 11-piece beachwear line, Plage, which launches today at ABC Home. “Last August, I was in Marrakesh with my husband, who was working, and I was kind of roaming the streets,” Goldman says, “and I went into this bodega packed with textiles and it blew me away.” She gravitated toward the breathable, refined-washed cottons and to the store’s owner, Randall Bachner. “He’d been a fashion photographer in New York and he moved to Morocco to begin this fabric business, and he and I decided to work together,” she says.

Goldman designed a range of tasseled tops, slouchy shorts and rompers and kilim-striped dresses that merge Moroccan detailing and Hatch’s sensibility; Bachner produced them in his loom studio. “They’re effortless pieces that allow a woman to grow and expand, but to also be herself in, without having an adjustable strap or something that screams temporary or disposable,” Goldman says. “When I design, I’m thinking about the belly, so there’s usually either a cocoon shape or a beautiful drape, or a specific pleat or some sort of ruching that allows the wearer to feel special, and then be out the door — there isn’t time to dwell.” Bachner also photographed the accompanying campaign in Marrakesh landmarks, including Beldi Country Club, and the nearby Kasbah Bab Ourika, a hotel above the Ourika Valley. “I’m pinching myself because I don’t know when things will align like this again,” she says. “It was both a personal, creative journey and about making an opportunity out of a curiosity. And here we are.”


