


This article is part of our spring gallery guide.

ART has always been used to sugarcoat economic power moves. In Manhattan, the arrival of galleries can help make real estate hot, and for a while, art gains from the cachet. In Brooklyn, gentrification seems to have the opposite effect: It kills off the art that helped inspire it. Not long ago, a wave of start-up art spaces was building in Dumbo and Williamsburg, only to die down once property values rose, a dynamic that may now be underway in Bushwick. Whatever the case there, in a once rent-friendly borough, galleries and artists alike are scrambling, a reality that tends to promote resourcefulness in exhibition options and to give at least some art being shown and produced a political edge.

BROOKLYN MUSEUM I’ll start with a museum exhibition that has the fluid, improvisatory sprawl of a giant gallery group show. It’s an international survey called “Agitprop!,” in which politics is loud, clear and polyphonic. The show opened in December at a third its present size, then unfolded in three stages, with earlier artists nominating others for inclusion, a process that has brought outstanding figures like Jelili Atiku, from Nigeria; Beatriz Santiago Muñoz, from Puerto Rico; and Inder Salim, from India, into the picture.

Much of the work is ephemeral, preserved as documentation. But there are some large-scale objects and installations, two of local relevance. One is the four-foot-high bust of the National Security Agency whistle-blower Edward J. Snowden, made by Doyle Trankina and illicitly placed by two other artists, Jeff Greenspan and Andrew Tider, in Fort Greene Park a year ago. The police quickly removed it, but an activist collective called the Illuminator just as quickly replaced it with a photographic projection.

In November, the Illuminator, working with the Crown Heights Tenant Union, made projections specifically to address gentrification and to protest the meeting of the annual borough Real Estate Summit, which rented space at the Brooklyn Museum. The museum, after taking heat for accommodating the summit, added to “Agitprop!” a multimedia piece assembled by community advocates and artists, called “A People’s Monument to Anti-Displacement Organizing.” It includes basic information on the city housing crisis; updated news on Mayor Bill de Blasio’s plans for creating “affordable” units through Brooklyn rezoning; and an artfully rousing video — by Noah Fischer, Betty Yu and Alicia Boyd of the Crown Heights and Flatbush-based Movement to Protect the People — showing resistance in action.

BRIC HOUSE The activist spirit is alive in this borough-sponsored contemporary space, now in good-looking new quarters near the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Among its current attractions is a group exhibition called “Whisper or Shout: Artists in the Social Sphere,” organized by Elizabeth Ferrer.

Some work has taken the form of single performances. Recently, Alicia Grullón re-enacted former State Senator Wendy Davis’s 11-hour filibuster in the Texas legislature to block a restrictive abortion bill. Most of what’s in the gallery also has a theatrical or interactive dimension. Kameelah Janan Rasheed’s reconstruction of a childhood living room is as precisely detailed and surreal as a stage set. Kenneth Pietrobono’s T-shirts, with their Jenny Holzer-like slogans — “Profit Be My Guide,” “Propensity to Consume,” “The Sum of My Debts” — are meant for street performances. A wall display of 52 album covers for vintage recordings of protest songs comes with a listening station. The piece is by Interference Archive, an ambitious collective that also contributes to “Agitprop!” and has its own exhibition (and listening) space at 131 Eighth Street, No. 4, in the Gowanus section of Brooklyn.

TRANSMITTER/TSA NEW YORK One option for getting around the rent crunch is the old cooperative gallery model, in which a bunch of artists chip in on basic expenses for a space; organize shows, sometimes of their own work; and sometimes sit at the front desk. (A.I.R. Gallery in Dumbo is a classic example.) This is the route taken by two Bushwick galleries, Transmitter and TSA New York (Tiger Strikes Asteroid New York). They share a two-room space so small that it’s easy to mistake it for a single gallery, though the sensibilities suggested by their current exhibitions are distinctive.

The work in the two-person show at TSA, organized by Vincent Como, is fairly conventional in format, even if its use of materials is not: Joy Curtis cuts and shapes abstract sculptures from cotton duck fabric of a kind that many artists paint on, and Terence Hannum makes something like abstract painting from audio cassette tape.

The seven artists in “Publish or Perish,” a collaboration with Arts and Sciences Projects, at Transmitter (which refers to itself as an artist-run curatorial project), sidestep the notion of art-as-precious-object by focusing on unconventional means of delivery. Sessa Englund offers key chains carrying images from her Instagram account. Antoine Lefebvre invites you to download books from the Internet. In the news release, the artist David Horvitz proposes a telepathic version of mail art: “For $1 USD I will think about you for one minute. I will email you the time I start thinking, and the time I stop.”

MICROSCOPE In the same building as Transmitter and TSA, this gallery has work of a similarly Conceptualist bent in “Takahiko Iimura: Seeing Double.” Mr. Iimura, born in Tokyo in 1937 and living in the United States since 1981, has been making film and video installations for more than half a century. The title of an early piece, “Dada 62,” speaks of at least one inspiration for his art. Microscope is showing a handful of pieces from this past, which, in different ways, float the notion of filmmaking as an absurdist, looping endeavor: Two video cameras film each other; two televisions watch each other; the artist films himself reciting personal pronouns as if trying to figure out which one fits.

SOUTHFIRST Another veteran Japanese Conceptualist, Akio Suzuki, now 75, has a solo show at Southfirst, and it’s a startling beauty. In the center of the gallery sits what looks like a pile of street-found junk. But if, as instructed, you place a small metal ball at a certain place on the pile, the whole thing turns into a fine-tuned musical instrument, as the ball rolls down inclines and across textured surfaces, striking bits of glass, wood and metal as it goes. The whole show, organized by the sound artist Aki Onda, is based on the pinball-like Japanese game called pachinko, which is often used for gambling. Here all gambles — will the ball stick to a path, and what path will it take? — pay off in delighted listening.

REAL FINE ARTS At this gallery almost under the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, the young artist Maggie Lee is having her first New York City solo show. Ms. Lee is best known for her feature-length 2015 video “Mommy,” made after her mother’s death and about her own childhood. In a sense, the show’s nine small sculptural environments, several encased in glass fish tanks, extend the film’s autobiographical cast, advancing it to a coming-of-age narrative. The protagonist is a type of doll that Ms. Lee once played with and that, in tableaus, represents adolescent encounters with fashion, drugs, angst and rock ’n’ roll. The stories are old. What’s new are the millennial pop-cultural details that go into their telling.

FIVEMYLES Fantasy has a different, far subtler flavor in a modest career survey of work by the artist Hanne Tierney. Ms. Tierney carved FiveMyles out of an abandoned garage in 1999 and named it in memory of her son, Myles, an Associated Press photographer killed in Sierra Leone. She has used the front of the space for exhibitions, often of neighborhood artists, and reserved the back to develop her own performance work, based on puppetlike abstract forms, which she manipulates through a complex system of hand-operated pulleys.

In a new 15-minute-long piece, which she calls “an experiment in self-performing theater,” she, for the first time, calls on computer technology to move her forms. The resulting piece, based on texts by Gertrude Stein and with an operating system designed by Oskar Strautmanis, is brilliantly done, and very moving, with characters gently interacting, objects suddenly springing to life, and music — by Erik Satie — sweetening the air.

Ms. Tierney has watched Crown Heights change from a neighborhood in which longtime residents could just scrape by to one they’re being pushed out of. Little wonder that a fair share of what she has done at FiveMyles has been topically driven, as is a small, powerful concurrent show there by the photographer Janet Goldner, on immigration.

Social issues also impel the work of certain younger Brooklyn artists. Jennifer Dalton and William Powhida will be collaborating on an interactive political project that probably comes under the art category of social practice, beginning in early May. Month2Month, a programming series produced by More Art, will entail inviting people to make short-term stays in examples of “luxury” and “affordable” housing, and to join in talks with developers, policy experts, local residents, artists, journalists and activists about gentrification, which is so drastically shaping the possibilities for life in this city.

Will Month2Month “work,” whatever that may mean? Who knows. But anyone interested in the intersection of class, race, money and life, and in experiencing a rare meeting of art world and real world, might want to give it a shot.

THE SAMPLER Pick a beer from the glass cases or try one of the craft brews on tap (from the likes of Threes Brewing and Stillwater). What this bar (about 20 seats) lacks in size it more than makes up for in its convivial atmosphere. (Freshly popped popcorn is a bonus; other snacks are also available.) 234 Starr Street, Bushwick; 718-484-3560.

BUILDING ON BOND This rustic chic cafe’s design — salvaged fixtures, colorfully painted pipes (one retrofitted for beer taps) and repurposed tabletops (some from shuffleboards) — are aesthetically pleasing. The food (kale salad, Pat LaFrieda burgers) and craft beer options (Other Half, Finback Brewery) will whet the appetite. 112 Bond Street, Boerum Hill; 347-853-8687.

NITEHAWK CINEMA Here you can grab a seat, a drink and a bite, all while taking in a big-screen feature. (Nitehawk’s monthly Art Scene series will present Jean Cocteau’s “Testament of Orpheus” on May 21 and 22.) 136 Metropolitan Avenue, Williamsburg; nitehawkcinema.com. You can also take a load off around the corner, at VIDEOLOGY, where movie trivia, bingo and comedy are standard fare.308 Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg. — NICOLE HERRINGTON


