


It will be a big night for Canadian hockey on Saturday, with seven teams competing for a huge prize.

Unfortunately, it is not the Stanley Cup.

For the first time since 1970, every Canadian team missed the playoffs. Instead, the seven Canadian franchises will vie with seven American teams for position in the N.H.L. draft lottery, with the top spots in June’s draft up for grabs.

After some half-steps over the years, the N.H.L. has gone to a more comprehensive draft lottery this season.

The N.H.L. draft lottery was introduced in 1995, and was a halfhearted affair in which the one team drawn was allowed to move up a maximum of four positions. Starting in 2013, all 14 nonplayoff teams were given a shot at the first pick. This season, for the first time, the top three picks will be on the line.

Although the N.B.A.’s lottery system is fairly complex and not necessarily beloved, the N.H.L. has decided to adopt a similar system. As in the N.B.A., 14 balls will be placed in a hopper and four drawn out. Each of the 1,001 possible four-ball combinations is assigned to a team. The first combination pulled will determine which team picks first at the draft on June 24 in Buffalo.

Numbers will then be drawn again to determine which clubs will select second and third. The worse a team’s record, the better its chance of a high pick. The 11 unlucky teams not selected will be slotted into positions 4 through 14 in reverse order of their records.

Last season, when only the top pick was chosen in the lottery, there was much talk of teams losing on purpose late in the season to gain a better shot at Connor McDavid, a player believed to have once-in-a-generation potential. The Edmonton Oilers, though only the third-worst team, won the lottery and McDavid.

He missed about half the season with an injury but still managed to finish fourth in rookie scoring. He played well, but the Oilers did not. Edmonton, which has not made the playoffs since 2006, has picked first in four of the last six drafts and has a good chance to do so again after posting the league’s second-worst record.

This year, the player expected to go No. 1 is Auston Matthews, an 18-year-old center from Arizona who just completed a season in the top Swiss league, where he scored 24 goals in 36 games. He would be the first American taken with the top choice since Patrick Kane in 2007.

The best shot at Matthews belongs to the Toronto Maple Leafs, who have not had the No. 1 pick since 1985, when they selected Wendel Clark. He would later captain the team and earn the nickname Captain Crunch for his hard-hitting style.

The Leafs have a 20 percent chance at the top pick. (The N.B.A.’s worst team gets a 25 percent chance at No. 1.) Next up is Edmonton, at 13.5 percent, and the list goes down to the 14th-worst team, the Boston Bruins, at 1 percent. (Matthews’s hometown team, the Arizona Coyotes, has a 6.5 percent chance at the No. 1 pick.)

Canadian teams rank first, second, third, fifth and sixth among the teams most likely to win the Matthews sweepstakes; as a country, Canada has a 68.5 percent chance of landing the top pick.


