


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

It’s finally May, which means May sweeps, when networks pull out all the stops for a spring ratings push. We’re about to be inundated with character deaths, cliffhangers, weddings and probably a baby or two. I can’t wait. In the meantime, I’m loving the new season of “The Last Alaskans,” thinking a lot about how great Marsai Martin is as Diane, the youngest daughter, on “black-ish” and obsessing over every update from this wombat rescue I started following on Instagram. What’s your most improved show for the season? I’d love to hear which series you think has turned things around, or went from good to truly great. Email us at watching@nytimes.com. See you on Friday. (Oh, and remember — Mother’s Day is Sunday.)

When “Mom” made its debut in 2013, it fumbled around for a bit, not quite sure what to do with the mother-daughter duo of Bonnie (Allison Janney) and Christy (Anna Faris), who are both sober and active in A.A. Multicamera comedies can seem mawkish and tacky, and the show had too many characters and too many settings. Now in its third season, “Mom” has found its focus and rhythm, namely by giving more screen time and punch lines to Janney — by far the show’s stand-out — and by allowing itself to play serious, even tragic moments.

We are not in a golden age of multicamera comedies. We are in the opposite — a garbage age? — even as single-camera comedies and particularly dramedies grow in new and fascinating directions. “Mom” has the brashness that made executive producer Chuck Lorre a jillionaire. But it’s also willing to have a teenage character relapse and fatally overdose, and treat that story arc with some gravity. Sure, “Mom” doesn’t have the depth or emotional integrity of “Transparent,” but don’t lump it in with the spiritually bankrupt “2 Broke Girls,” either.

“Mom” is broad enough that you can pick up any given episode and get the gist, and this week’s is a good place to start thanks to a brief but enchanting fantasy sequence in which Bonnie imagines a career in politics — which then becomes a winking homage to “West Wing.” (Thursday, 9 p.m., CBS; Watch the last five episodes for free at CBS.com; purchase at iTunes and Amazon)

Game of Thrones Something big happened on Sunday night. We’re not going to say because this is not a space for spoilers. But, if you haven’t seen the episode yet you should probably get on that. Also, a reminder: Ramsay Bolton is the absolute worst.

Outlander “After three episodes that have introduced new players and their various alliances, this week’s hour is overloaded with plot twists,” writes Angelica Jade Bastién.

Veep “Only in Washington — or, possibly, some corners of Manhattan’s financial district — would the term ‘banking task force’ be used as a euphemism for sex,” writes Jen Chaney.

Silicon Valley Of the show’s first two episodes this year, Scott Tobias writes, “In short order, the existential threat of failure in Seasons 1 and 2 of ‘Silicon Valley’ has morphed into the nightmare of success.”

Fear the Walking Dead This week’s episode finally sheds some light upon the mysterious Victor Strand. And his story is genuinely surprising, writes E.A. Hanks.

If you’ve ever wondered how TV pilots get to air, read this blog post from Preston Beckman, a.k.a. the Masked Scheduler. Beckman helped engineer NBC’s “Must-See TV” block in the ’90s and Fox’s “American Idol” success, and his recent piece explains some ways networks use (or don’t use) pilot screenings when planning their fall schedules.

In today’s Science section, a study of “The Biggest Loser” Season 8’s contestants “has yielded surprising new discoveries about the physiology of obesity that help explain why so many people struggle unsuccessfully to keep off the weight they lose,” writes Gina Kolata.

“The Good Wife” series finale airs next Sunday night at 9 p.m. on CBS. It’s too late to catch up — there are 155 other episodes, you snost and lost on this one — but if you used to watch, it’s probably worth catching the last two in preparation for the finale.

“Houdini and Doyle,” Fox’s new wunza cop show — as in “one’s a [this thing], one’s a [another thing]” — premieres Monday at 9 p.m. It’s about Harry Houdini and Arthur Conan Doyle teaming up to solve crimes, and it is not good.

Season premieres: The final season of “Person of Interest” (Tuesday, 10 p.m., CBS); “Real World/Road Rules Challenge” (Wednesday, 10 p.m., MTV), “Grace and Frankie” (Friday, Netflix)

Season finales: “Project Runway All Stars” (Thursday, 9 p.m., Lifetime), “Blue Bloods” (Friday, 10 p.m., CBS)

Every month, a slew of new movies hit the major streaming services — Amazon Prime, Netflix, Hulu, HBO, etc. Many of them are not particularly good. We’ll highlight just a few of the more worthy.

Great Expectations Artist rejected by childhood sweetheart. Radical pop overhaul of Dickens. Starring Ethan Hawke and Gwyneth Paltrow, directed by Alfonso Cuarón, now an Oscar winner. (Watch on Netflix)

To Catch a Thief Cat burglar and rich Americans. Hitchcock’s Riviera cocktail, swank and swell. Starring Cary Grant and Grace Kelly. (Watch on Netflix)

The Grapes of Wrath Steinbeck’s Depression-era Okies, via director John Ford. The American screen at its peak. Starring Henry Fonda. (Watch on HBO)

When Harry Met Sally Rob Reiner’s take on romantically bruised New Yorkers. Starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan. (Watch on Amazon Prime)

Goldfinger It’s weird how the James Bond movies can seem like unwanted children, getting kicked off various streaming services one month, added back the next. In addition to “Goldfinger,” titles including “Die Another Day,” “Diamonds Are Forever,” “Live and Let Die,” “The Living Daylights” and “The Spy Who Loved Me” are back on both Amazon Prime and Hulu. (Watch “Goldfinger” on Hulu)


