


Real Madrid, missing the injured Cristiano Ronaldo, dominated late in the game but failed to capitalize with a goal as host Manchester City held on for a 0-0 draw on Tuesday in the first leg of a Champions League semifinal.

City’s Joe Hart prevented Madrid from taking an advantage before next week’s second leg in Spain, producing close-range saves on shots from Casemiro and Pepe in the final 10 minutes.

City may not get a better chance to beat Madrid, which played half the game without its two top attackers: Ronaldo had been nursing a thigh injury and “felt something” in a training session Monday, Coach Zinedine Zidane said, and Karim Benzema, trying to play through a knee problem, was replaced for the second half.

City, though, managed just two shots on target — one of which came on a free kick from Kevin De Bruyne that was tipped over the bar in second-half injury time. And the team had its own injury problems: Already missing Yaya Touré because of a muscle problem, it lost David Silva with a hamstring injury late in the first half.

Zidane said he was unsure if Ronaldo and Benzema, who have scored 74 goals between them this season, would be ready for the second leg.

TEAM SOUGHT IN DETROIT The owners Tom Gores of the Detroit Pistons and Dan Gilbert of the Cleveland Cavaliers are teaming up to try to put an M.L.S. team in downtown Detroit, they said in a joint statement.

SPURS PLAYER UNDER SCRUTINY The English Football Association charged Tottenham midfielder Dele Alli with violent conduct after he appeared to punch a West Brom player Monday.

CHARGES IN CROATIA The Croatian authorities filed tax evasion, corruption and bribery charges against the former Dinamo Zagreb president Zdravko Mamic, who is accused, along with his brother Zoran and two other people, of embezzling the equivalent of $17 million of the club’s money since 2008 and not paying $1.8 million in state taxes.

Zdravko Mamic is considered the most powerful person in Croatian soccer. Zoran Mamic is the current Dinamo coach.


