


A Rikers Island inmate beaten by correction officers in 2012 was not a victim but rather a dangerous criminal who had to be forcibly restrained after resisting orders to drop a weapon, lawyers for the officers argued on Wednesday.

The defense lawyers offered this explanation for the beating of Jahmal Lightfoot during their closing arguments in the trial of nine current and former correction officers in State Supreme Court in the Bronx. They had rested their case on Monday, without calling any officers to testify or presenting any other witnesses or evidence.

The lawyers maintained, as they have from the start, that the officers had committed no wrongdoing and were simply trying to do their jobs. They replayed videotape from the jail, reviewed court transcripts and sought to pick apart Mr. Lightfoot’s credibility by highlighting his criminal record and what they saw as discrepancies in his testimony.

“He keeps on changing his story, and the reason people change their story is because they’re not telling the truth,” Raymond Aab, a lawyer for Eliseo Perez Jr., a former assistant chief for security, told the jury. Mr. Aab added, “Lightfoot is a liar.”

In contrast, prosecutors have contended not only that Mr. Lightfoot, now 31, was unarmed when he was singled out for a beating by members of an elite correction squad, but also that the weapon he supposedly had was planted as part of a cover-up by the officers. They have said that the beating was ordered by Mr. Perez and Gerald Vaughn, a former correction captain, after Mr. Perez decided that the inmate thought he was tough.

Mr. Lightfoot sustained fractures to both his eye sockets, and testified that long after the beating, he spit up blood and suffered from blurry vision and headaches. Mr. Lightfoot was jailed at Rikers in 2010 after snatching a woman’s pocketbook. He was released from state prison in 2014.

The nine officers on trial have been charged with crimes including attempted gang assault in the first degree, the most serious charge. If convicted of that charge, they could face a prison sentence of up to 15 years. A 10th officer, who has medical problems, will be tried separately.

The case has come to symbolize what many critics see as an entrenched culture of violence and corruption at Rikers Island, New York City’s main jail complex with 8,000 inmates. Darcel D. Clark, the Bronx district attorney, who has pledged to focus on crimes committed at Rikers, sat in the front row during opening statements in the trial.

Mr. Perez retired in 2013, and Mr. Vaughn in 2014. The seven others on trial — Officers Tobias Parker, Jose Parra, Alfred Rivera, David Rodriguez, Jeffrey Richard, Harmon Frierson and Dwayne Maynard — were suspended in June 2013, but were recently allowed to return to work on modified duty with no contact with inmates.

If convicted, they will be automatically fired. If acquitted, they could still face departmental disciplinary action.

On Wednesday, the defense lawyers used their summations to hammer away at the prosecution’s case.

Louis Albert, a lawyer for Mr. Rivera, said the holes in the prosecution’s case were “like Swiss cheese.” He reminded jurors that Mr. Lightfoot, when asked to identify Mr. Perez in the courtroom, had instead picked out Mr. Rivera. “That goes to the reasonable doubt that I think is throughout this case,” he said.

Defense lawyers will continue with their closing arguments on Friday, followed by the prosecution’s summation. Six of the defendants will have their cases decided by a jury; the three others have opted to allow Justice Steven Barrett, who has presided over the trial, to make the decision.

The courtroom, which has been nearly empty at times as the trial has wound on for more than two months, was packed with observers on Wednesday, including several current and former correction officers. Mr. Lightfoot did not attend.

Outside the courthouse, an unrelated protest demanding the shutdown of Rikers Island was organized by Akeem Browder, 33, the brother of Kalief Browder, who committed suicide last year after spending three years at Rikers on charges that he stole a backpack. After being jailed at 16, he spent nearly two years in solitary confinement. He would have been 23 on Wednesday, his brother said.

“This is his birthday,” he said, “and we’re not going to forget.”


