


“Gold is funny — you don’t talk about it,” says Susan Okey, a gold-­panning instructor at Marshall Gold Discovery State Historic Park in Coloma, Calif., where James W. Marshall spotted a few flecks of gold in a sawmill in 1848, prompting the greatest voluntary mass migration of people the Western Hemisphere had ever seen. You will be tempted to yelp when you see that telltale metallic glow. Control yourself. “If you yell ‘Eureka!’ everybody is going to come over to where you are and start looking,” Okey says.

All you need is a pan and a glass or plastic vial with a lid ­— and a stretch of river or stream in a region known to yield gold. Go out after a storm, because rainwater can scour the landscape, dislodging your quarry. Situate yourself on public land along the inside curve of a bend in the river. Fill your pan with sand and sediment. Try digging from the crevices of boulders and in the roots of riverbank grasses, where gold often catches.

Submerge your pan, sloshing water back and forth over the dirt. Don’t be distracted by so-­called fool’s gold, glittery substances like iron pyrite and silicate minerals. Gold is more than 19 times as heavy as water; it will sink as you wash away lighter materials. The last sand left in your pan is often black, an iron oxide called magnetite that miners call “pay dirt.” Tip your pan and create a gentle wave action: The gold will lodge along the top edge while the sand collects at the bottom. Dry the pad of a finger, and use it to dab up any precious metal tidbits. Secure them in your vial. “Take your time,” Okey says. Newcomers might need 30 minutes to complete a pan. Okey can “pan out” in less than two minutes.

Don’t be alarmed if you start to feel obsessed. Okey and her colleagues teach gold panning to more than a third of the 70,000 or so fourth graders who visit the park each year as part of their public-­school state-­history curriculum. “You can see someone get gold fever — it’s a look in their eyes,” Okey says, and children are as susceptible as their adult chaperones. Avoid that myopia. “If you don’t find a nugget, you’ve still been out there in nature,” Okey says. “That’s gold, too.”


