


Howard Panter, a knighted titan of British theater who had been ambitiously leading his company into the American market, is suddenly out as leader of the company that he and his wife founded 24 years ago.

The company, Ambassador Theater Group, which is the largest owner of theaters in Britain, portrayed the move as amicable, as did Mr. Panter and his wife, Rosemary Squire.

But some in the theater industry in both cities suggested that the move was the predictable outgrowth of the 2013 acquisition of A.T.G., as the company is known, by an American asset management firm, Providence Equity Partners, and the drive such firms have to increase profitability.

Mr. Panter and Ms. Squire will remain directors of, and shareholders in, A.T.G., and will continue to play creative roles with the company as their executive roles are reduced.

They will be succeeded by a corporate executive without experience in the theater business.

The move came as a surprise: Just six months ago, Mr. Panter was in New York proudly showing off the Hudson Theater, a former Broadway stage he intended to restore, and talking dreamily about the theater community nightspot he wanted to create in a long-abandoned apartment overhead.

And in January, Mr. Panter and Ms. Squire were once again named the most influential players in London theater — topping the annual Stage 100 list for the seventh year in a row.

The company announced the changes in a 14-paragraph release: Mr. Panter and Ms. Squire will give up their roles as co-chief executives. Mark Cornell, the former managing director of Sotheby’s Europe, will be the new chief executive; his executive vice president will be Adam Kenwright, a veteran of the entertainment marketing business.

A.T.G.’s influence comes from its real estate holdings: It operates 46 theaters in Britain, the United States and Australia. The company also wields artistic sway as a producer and investor — it is among the producers of the Tony-winning Lincoln Center Theater revival of “The King and I.”

Sonia Friedman Productions, a company responsible for some of the most notable shows to come out of London in recent years, including last summer’s “Hamlet,” starring Benedict Cumberbatch, and this summer’s “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” is a subsidiary of A.T.G.; Jerry Mitchell Productions, led by the Tony-winning choreographer of “Kinky Boots,” is an affiliate of A.T.G., according to the company’s website. The company has about 3,500 employees.

“They’re arguably the biggest theater operator in the world, and certainly in the U.K. there is no one near their scale of operation,” said Alistair Smith, editor of The Stage, a British theater newspaper. Mr. Smith said that the appointment of a new executive from outside the theater world was particularly intriguing.

“Theater is an insular world, and having someone in a senior position who doesn’t have that background could be a good thing or a bad thing — until he’s in the position, we don’t know how it will go,” he said. “It might mean that they produce less of their own work, and focus on parts of the company that are more profitmaking.”

The company has been on a bit of a spending spree. In the United States in December it signed a long-term lease for the Hudson, which in recent years has been an event and meeting space attached to the Millennium Broadway Hotel New York, and said it would return the space to its prior use as a Broadway theater. That conversion, if completed, would make the Hudson the 41st theater now operating on Broadway.

And in September the company acquired the Kings Theater in Brooklyn, two theaters in New Orleans and two in San Antonio.

The company operates one of the largest houses on Broadway, the Lyric, which seats about 1,900. That theater, which A.T.G. acquired in 2013, has had a tough run lately, with a series of shows that have not done well financially. But there are high hopes for its new tenant, “Paramour,” a Cirque du Soleil show that opens next week and has been selling well in previews.

Providence Equity Partners, based in Rhode Island, did not respond to requests for comment; nor did Mr. Panter, though in the company’s statement he and his wife said, “We have thought long and hard before taking this decision but feel it is a time in our lives for an exciting new challenge.”

A.T.G. said it was financially strong, remained committed to restoring the Hudson as a Broadway theater, and expected to keep growing.

“With ongoing support from Providence, A.T.G. plans to continue to expand its global network of high-quality theaters and related services,” the company said.

Mr. Panter will continue to produce “The Rocky Horror Show,” a touring musical, and will be executive producer of some other projects; Ms. Squire will be chairwoman of Sonia Friedman Productions.

The couple will also acquire from A.T.G. the Trafalgar Studios Theater in London, “where they will evolve a distinctive artistic direction for the theater,” according to the company’s statement.


