


A “24” without Jack Bauer? Believe it; it’s coming this winter. But there’s more unimaginable news on the secret-agents-named-Jack front: Jack Decker is dead.

A new season of Adult Swim’s ridiculous “Decker” franchise begins at midnight on Friday, moving to the broadcast block for the first time from adultswim.com. It opens on July 4 in the distant year 2076. Decker, old and gray, is fading fast. He enjoys a last cigarette and then joins Thomas Jefferson and John Adams on the list of great American patriots who died on the Fourth of July.

Don’t hurl “spoiler” complaints at me; that scene merely sets up the season, and is a way for newcomers to get up to speed on this odd show. A grieving president marks the sorrowful occasion by opening up the classified Decker files, and thus we arrive at the title of the new season, “Decker: Unclassified,” and a 50-year flashback to an airplane hijacking in which Decker saved the day.

Decker is a special-ops type played by Tim Heidecker, who created the series with his frequent collaborator, Gregg Turkington. It’s a parody of “24” and every other show and movie in which macho men do heroic deeds to preserve the American way. The acting is deliberately wooden, and the special effects are laughably cheesy. How cheesy? The new season may have blown most of the budget on Decker’s old-man makeup for that opening scene.

The show is an inside joke wrapped in another inside joke. In a different series, “On Cinema,” Mr. Heidecker and Mr. Turkington play inept film critics, and a few years ago that alter-ego Heidecker decided he could make better entertainment than he was seeing on the movie screen, and proceeded to create “Decker.”

The “Decker” web-series episodes were often only three minutes or so, which was about right for what is essentially a one-joke show. The 15-minute demands of Adult Swim’s broadcast band might overstretch the bit, but the after-midnight audience apparently isn’t very demanding.

We know this because right after the “Decker: Unclassified” premiere, an equally low-budget show, “Check It Out! With Dr. Steve Brule,” begins its fourth season. Teetering on the line between idiotic and offensive, “Check It Out!” stars John C. Reilly as the title character, who in each episode examines some everyday subject in a skewed, barely coherent fashion. In the Season 4 premiere, it’s cars. He tries to buy one, talks about vintage ones and attempts a little engine repair — with disfiguring results.

The best thing about the show is the editing: It is made to look like the world’s worst community-access program, the screen fritzing out periodically, random bits of unrelated video cropping up like interference on the radio dial. Dr. Steve, though, is hard to take. He never seems to know where the camera is and talks in a sort of brain-damaged stream-of-consciousness. Funny, or just cruel? It’s a tossup.


