


The New York City Buildings Department on Wednesday ordered a stop to construction on a luxury condominium tower on the Upper East Side of Manhattan that has faced rising local opposition, saying the developers improperly created a four-foot-wide lot to avoid zoning regulations and build a taller structure.

In a letter to the developers and the architect, the department issued a stop-work order and said it intended to revoke the approval and permits for the tower, on Third Avenue near 88th Street, where multimillion-dollar condominiums are already on the market and concrete has been poured into the foundation.

A planning expert hired by local opponents, George M. Janes, studied the publicly filed paperwork related to the building and found that the creation of the tiny lot along East 88th Street appeared aimed at skirting regulations, including one requiring a base for the tower running all the way to the “street wall” at 88th Street.

The developers instead carved out the small plot and gave themselves an easement so that residents could pass between the street and what was designated as a “rear yard.” Doing so, Mr. Janes said, allowed the developers to add several more floors of valuable apartments that would have otherwise been prohibited.

The department, in the letter and accompanying documents shared with The New York Times, said its own audit had found the lot “subdivided into a four-foot lot for the sole purpose of avoiding a zoning lot requirement” — in this case, the street wall and setback requirements of the zoning code.

A spokeswoman for the developers, DDG Partners, declined to comment on the order by the Buildings Department.

The buildings commissioner, Rick D. Chandler, said in a statement that the department, which had approved permits for the tower’s construction, conducted audits because developers “regularly submit creative plans to maximize the square footage” that they could build. In the case of the Upper East Side tower, he said, “we stopped work on the site and are requiring the developer to submit new plans.”

The department audit found other violations in the plan, including the exit onto 88th Street, because the small lot does not meet the definition of a “public way.”

While the developers may still build on the site, the finding appeared to require a significant redesign of the building, known as 180 East 88th Street, which, at 521 feet, is set to become one of the tallest on the Upper East Side. Towers are permitted in the neighborhood, but zoning rules prohibited several elements of the design, the department said.

DDG Partners has donated at least $19,900 to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s campaign or political causes, highlighting the way in which such donations have come to be seen by some in the real estate industry as a cost of doing business.

The de Blasio administration has not been accused of any wrongdoing in connection with the tower. The city signed off on the creation of the four-foot-wide parcel, Lot 138, added it to the official tax map in November and gave approval for construction to begin in March.

Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, who has faced scrutiny over the intersection of political contributions and donors with city business, said in a statement to The Times that the administration “listened to the community’s concerns” and that the plans were found to be “improper” after the city’s investigation.

Beyond this particular building, opponents expressed concern that, if allowed to go forward, the project could set a precedent for the proliferation of tiny lots, where nothing could be built in the future, in order for developers to mount taller projects now.

“Developers and contractors are on notice,” Mr. de Blasio said. “When we see something that’s not right, we’ll take swift action to correct it.”

Councilman Ben Kallos and the Manhattan borough president, Gale A. Brewer, who are Democrats and who sent a letter to the city last week flagging the zoning irregularities at the building site and requesting a stop-work order, praised the city’s decision. “I am glad we won before it was too late,” Mr. Kallos said.


