


Is it an exaggeration to claim that Americans have a genius for overstatement? You can hear it in the high-­minded bombast of our country’s founding documents. It echoes in the boasts of poets, from Walt Whitman (“I contain multitudes”) to Jay Z (“I’m not a businessman/I’m a business, man”). It resounds in the carnival ­barks of entrepreneurs, from P.T. Barnum to a certain real-­estate-­and-­reality-­TV magnate, who these days can be heard booming his sales pitch across the presidential trail. As Donald Trump himself put it in his book “The Art of the Deal”: “People want to believe that something is the biggest and the greatest and the most spectacular. I call it truthful hyperbole.”

The gift and curse of American hyperbole, truthful and otherwise, has lately been distilled in a single omnipresent word. In 2016, everything is “everything.” That’s what the Internet is telling us, at least. Or yelling at us, in capital letters, with blaring hashtags attached. “@Beyonce’s #MetGala dress is EVERYTHING,” Self magazine proclaimed recently on Twitter. But that judgment should perhaps be taken with a grain of salt, as Self has bestowed the “everything” mantle on at least a dozen other things, including “this near-­perfect gymnastics routine,” “Justin Bieber’s ‘Sorry’ performed by acrobats on hoverboards” and “brunch.”

On social-­media feeds and in blog headlines, the profusion of “everything” spins the head. “This tiny pig dancing in the grass is everything.” “A rustic cabin with a nice porch is everything.” “This cream-­cheese-­filled everything croissant is EVERYTHING.” The religiously and philosophically inclined take to Facebook and Tumblr to pronounce their dictums: God is everything, family is everything, trust is everything. More often, “everything” is applied to secular objects of veneration: kittens, celebrities, photographs of celebrities holding kittens. The actress Dianna Agron’s smile is everything, according to a number of Twitter testimonials, but Agron, the former star of “Glee,” disagrees. “This new @radiohead album,” Agron tweeted not long ago, “is everything.”

The word “everything” entered English in the 14th century. It is a pronoun denoting all that exists; more colloquially, it describes the current situation, the general thrust of things. (“How’s everything?”) But the ontological puzzle of everything — its nature, what it means — has preoccupied humankind for millenniums. A conviction shared by all theorists of everything, from the authors of the Hindu scriptures to Baruch Spinoza to astrophysicists, is that everything is a very big thing indeed — so vast and multifarious that it can never be fully described or inventoried. “Everything” is a fudge, a word we apply to the unknowable.

It is also, nearly always, an exaggeration. The self-help guru instructs “Everything happens for a reason,” the how-to book promises “Everything You Need to Know About Gardening,” the devoted wife intones “My husband is everything to me” — and in all cases the truth is politely stretched. Little wonder that “everything” thrives on the Internet, where the math is so often fuzzy. The “everything” that holds sway online exaggerates the exaggeration, by eliminating any notion of uncertainty, any qualification. The formulation is not “Pumpkin spice latte is everything you want in a seasonal novelty beverage.” It’s “Pumpkin spice latte is everything,” full stop, no questions asked, no doubt countenanced.

The result is rhetorical gold — ideal, in any case, for social-­media banter, which places a premium on pithy hyperbole, on outsize statements delivered with minimal keystrokes. If, like Dianna Argon, you’re a fan of the Radiohead album “A Moon Shaped Pool,” you could lay out the reasons in a carefully ­worded Facebook post. But why bother, when you can make a single definitive pronouncement, which transmits your enthusiasm and brooks no debate? The fool who dares to take issue with “This new @radiohead album is everything” — Well, um, it’s not really everything, the production is a little fussy, the songwriting isn’t so sharp, I preferred “Kid A” — that person is a nerd and pedant, scuttling through the world’s weeds. When you call something “everything,” you are taking the celestial view: gazing down from an Olympian perch, knowing and feeling and seeing all.

Internet one-­upsmanship is a definitively 21st-­century art form, but “everything” carries a hint of yesteryear — a whiff of the hot air that once swirled through medicine-­show tents and carnival grounds. It harks back to Barnum, who promoted his traveling circus not with the modestly hedged hucksterism that was previously the norm but with reckless, outrageous claims: “The Greatest Show on Earth, Without a Rival, Recognizing No Equal, and Regarding No Opposition ... A Perfect Exhibition! Vast in Its Proportions! ... The Acme of Refined Elegance and Best in All Things.”

Boiled down, Barnum’s message was: My show contains all the wonder and sensation in the world; my show is everything. That same idea is endlessly reiterated by advertising. “It slices, it dices”; “Who could ask for anything more?”; “I’d like to buy the world a Coke.” Advertising says that this car — or wristwatch or weed-­whacker or breakfast cereal — is everything: great taste, less filling, a balm for the world’s ills, an answer to our prayers, all that you want, all that you need.

“Everything” is a hawker’s cry, a hard sell. Which makes perfect sense. The Internet is the most dizzying marketplace in human history, a seething bazaar that barrages us relentlessly and from all angles. We recoil at the crudity of click bait, but in this atmosphere, it’s unfair to begrudge anyone his desperation. The Internet has a way of placing all of us — you, me, the online peddler of counterfeit Viagra, the editor of The Paris Review — in the undignified position of those touts who haunt the sidewalks outside bad restaurants in tourist-­trap neighborhoods, thrusting menus in the faces of passers-­by.

We’re not just click-­­bait addicts, after all. We’re adepts. Nearly everyone with a Facebook account, 1.65 billion active members and counting, has learned how to trawl — and occasionally troll — for page views, and every day, with every post, we refine our skills. In so doing, we’ve formed the largest volunteer work force the corporate world has known, an army of unpaid interns, doing the jobs formerly left to flacks, shilling for Starbucks and Universal Pictures and Jennifer Lawrence and other multinational brands.

Of course, the brands we promote most diligently are our own: We curate and spit-­polish our online presences in pursuit of followers and faves. “Everything” is ubiquitous because it’s unusually effective, delivering the social-­media dividends we covet. It’s a clever ploy, a word vague enough to appeal to all comers and too forceful for many to ignore. If a thing is really everything, surely it merits a click-­through?

These days, “everything” is migrating from social media to the wider world. It flows through everyday speech. Justin Timberlake, fielding softball questions in an “Entertainment Tonight” interview a couple of weeks back: “Cannes Film Festival is amazing, but my son is everything.” “Everything” has infiltrated the media mainstream, popping up in headlines and photo captions and magazine rubrics. (Last year, the L.G.B.T. magazine The Advocate changed the title of its weekly cultural-­recommendations roundup from “Hot Sheet” to “7 Things That Are Everything This Week.”) Even this newspaper is not immune: “In Texas, Texas is everything,” The Times’s National News Desk recently tweeted.

Leave it to Kanye West to take “everything” to an unexpected place. The most surprising sound in “Ultralight Beam,” the opening track on West’s recent album, “The Life of Pablo,” is not the music — the gospel-­choir vocals that flare up over a shuddering beat — but the words in the song’s refrain. “We on an ultralight beam,” West croons, “This is a God dream/This is everything/This is everything.” It’s fitting that West — who has spent years writing songs about the tussle between God and mammon, while maintaining the world’s most reliably bonkers Twitter feed — would be the one to transform an Internet-­speak banality into a howl of spiritual ecstasy.

Or maybe West has hit upon the secret essence of “everything,” the depths that hide in plain sight? We’ve all experienced the sensation: Someone or something arrests your attention so completely that the surrounding scenery dissolves, the contours of the universe seem to collapse inward, until all you see is the object of your fascination — a lover, or a great book, or a sumptuous rack of lamb, or Stephen Curry sinking a three-­pointer.

These days, the sublime can ambush you at unlikely moments, in odd places: when you find yourself staring at YouTube, say, watching a squirrel slalom across a swimming pool on a pair of miniature water skis. The inescapable mantra “This is everything!” may strike us as glib, puerile, an assault on our sanity and intelligence. But every now and then, there’s truth in it. Sometimes, click bait can be a God dream. This Vine, that GIF, those tiny pigs dancing in the grass: They may have the power to obliterate the world for a minute or two. That might not be EVERYTHING — but it’s not nothing.


