


A Syrian girl whose family’s journey across Europe to Sweden on the refugee trail was documented by The New York Times was told on Tuesday that she is not a full match to donate bone marrow to a younger brother who is sick with leukemia in Turkey.

The girl, Widad Majid, 10, was the last hope for a full match in the family for her brother, Nabih, 9. Swedish officials had expedited the process of granting her residency, to allow her to travel to Turkey to help her brother and return to Sweden legally if she had been found to be a full match.

Nabih’s doctors said they now intended to use an alternative procedure using marrow from an aunt who is in Turkey with him and who, like Widad, is a partial match.

“He loves me, too,” the aunt, Amina Nouri, said Tuesday from Turkey, where she has been at the boy’s bedside. “He told me, ‘I am your son.’ More than my blood is close to him.”

The Times’s journalists traveled with the family from Idomeni, Greece, as they crossed Europe with thousands of other refugees last summer. They are now temporarily settled in a farmhouse in Backhammar, Sweden. Of the 14 family members, only two have received residency permits, leaving the others to depend on welfare as they wait for the generous but restrictive Swedish bureaucracy to move forward. The family plans to start an Arab grocery after receiving residency permits.

The bone-marrow transplant, which has become urgent because Nabih has relapsed, will take place in about 10 days, said his doctor, Akif Yesilipek of Medical Park Hospital in Antalya. It is not clear whether the Turkish insurance system will reimburse the hospital for the operation.

Partial-match transplants have a higher risk of the patient’s rejecting the transplant or the transplant’s rejecting the patient. Dr. Kenneth Miller, a professor of medicine at Tufts Medical Center in Boston, who has carried out thousands of transplants but does not do partial matches, said the potential side effects of the procedure could be painful and debilitating.

“One has to balance the long-term side effects of the transplant with the potential to be cured of leukemia, and sometimes it’s a very difficult decision,” he said.


