


“The Winter’s Tale,” a new opera written by Ryan Wigglesworth and directed by the actor Rory Kinnear, will be a highlight of the 2016-17 season that the English National Opera announced on Thursday.

Other new productions include the British premiere of Daniel Schnyder’s jazz-influenced chamber opera, “Charlie Parker’s Yardbird,” and Alban Berg’s “Lulu,” in the William Kentridge production that was well received this fall at the Metropolitan Opera. Revivals include the director Jonathan Miller’s “Little Italy” version of “Rigoletto,” Catherine Malfitano’s staging of “Tosca” and the first revival of Mike Leigh’s 2015 “Pirates of Penzance,” which, according to the company, is its most successful production ever.

The reduction in the number of new productions — half the number in the 2015-16 season — is part of the troubled company’s attempt to slash costs after a 29 percent cut to its grant from Arts Council England, the distributor of public funds, last February. During the summer of 2017, the company will rent out the London Coliseum, its main home, and present “Charlie Parker’s Yardbird” at the Hackney Empire and Jonathan Miller’s production of “The Mikado” at the Winter Gardens in Blackpool.

Daniel Kramer, the company’s newly hired artistic director, attended the news conference. His appointment came more than a year after John Berry stepped down in the wake of the funding cuts and Cressida Pollock, a management consultant, was named chief executive. Fraught contract negotiations with the company’s chorus and the subsequent resignation of its music director, Mark Wigglesworth (no relation to Ryan Wigglesworth), have heightened the sense of turmoil, but the music director will, as previously planned, still open the season leading a new production of “Don Giovanni,” directed by Richard Jones.

Mr. Kramer, whose production of “Tristan and Isolde” for the company will open on June 9, has played no role in programming this season or the next one. He begins his new job on Aug. 1, and said that he already has three commissions underway for the 2018-19 season.


