


Twice a year, my husband and I drive eight hours to visit our son, his wife and baby. Their place is small, so we stay at a hotel nearby. I have always been afraid of cats and dogs; they have a large cat. But the playroom is in the basement. It would be easy to close the door so the cat stays upstairs. When I suggested this, my daughter-in-law said: “Why should I? The cat lives here.” I was insulted but did not say anything. Next time, I am not planning to visit their home. I do not feel welcome. Thoughts?

SUSAN

So, you’re going to drive eight hours and just stay at the hotel the whole time? I hope it has a good spa and pay-per-view selection. (May I suggest downloading “Catastrophe” from Amazon — a terrific show in which a terrier comes to a sad end?)

I get why your back is up. It would have been kinder for your daughter-in-law to accommodate you. But many folks consider their pets members of the family. The idea of shutting them away may strike them as odd as placing their less-pleasant children under quarantine. (And some pets go nutso if their territory is shrunk.) Spell it out. You can’t possibly want to blow up your relationship with your daughter-in-law over one insensitive episode.

Try to feel less aggrieved and call her. Say: “This may sound crazy to you, but I have always been terrified of dogs and cats. I’m sure Socks is terrific, but I would so appreciate it if you could keep us separated next time.” If you care to go the extra mile, inquire at your local animal shelter about gradual immersion for your fear of pets. For a small donation, the excellent one in my neck of the woods, Animal Rescue Fund, would probably welcome you with open paws.

I am a strong animal rights advocate. My sister knows this. She has had a string of bad relationships, but now seems to be getting serious with a man who hunts. She claims he does so for food and conservation, which I don’t buy. I also see on his Facebook page that he mounts animal heads on his walls and, disturbingly, decorates them for the holidays. She is angry that I am unwilling to have a relationship with him, but I don’t feel I can. Help!

TIFFANY, QUEENS

Look! It’s Animal Planet week at Social Q’s. I am no hunter (and don’t get me started on automatic weapons), but I have enjoyed venison osso buco and rabbit stew on many occasions. I have no illusions about how those creatures came to sit on my dinner plate. Would you refuse a friendship with me, too? Whether we kill the animal or merely consume it, we meat-eaters are part of one continuum. That’s a lot of people to snub.

I have sat at tables with hunters who gave thanks to the animals that died for our supper. They seemed respectful and a million times more thoughtful about the food chain than most of us. Mounting heads may be part of this respect (or proof that your sister’s new beau is a creep). Only one thing is certain: You are never going to find out unless you get to know him.

Staying open for (calm) discussion on our big-ticket issues has been as big a gift (to me) as rigidity has been a hindrance. And if you want to stay close with your sister, you have to make a sincere effort. That doesn’t mean quail hunting with him. But respecting him enough to discover the man in full would be a start.

My daughter had a serious boyfriend in high school. He went far away to college in the fall, but promised to keep in touch. She broke up with him at Christmas because he didn’t. He recently came home for the summer and told her that he is gay. My daughter is devastated. She truly loves this guy, and I believe he loves her. Any advice?

JANET, MICHIGAN

He’s gay! They can be close friends, but a sexual relationship seems unlikely. Sympathize with your daughter. The mismatch of her heart’s desire will not lessen her pain. But don’t demonize the boy; he may feel vulnerable enough. And as many people can tell your daughter, she is better off learning the truth now than discovering it at 40.

My husband and I often invite friends to dinner. When they ask what they can bring, I say, “Just yourselves.” These aren’t potlucks. But if my husband fields the question, he assigns them actual dishes, “Vegetable side, please.” This is embarrassing. Please make him stop.

JENN

Not my jurisdiction, I’m afraid, though I share your sentiment. Guests should not be expected to bring anything. That’s what makes them guests. Still, many refuse to come empty-handed. If they ask (or insist), respond, “How about a bottle of wine or a pie from the farmstand?” Keep it simple. But asking them to blanch broccoli seems a step too far. Try bribing your husband to keep him quiet.


