


It’s not every day that you get a spot on the London Collections Men schedule straight out of school. Then again, Kiko Kostadinov is far from an average Central Saint Martins student. Though he graduated from the M.A. Fashion course only last month, the 26-year-old men’s wear designer already has a collaboration with Stüssy under his belt, a NEWGEN Men sponsorship — and a yearlong deal to be exclusively stocked at Dover Street Market.

Inspired by his hardworking parents (his father works in construction and his mother does childcare and cleaning jobs) as well as Danish and Swedish workwear catalogs, Kostadinov seeks to make elevated workwear for his own generation of creative men. “I want to do things that help me live in the city,” said the Bulgarian-born designer on a recent morning in his light-filled studio in Tottenham (notable for its lack of mood boards.) “You go to meetings and you need a bag that can hold a charger for your phone, headphones, a notebook et cetera. I’m not saying you need to have a hundred pockets as that’s fictional function, but it needs to be really comfortable and interesting.”

The result is a concise collection of considerately engineered garments. Fuss-free blue cotton shirts are precisely tailored with Cuban collars and simple panels in the back. Tailored jackets and trousers are crafted from navy Ventile — a British wartime innovation of oxidized cotton for resin-free weatherproofing — and feature twisted pleats that cleverly conceal spacious pockets. “It’s all about the cut and finishing — I hate decoration,” says Kostadinov, whose own uniform consists of Yohji Yamamoto workwear. “There’s nothing worse than finding a pair of trousers that are cut great but covered in straps and buttons that don’t do anything.”

The highly functional collection also features subtle details that nod to his parents. “When I worked with my dad and we would soundproof rooms for radio stations, we would use wooden frames that we’d wrap with soundproof fabric and staple down,” he explains of the process that inspired his “aggressively tie-dyed” shirts. Another poignant detail is his gesture to his mother: a rendition of a Japanese cleaning jacket that has an inner zip-up layer and elasticated smocked cuffs, both of which minimize exposure to skin. “Without sounding dramatic, I get quite worried about her health because she works with so many chemicals,” he says.

Initially rejected from the Central Saint Martins B.A. course, Kostadinov trained with the London-based designer Aitor Throup before sneaking into the college’s Soho campus to help students that he had met along the way. “I knew I wanted to be there,” he says. After being accepted to the Fashion Design and Marketing course, Kostadinov unsuccessfully attempted to transfer to the men’s wear course several times. “It was what motivated me to do a better men’s wear collection than any of the men’s wear designers,” he says with a smile. Throughout his studies, he assisted the stylist Stephen Mann, who introduced the designer to Stüssy and continues to mentor him today.

Considering all this, it’s easy to forget that Kostadinov hasn’t officially started yet: his show, which was held during London Collections Men today, will be his first collection since graduating. “Usually you get press first and then buyers, but it’s been the other way around for me,” he says. Just like his parents, he works long hours throughout the week and will only sacrifice a late night in the studio for one of his beloved soccer matches. Referencing the late Central Saint Martins professor, he says: “Louise [Wilson] used to say there’s no such thing as young designers; there’s only good and bad designers. I’d rather be a good designer than a young designer.”


