


Salomón Rondón scored on a rebound after a shot from midfield struck the crossbar as Venezuela beat Uruguay, 1-0, on Thursday in Philadelphia to advance to the Copa América Centenario quarterfinals.

Rondón scored in the 36th minute, after Alejandro Guerra’s shot was barely deflected by Uruguay goalkeeper Fernando Muslera and hit the crossbar. Uruguay striker Edinson Cavani missed several scoring chances, including a one-on-one against goalkeeper José Contreras in the 90th minute.

Venezuela won its first two games and leads Group C with six points. Uruguay has two losses and is nearing tournament elimination.

MESSI TO RETURN FRIDAY Lionel Messi is set to return from a back injury when Argentina takes on Panama in the Copa América on Friday night at Soldier Field in Chicago.

“He has been training without any kind of problem, any kind of pain,” Argentina Manager Gerardo Martino said, “so there is no reason for him not to play.”

Messi departed with a back and rib injury in the second half of a 1-0 victory against Honduras in a May 27 friendly. He then watched as top-ranked Argentina beat Chile, 2-1, on Monday night in the teams’ Copa América opener.

FRANCE TIGHTENS SECURITY Bar and restaurant owners are being told not to set up giant screens outside their businesses during the European soccer championship, a French sports ministry official confirmed.

The move is aimed at improving security during the monthlong tournament, with the French authorities hoping fewer people will gather outside official fan zones if outdoor screens are banned.

France has been under a state of emergency since November’s coordinated attacks that killed 130 people at a rock concert, on the terraces of bars and restaurants and outside the Stade de France, the stadium where the soccer tournament will begin on Friday.

Fan zones are typically set up in squares or parks near the center of cities, allowing supporters without tickets to watch matches on a big screen. Extra security measures, including reinforced video surveillance, have been added to secure the fan zones after the Paris attacks.

The junior minister for sports, Thierry Braillard, said that the official fan zones are the only outdoor public spaces where big screens will be installed, or permitted.

“We can’t accept unorganized gatherings because police forces don’t have the means to secure them,” Braillard told the television station BFMTV. “And a live screening on a terrace means gathering around a screen.”

The ban is expected to annoy bar and restaurant owners, especially in the south of France, where people spend warm summer evenings outdoors.


