


There is a second critical contest in America’s 2016 elections: the battle for control of the Senate.

Republicans, pessimistic about their presidential prospects, feel an urgency to hold on to the Senate, where they now effectively have a 54-to-46 advantage. (Democrats would have to score a net gain of 30 seats to win a majority in the House, a highly unlikely prospect.) Both parties acknowledge that the Senate is a tossup that will be affected by the presidential election. But there are two other, perhaps more important, factors: the outcome of a number of remaining primaries and the question of whether congressional Republicans, especially the speaker of the House, Paul D. Ryan, can fashion an agenda that, if necessary, creates a distance from the debates of the presidential race.

Strategists on both sides suggest that there are two Republican-held seats that lean Democratic, along with several tossups. There is only one Democratic-held seat, that of the party’s Senate leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, who is retiring, that seems competitive. But there are three or four other Republican-held seats that may be vulnerable if the presidential race proves a landslide for the Democrats.

Democrats, however, say that a couple of primaries will be critical: In Pennsylvania, party leaders believe that if Katie McGinty, an environmentalist, can emerge the winner in her close contest next week, she has a chance to unseat Senator Patrick J. Toomey, the incumbent Republican, in November. Later, if Representative Patrick Murphy, a Florida Democrat, is able to defeat a challenger from the left who faces ethics charges, he will be the favorite to take the seat vacated by Senator Marco Rubio, a Republican.

On the Republican side, the issue is the extent of the damage that a few challengers from the right will be able to inflict on more mainstream candidates. An example: The party has felt confident about Nevada since it settled on Joe Heck, a popular House member, as its candidate. This month, however, Sharron Angle, a prominent Tea Party activist, jumped into the race. Ms. Angle won a multicandidate primary in 2010 but lost to Mr. Reid after asserting that Shariah was spreading, as well as making other claims that voters appeared to find dubious. She is not likely to win this time but could damage Mr. Heck.

Democrats believe that the refusal of the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, to allow a hearing on President Obama’s Supreme Court nominee, Judge Merrick B. Garland, will hurt Republican incumbents in states such as New Hampshire, Pennsylvania and Ohio. “They try to stress their independence,” notes J. B. Poersch, a top Democratic political strategist, “but they’re carrying McConnell’s baggage.” Republicans counter that these races are local contests and that their stronger incumbents will prevail in Ohio and elsewhere. Ironically, one of the Republicans’ models is a Democrat, Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, who was elected to the Senate in 2012 despite Mr. Obama’s losing her state by almost 20 points.

Mr. Ryan, who again took himself out of consideration for a presidential run last week, has a different take, however. He thinks that it is important for congressional Republicans to frame a message — and policy prescriptions — that could separate them from an unpopular presidential candidate.

That approach has appeal, but it has problems, too. For one, the speaker, a Jack Kemp protégé, is out of sync with the angry Republican rank and file this year on issues like immigration and trade.

Also, separation is not easy. Former Representative Tom Davis of Virginia, a leading Republican strategist who used to oversee the House campaign committee, knows what it is like to be saddled with a liability. In 1994, he won election to a suburban Washington district while Oliver North, a right-leaning former Marine who had been embroiled in the Iran-contra scandal, was blowing a race for the Senate.

But Mr. Davis worries that Republican candidates will find it tougher to overcome such liabilities this time, particularly if Donald J. Trump leads the ticket: “He just has offended too many people not to affect other races.”


