


Wadhurst, England — The imposing Marling House is an unusual home to find in the county of East Sussex, in southeast England. The seven-bedroom house is the larger portion of a Victorian country mansion, according to Nick Kimber, the area sales partner at the real estate agency Chewton Rose.

“Most of the period properties in this part of the country are either very old Elizabethan houses, with much smaller rooms and lower ceilings, or Edwardian homes, which also have much smaller proportions,” he said. “Marling House is Victorian but has more of a Georgian style, with high ceilings and large windows.”

Refurbished in keeping with its age by its owners, Simon and Amanda Dunn, Marling House, with an asking price of 1.5 million pounds, or $2.1 million, sits on approximately two and a half acres on the edge of the village of Wadhurst, overlooking the undulating and protected landscape of the High Weald.

Classified as an area of outstanding natural beauty by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, this 564-square-mile stretch of wooded, rolling hills covers parts of Kent and Surrey, as well as East and West Sussex.

“We have been here for 15 years now,” said Mr. Dunn, a corporate financial adviser. “One of the main attractions for us was the position of the house. It is set back, with these beautiful views over the extensive gardens and parkland grounds, as well as the Weald, and we are within walking distance of both Wadhurst village and the mainline station, which is a wonderful asset.” The train journey from Wadhurst to central London is just under one hour.

Marling House has 5,610 square feet of living space in three stories. In addition to the main residence, there is also a detached 455-square-foot double garage, with a 317-square-foot game room, or studio, above.

“The main house dates back to the mid-19th century and is believed to have been built by an industrialist,” Mr. Dunn said. “It still retains many of its beautiful, original features, from sash windows and shutters to stripped floorboards and fireplaces. It also benefits from a spacious cellar with a high ceiling, where there are three rooms that we use as a wine cellar, for the storage of sports equipment and as a laundry.”

A lobby with circular windows leads into the generous entrance hall at the center of the property, which has a wooden floor and open fireplace, as well as the original elegant staircase and banister. This leads to a 490-square-foot farmhouse-style kitchen and breakfast room, with an Aga range, painted cupboards, a central island and granite work surfaces.

“We did extend this part of the house to create a space that was a ‘living’ kitchen,” Mr. Dunn said. “There are now French windows in here, opening on to a double terrace, where it is nice to have breakfast.”

The hall also leads to a 177-square-foot sitting room, which in turn opens to a grand 583-square-foot drawing and dining room, with an inglenook fireplace, deep skirting boards, cornicing and seven sets of sash windows.

“Apparently this was added by a previous owner for his daughter’s coming-out party,” Mr. Dunn said. “It has a sprung floor, making it superb for dancing. We do not use it every day, but it comes into its own at certain times of year, such as Christmas, Easter and other family occasions.”

There are five bedrooms and two bathrooms on the second floor of the house. At 350 square feet, and encompassing a bay window, the east-facing master bedroom is particularly spacious. Stairs from the generous landing then lead up to the third floor, where there are two more bedrooms and another shower room.

“The house is so large that people can have the peace and privacy to do whatever they like, whether that is getting on with schoolwork or playing the piano. We have five children and even when everyone is home and the house is full it works very well,” Mr. Dunn said. “It is also a splendid party house.”

The grounds at Marling House include a private driveway and mature parkland gardens, as well as a tennis court, timber garden room, chicken coop, vegetable patch and a fruit cage.


