


The sophisticated suburb of New Canaan, a lower Fairfield County town about 45 miles from Midtown Manhattan, tends to draw young families seeking schools brimming with overachievers and empty-nesters wanting to downsize into fancy condominiums.

Rose and Barry McInerney are an anomaly in that regard: They are buying a sprawling six-bedroom home on four acres even as the last of their three daughters is finishing college. They raised their children in North Stamford, which they preferred for its diversity, Ms. McInerney said, and have been living more recently in Chicago.

While still engrossed in their work — he as the chief executive of an investment company and she as the creator of a website that will focus on “the landscape of women” — the couple decided they were ready for a home that would also serve as a relaxing retreat big enough to accommodate their large extended families.

“It’s still attractive to have all that space,” said Ms. McInerney, 52. “And there’s something very peaceful about having a window to look out of and not seeing another building.”

While the McInerneys may not represent the typical New Canaan buyer, the details of their purchase are right in line with current buyer-friendly market dynamics. Their 8,000-square-foot home was first listed in 2007, when it was new, at nearly $7.4 million. It didn’t sell and was eventually rented. it was relisted last October for closer to what the market would bear: $4.2 million. The McInerneys, who are scheduled to close on July 1, went to contract for nearly $3.68 million.

Jennifer Moore, 37, spent part of her childhood in New Canaan, and after living in Boston, New York and Stamford, moved back with her husband, Peter, 43, to raise a family in 2010. “We wanted the good schools, a yard, some privacy,” said Ms. Moore, a former high school science teacher. She has since run into many of her high school classmates who have moved back for similar reasons.

The Moores bought a 1960s colonial in a neighborhood where their children, who will turn 4 and 6 next month, can easily find friends to play with. And Ms. Moore’s friendship with another stay-at-home former teacher who lives nearby inspired a business venture: a preschool science program called Rad Lab, which is now offered as an extracurricular activity in the town’s elementary schools and as an intergenerational program that links children with seniors at a local assisted living community.

Buyers have a distinct upper hand in New Canaan these days, especially if they are looking in the multimillion-dollar range. Over all, inventory has spiked, with more than 330 properties on the market earlier this month, compared with around 240 a year ago, according to data from William Raveis Real Estate.

Properties priced from around $2 million to $4 million are particularly abundant, and the market for “super high-end” properties priced above $5 million has been “extremely stagnant,” said Rachel Walsh, an agent with William Pitt Sotheby’s International Realty. The usually busy spring market “hasn’t hit us yet,” she said.

Sellers of higher-priced homes are losing money more often than not in this market, said Susan Engel, an agent with Halstead Property, and buyers can be very choosy. “Nobody wants to fix up,” she said. “Even if the color is off, you can’t sell it.”

What You’ll Find

New Canaan’s hilly terrain covers 22 square miles, generously adorned with ponds, rivers and brooks. North of Metro-North Railroad’s New Haven line, it is connected to the commuter rail via a branch line. With a population of 20,000, the town has a median household income of around $180,000.

Commercial development is centralized in the bustling downtown, which caters to local tastes with upscale coffee shops, trendy fitness facilities, boutiques for adults and children alike, and a variety of restaurants, including Elm, Solé and Chef Luis. Empty storefronts are few. “We’re less than 5 percent vacant,” said Tucker Murphy, the executive director of the local chamber of commerce. “We’re feeling like things are fairly robust.”

Properties close to town claim a half-acre or less, while those farthest out sit in the four-acre zone. In between, two-acre zoning predominates.

While teardowns are common, roughly 90 midcentury moderns have hung on from the days when well-known modern architects, including five from Harvard’s Graduate School of Design, began building the houses in town, according to Janet Lindstrom, the executive director of the New Canaan Historical Society. Among them was Philip Johnson, whose famous Glass House is now a National Trust Historic Site open seasonally for tours.

Last year, a newer architectural phenomenon, Grace Farms, appeared. Run by a foundation and open to all, the 80-acre site features a striking glass structure, shaped like a winding river, that houses gathering spaces, a dining commons and a tearoom.

What You’ll Pay

The median sales price for the first quarter was $1.75 million, up 23 percent from a year earlier, according to William Raveis Real Estate. The bulk of sales over the last 12 months were between $1 million and $3 million.

Single-family homes listed earlier this month ranged from $649,000 for a three-bedroom colonial to $14 million for an expanded midcentury modern originally designed by Philip Johnson on 6.3 acres.

More than 40 new homes (some still in the blueprint stage) were listed earlier this month, from just under $2 million up to $6 million, according to Ms. Engel of Halstead.

The condo complexes clustered around the downtown draw many buyers from surrounding towns. About 40 units were listed earlier this month, starting at $279,000 for a small one-bedroom and peaking at $2.195 million for a three-bedroom at Jelliff Mill Falls, a new complex overlooking the Noroton River.

What to Do

The town’s 250-acre Waveny Park, a former estate, has trails for jogging or walking, ball fields, an outdoor pool, platform tennis and a dog park. A family pool pass for 2016 is $450 for residents.

The playgrounds and snack bar at Mead Memorial Park are popular with young families.

The Bow Tie Playhouse downtown shows first-run movies on two screens.

A downtown “pop-up park,” at the intersection of South Avenue and Elm Street, will be installed from Aug. 5 to 28. The chamber-sponsored park, which has previously popped up for shorter spans, serves as a town green of sorts, with seating at tables, live music and other programming.

The 40-acre New Canaan Nature Center has walking trails, a marsh-side boardwalk, and summer programming for children.

The Schools

New Canaan has three elementary schools, a middle school and a high school. New Canaan High School, with about 1,250 students, offers numerous honors and Advanced Placement classes. In 2015, 94 percent of graduates enrolled in a four-year college.

Mean SAT scores for the class of 2015 were among the highest in the state, at 582 for reading, 609 in math and 594 in writing; state averages were 504, 506 and 504.

The Commute

The peak-time trip to Grand Central takes roughly 70 minutes from the downtown New Canaan station. Off-peak trains require a transfer at the Stamford station.

The ride from the Talmadge Hill station, near the Darien border, generally takes around 65 minutes.

A monthly pass is $306.74 purchased online.

The History

The New Canaan Historical Society sponsors modern house tours every two years (next on May 14). The houses were initially opened to the public in 1949, soon after they first appeared. According to a 2006 book by William D. Earls, “The Harvard Five in New Canaan,” about the architects who lived and worked there, around 1,000 people turned out then to walk through the flat-roofed curiosities. New Canaan had only seven moderns at the time, but the boxy, open designs held enough appeal that just four years later, there were four times as many.


