


FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about David Geffen’s $100 million gift to the Museum of Modern Art and financial problems at the Metropolitan Museum of Art referred incorrectly, in some editions, to a gift Mr. Geffen gave last year to the former Avery Fisher Hall. Though it was for $100 million, it was not his last donation in that amount before the gift to MoMA. He later gave $100 million to U.C.L.A. to build a middle school and a high school on its campus.

INTERNATIONAL

An answer in a Q&A article on March 11 about whether Iran’s recent missile tests call into question its commitment to the landmark nuclear agreement reached last year with world powers misstated the official position of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps concerning the agreement. The corps endorsed the agreement, but opposed any constraints on Iranian missile tests; it did not object to the agreement as an infringement on Iran’s sovereignty. Another answer in the article reversed the location of Iraq and Afghanistan relative to Iran. Iraq is to the west, and Afghanistan to the east. While the errors were promptly corrected online, editors failed to follow through on this print correction.

NEW YORK

An article on Friday about an agreement by NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital to pay $2.2 million to federal regulators for allowing television crews to film two patients without their consent misidentified the person who filed a complaint with federal regulators in 2013 that led to the $2.2 million penalty. It was filed by Mark Chanko’s son Kenneth — not by his widow, Anita.

BUSINESS DAY

Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Volkswagen’s agreement to fix or buy back 500,000 diesel cars in the United States that are equipped with illegal emissions software misstated the number of states in a coalition that is investigating Volkswagen. It is 45, not six. Also because of an editing error, the article misstated the way the illegal software enabled cars to cheat on emissions tests. It increased the pollution controls; it did not reduce them.

SPORTS

An article last Saturday about Mets pitcher Jacob deGrom’s missing his scheduled start the following Tuesday misstated, in some copies, the day that Logan Verrett previously pitched in deGrom’s place. It was Wednesday, April 13 — not Thursday, April 14.

WEEKEND

An entry in the Spare Times for Children listings in some editions on Friday about the Nitehawk Cinema’s Little Bookworm series, which is presenting the film “Chitty Chitty Bang Bang” Saturday and Sunday, misstated the cinema’s address. It is at 136 Metropolitan Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, not 36.

•

A theater entry in the Listings pages on Friday about “The Book of Mormon” included outdated ticketing information. The website and telephone number for tickets are now ticketmaster.com and 800-745-3000.

REAL ESTATE

Because of an editing error, a caption this weekend for two pictures with a cover article about older apartment buildings in New York that are adding amenities to stay competitive omits the description of the top photograph. It shows Monica Goel and her husband, Donal Burke, in the new bike room of the Carlton Regency, a co-op on East 36th Street.

OBITUARIES

A correction in this space on Friday for the obituary of the basketball player Pearl Washington referred incorrectly to his honor as consensus second-team all-American. It was awarded in 1985, for his play in 1984-85, his next-to-last season at Syracuse University. It was not for his play in 1985-86.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed tonytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


