


THE EARTHQUAKE, one of the biggest ever recorded, hit in the middle of a late February night in 2010. The real damage came 18 minutes later, with the tsunami, crashing from the Pacific up the estuary of the River Maule, where the small, hardscrabble city of Constitución nestles. More than 500 people died. Residents were left without homes, electricity and clean water.

The architect Alejandro Aravena was on a helicopter days later, surveying the damage. His firm, Elemental, and a team of consultants had been enlisted to put together a reconstruction plan. Arauco, the forestry company that employs thousands of workers in Constitución, had agreed to pay for it.

Aravena was picking at a plate of pernil in a truck stop, recalling what happened next, a story he has probably told a thousand times by this point. “Residents in Constitución naturally suspected, because we were working for the forestry company, that all the benefits of reconstruction would go to the company, not them,” he said. “That’s why we knew from the start that the people had to participate in the reconstruction process. In effect, we needed to create the right client. So we devised a consortium: Arauco, the government, the public and us. We were taking an intuitive approach because we actually knew nothing about planning. In the end, ignorance helped.”

Aravena polished off his beer when a stranger sidled up to the table. It happens all the time now. Drivers in passing cars stop him in the street. Shop clerks, politicians, long-lost acquaintances and schoolteachers ask for selfies with him. They all say the same thing. “Thank you,” the stranger said to Aravena, who smiled and posed arm in arm with the man for a picture. Thank you — as if the Pritzker prize, architecture’s Nobel, which Aravena had just won, had been awarded on behalf of everybody in Chile. “Even New Zealand has more heroes, they have the All Blacks,” Aravena half-jokes, about the famous rugby team. “We’re a small country. We hardly ever win anything.”

That said, Chile happens to be producing some of the world’s most gifted architects right now, a generation that includes Cecilia Puga, Sebastian Irarrazaval, Pezo von Ellrichshausen, Mathias Klotz, Teresa Moller, Smiljan Radic (“the best architect in the country,” Aravena tells me) and Aravena. On top of the prize, Aravena is directing the current Venice Architecture Biennale, whose socially minded show he has titled “Reporting From the Front.” Naturally, this has brought skeptics out of the woodwork. Young for an architect, at 48, they note, relative to other Pritzker winners he hasn’t built a lot; and some of his signature projects, including Constitución, are still in medias res, so it’s not entirely clear how they will actually turn out. Moreover, he and his partners at Elemental — Gonzalo Arteaga, Juan Ignacio Cerda, Víctor Oddó and Diego Torres — concentrate on social housing. “The more monotonous, dry, tough, the better,” as Aravena himself puts it. “Given that people will construct homes for themselves anyhow,” he elaborates, “this architecture gives order to their interventions.”

“We don’t think of ourselves as artists,” he adds. “Architects like to build things that are unique. But if something is unique it can’t be repeated, so in terms of it serving many people in many places, the value is close to zero. We go into fields where the chance of failing is higher than average. We make mistakes. If we need to replace a window or make some other fix, it’s easier for us because we’ve built up an account of good will.”

Meaning, overall, the work is not the poetry in glass or curvaceous spectacle that has tended to woo Pritzker jurors — one of whom, as it happens, Aravena used to be, until he quit the jury only a year ago. The prize clearly acknowledges a sea change in architecture, which not everyone agrees with. “Aravena,” sniffed Rowan Moore, critic for The Guardian,“has some of the trappings of the starchitect: a high media profile, a globe-trotting, lecture-giving lifestyle, a carefully cultivated look, a bizarre hairstyle (think desert roadkill) that seems to get spikier and more top-heavy with every transcontinental flight” — as if engaging in public debate about the built environment and the role of architects makes him a media hound. It’s the usual Catch-22: Architects who don’t speak out are hermits. As it happens, Aravena promised his family he wouldn’t leave Chile more than once a month, which, with site visits to far-flung projects, means he has time for three or four lectures a year, he told me.

Before arriving in Chile, I had been told by some of Aravena’s colleagues that he’s standoffish. I found him earnest, open, a little nerdy — and deadly serious. This is an era of unprecedented urban growth, much of it informal, which is to say illegal slum development. The total number of displaced people in the world now rivals the population of France. Climate change is reshaping the globe. For architects, today’s challenges and opportunities are historic. “In the name of artistic freedom, architects made themselves irrelevant,” Aravena says. “I think we may look back and see this as a tipping point.”

If so, one place we’ll look to is Constitución. After the tsunami, construction companies there floated the predictable and self-serving idea of erecting an immense protective sea wall, which would have made a kind of fortress, or prison, of the ravaged riverfront. It’s a proposal politicians love: A wall is an impressive-looking thing they can cut a ribbon standing next to. But residents, in public meetings, had bigger concerns. Tsunamis were rare. The city flooded regularly, they complained. There was next to no green space, inadequate housing, little access to the river, poor roads and miserable public buildings.

Elemental’s strategy required as much diplomacy as it did design. The firm compiled public demands, talked to government agencies that didn’t talk to each other and compared costs. Then Aravena presented residents with a choice: Build the wall and rebuild the houses destroyed along the river, or get nearly everything else they asked for, for millions less. Relocate displaced families and make the waterfront into a public forest, Elemental proposed. New trees wouldn’t stop another once-in-a-generation tsunami but would mitigate its impact and meanwhile open up the river as parkland. Retention ponds would deter flooding and double as recreation sites.

The general idea: Live with nature, don’t resist it. It’s how smart planners are thinking these days about rising waters. The people of Constitución voted for the forest. When a tsunami hit Japan in 2011, many sea walls there failed. Resistance was futile, it turned out, as Elemental had argued.

Looking back, Aravena says, “the sea wall would have provoked riots because it would not have done what people wanted. The participatory process revealed public priorities, of which the tsunami turned out to be last.”

We were now talking in a drizzle, at the foot of a cliff overlooking Constitución, where Elemental has installed several viewing platforms — elegant, Donald Judd-like wood boxes with concrete floors, open at either end — which frame postcard views of a tourist route facing the Pacific. Below, the new riverfront was a construction site. Further up the river, future parkland was waiting to be cleared and a promised bridge wasn’t yet built. Progress has been slow, the politics grinding, Aravena acknowledged. He was appalled when we stopped in the city’s main square to find the new mayor had approved cheap wooden kiosks blocking the double-height portico of Elemental’s austere and handsome cultural center, whose weathered gray wood columns city workers were slathering in ugly caramel-colored paint.

But then we drove up to Villa Verde, a housing project Elemental designed for a number of the displaced residents of Constitución and others. It was perched on a hill, near one of the city’s middle-class enclaves, overlooking downtown and the sea: hundreds of connected two-story homes, some with private gardens in front, all red and white, a sawtooth of interlinked roofs that suggested houses a child might draw.

Incremental housing, it’s called: a response to scarcity. Elemental’s first incremental housing project was in Iquique, in northern Chile, in 2003. The government puts up money for a new home, but not enough to cover the cost of land, construction and a place much bigger than a studio apartment. So Elemental provides “half a good house.” Residents get what they couldn’t easily build or pay for on their own: a two-story, two-bedroom home, with roof, kitchen and bathroom — plus an equivalent empty space next to it. Residents complete the second half, if, when and as they can.

This was hardly a new idea, or unique to Aravena. During the 1970s, a policy called “sites and services” envisioned plots of land with plumbing and electrical connections, requiring tenants to build houses from scratch. But Elemental’s incremental housing goes further, with a baseline of architectural forms, street walls and public spaces, outlining neighborhoods. Aravena talks about monotony creating “the cadence of a silent rhythm.” The syncopation of half-houses and voids acts like a grid, a framework, binding the community together, insuring visual continuity, encouraging variety. Like the reconstruction plan for Constitución, it is a collaborative undertaking.

And it transforms what is often a deteriorating commodity — the social housing project — into a generator of new wealth. The state puts up $22,300. Poor families, who buy these homes for $700, put in two or three thousand dollars to customize the second half and voilà. Equivalent-sized houses on the open market here can sell for more than $100,000. Residents of Villa Verde, who had next to nothing, gain equity.

While Aravena was complaining one morning to a local television station about the kiosks in the square, I made my way back to Villa Verde to ask families what they thought. It was a quiet, gray day. I passed newly gated front yards, whimsical and incongruous Swiss chalet-style balconies, a muddy basketball court and a few still-unfinished houses. Noemi Moran, 27, was standing in a doorway, chatting with a neighbor. She told me she moved into her house two years ago, along with her husband, a truck driver, their children, Lucas, 3, and Antonia, 2, and a puppy. They had all been crammed into a one-room adobe shack, barely large enough for sleeping, in a field behind Moran’s mother’s home in Santa Olga, about 20 minutes away. With money they saved over the course of the last year, Moran and her husband completed the second half of the house. Her uncle helped with drywall and windows. She took me inside.

The place was immaculate, the tiled floor polished, the ceiling paneled in wood, with a large dining-room table in the living room and a kitchen big enough for Lucas to ride around on a tiny tricycle. “In the beginning I cried a lot, without my mother,” Moran told me. I asked her if she was happier now. It was hard to talk over the children and barking dog. So she waved a hand, by way of an answer. “Look,” she managed.

Then I stumbled on Luis Flores, 37, standing with his wife, Ximena Troncoso, 33, in front of their house. “We always had a dream of owning our own home,” Troncoso told me. “At first the idea of only half a house made us very uncomfortable.” The alternative was a different, more conventional housing project by other architects, down the hill, with apartments a little larger than Elemental’s half house but not nearly as large as the whole house they would get at Villa Verde. With a combined income of around $500 a month, it took them more than year, the couple said, to save the $1,500 they needed to build out the second half, including a picture window and tiled terrace. The couple have three children. They also had moved from a single room in Santa Olga. The new house was crammed with belongings, but at 900 square feet, it felt large. “We have hot water,” Troncoso said, ticking off the pluses. “We have enough room so all the kids get their own bedrooms. We have independence.”

Aravena is the son of middle-class teachers who scrimped to provide him with a private education in Santiago. On the road between Constitución and the capital, we stopped at the Ayelén School that Elemental finished just last year, on the edge of Rancagua. Built on a fairly meager budget ($70 a square foot) to serve some 1,200 mostly poor children, it is conceived as the anchor for a larger development that someday is supposed to include social housing. The school is a charter, run as a public school, its construction paid for by the owner of the factory next door. The structure approximates a circle in a square: with a long slab roof along the front, a landscaped entryway and huge round courtyard, open to the sky.

Painted black, the building is large but recedes against all the colorful posters and artworks children pin up in classrooms and halls. You can see in the thin fiber-cement walls and approximated circle of the courtyard roofline where corners had to be cut. Handsome screens of woven mimbre, a local material, wrap around the half-moon library. The school’s director, Lorena Alcota Ireland, told me, “it’s clear how much the architects cared and valued the students, which for these children is something new.” In turn, she said, students take unusual care of the building.

I stood with Aravena during a recess, when dozens of students were running around in the courtyard. A gawky teen with braces and glasses, spotting the architect, fast-walked over and thrust out a hand. “This school is so cool,” he said. Over several days, I never saw Aravena look happier.

Back in Santiago, Aravena and his wife, Gica, who studied architecture in her native Brazil, took me one sunny afternoon to see the rusted steel and glass house they built for themselves and their two young daughters. (Aravena has a teenage son from a previous relationship.) It’s perched atop a little hill on a leafy street in Santiago. The house is near Elemental’s office, a scrappy suite of rooms for 20-odd employees that takes up half a floor in an aging commercial tower. A few blocks in the other direction is Aravena’s old architecture school at the Universidad Católica de Santiago.

We wandered over to see it. The school occupies a handsome colonial-era hacienda called Lo Contador. Back in the 1980s, “it was a competitive but collaborative atmosphere,” Aravena told me. These were the Pinochet years, so many foreign magazines were banned and Chilean architecture students had limited access to what was going on in the rest of the world. “We were saved from postmodernism,” Aravena says about the upside of censorship. “By default, we were left to find our own identity. Our professors were practitioners, not theorists, who taught how to get buildings built. It was, in retrospect, a very useful education.”

Aravena and his classmates graduated into post-dictatorship Chile, “not exactly as a close-knit group,” he recalls, “but united by what we were not — not postmodern, not parametric, not ideological. We were educated. We were steeped in art, math, literature and materials. We knew how to draw and to build.”

The courtyard of Lo Contador is a lush sprawl of trees and footpaths. Student projects and posters hung on peeling walls around the hacienda’s arcade. As always, Aravena carried a sketchbook. He draws all the time, to work out a plan, to illustrate a point. His conversation tends not toward architecture and aesthetics but toward practical affairs — negotiations, economics, materials, numbers — which for him can be a source of wonderment. He spent 10 minutes one day on a rapturous tangent about the odd number of stairs Michelangelo designed for the vestibule of the Laurentian Library in Florence.

“I feel I really began to study architecture when I moved to Venice in 1992,” he told me. “I was on a completely different planet there. I could go to a building for a week just to draw it. I spent a month drawing Doric temples in Sicily. I was measuring everything, absorbing all this history we didn’t learn in Chile. I saw Romanesque buildings and Palladio’s buildings and Alberti’s and Brunelleschi’s buildings, all of which finally made me realize what architecture could aspire to be.

“Then, when I came back to Chile, the jobs I got were for restaurants and shops, one lousy client after another. I was doing a discothèque in northern Chile for a guy who proved to be dishonest in the end, and finally couldn’t take it. It wasn’t what I had devoted my life to learning. So I quit architecture and opened a bar. I was still a nerd but I was living at night and sleeping in the day.” That lasted a couple of years, until a chance came up to design a new building for the mathematics department at the Catholic University’s San Joaquin campus.

If you want to see the other side of Aravena’s architecture — the non-incremental housing projects that probably tipped the scales for the Pritzker judges — Aravena has three on the university’s San Joaquin campus: the math building, a classroom and study center called the Siamese Tower, and the Angelini Innovation Center. The math building, completed in 1999, is a long, low structure that fills the gap between two previously existing buildings. Students had used the gap to cross the campus — what architects call a desire line, an informal path or shortcut, through a park or open space. Aravena’s idea was to merge all three buildings, seamlessly, incorporating the desire line and devising the entry pavilion as a kind of knot, in the form of a two-story triangular grid, tying together circulation inside and out.

Skylights open onto interior balconies, where faculty on different floors can talk. The diagonal desire line intersects with a stairway to a terraced cafe, the building’s public square. The project, stuffed with ideas by a young architect anxious to prove himself, wears on its sleeve lessons Aravena picked up from Louis Kahn and Le Corbusier. The next year, Aravena was hired by Harvard to teach in its architecture school; and the math building led to another university commission, the Siamese Tower, probably Elemental’s most frequently photographed building.

It looks bold and catchy in reproduction. It’s a letdown in the flesh — punk, squat and fussy: an awkward clash of glass with recycled railroad ties, arrayed as platforms around the base. The brief required Elemental to use glass, Aravena told me, without providing enough money for a proper curtain wall to mitigate heat and greenhouse effects. At 50,000 square feet, the building also wasn’t big enough to make a shapely tower with practical-sized floorplates. So the architects drew a box, sliced a wedge from its top and pinched in the sides to create an illusion of twin asymmetric towers.

The glass facade, like a nesting doll, is just a shell enclosing a separate building with the classrooms, the gap in between acting as a virtual chimney, extracting heat. The building feels claustrophobic and half-baked, uncomfortable in its own skin. In a sense, it provided a model for what not to do with his next campus project, the neo-Brutalist and impressive Angelini Innovation Center.

Tasked with designing a 90,000-square-foot, $18-million building that, for decades, would betoken “innovation,” Aravena and his colleagues faced the obvious problem. Anything shiny and faddish, with flying titanium panels or parametric pyrotechnics, would look dated. The center had to look timeless. Aravena likes to use the word “irreducible” to describe Elemental’s approach. “An Elemental project should be something where you can’t change the design without removing something essential,” he says. “Scarcity of means requires from the architect an abundance of meaning. The power of architecture is the power of synthesis, to say what you want in two words instead of three, to achieve a solution in as few moves as possible. The discipline of social housing is imposed. With the Innovation Center, we had to discipline ourselves.”

What resulted weighs in at 17,000 tons. The building is, in essence, about exactly what you see: load-bearing walls, gravity and concrete, organized abstractly to resemble Jenga blocks. “So much architecture these days is devised via computer modeling that doesn’t express weight but gives you planes in space,” Aravena adds. “Designs end up being about taste and finishes. I hear that Frank Gehry sometimes asks for a meter of distance in his buildings to separate structure from exterior, muscle from skin. The Innovation Center is all structure, all muscle.”

You can’t always sense the weight from photographs but do standing next to it. Like Mondrian panels, multistory terraces irregularly break up the facade, the larger openings at the top, smaller toward the bottom, as if the building, by virtue of its own mass, was slowly compressing the lower floors. The effect is subliminal and potent.

Inside, everything is reversed: glass, steel and wood, light and linear, finely detailed, with a soaring atrium. The atrium makes a vertical street, with views into all the offices, and through them, outdoors. Opaque and brooding outside, the building feels transparent, uplifting, inside. The concrete frame saves energy. On one of the terraces, I noticed faint streaks of corrosion from rebar, a leftover of the construction process, and irregular patterns made by recycled wood used to impress the surface of the exposed concrete — evidence of the handmade. Chile is not Switzerland, Aravena points out. Workers in Santiago are not able to achieve what construction crews manage in Basel. “So we turn that into an advantage,” he says. “Instead of looking for perfection, we embrace irregularity and variation. To get the same effects on purpose would probably cost a fortune.”

This is essentially the strategy Elemental employs with incremental housing: a quotient of chance contained within a binding geometry, the outcome made by many hands. Clearly, Aravena sees himself as the man in the middle. His clients are often big Chilean mining and forestry companies that run company towns. After more than a dozen years doing incremental projects, Elemental has become the firm of choice for emergency and social housing in Chile, getting called in to relocate an Andean town called Chaitén after a volcano, mediating between company officials and disgruntled miners in northern Calama who didn’t want cash payoffs but better urban conditions so their wives wouldn’t leave with the children. Success is elusive. Elemental recently put several of its incremental housing designs online, gratis, so others might use them. “We would love to jump from 1,000 units of social housing to a million units,” Aravena said. “Maybe someone else can find a way to make the leap in scale.”

But it’s not ultimately sheer numbers that count. The architect likes to quote Supreme Court justice Stephen Breyer, a fellow juror for the Pritzker. Breyer would ask, “Does a building do what a client wants? Do I understand the human condition better from this building?” In Santiago I visited Lo Barnechea, a riverside slum in a very wealthy neighborhood, where Aravena’s incremental homes, replacing tin and cardboard shacks, have allowed more than 500 families to stay put, rather than be moved to some disconnected project on the periphery.

At Renca, another incremental development in the capital, Aravena told me about a resident who used to bathe in the backyard and slept with her husband on a cot. Elemental’s bathrooms fit a tub; its bedrooms, queen-size beds — “like in the movies,” the woman told Aravena. “What she meant,” he elaborated, “was that now she can have a life of the imagination. Needs are not desires. You can answer needs but people still have desires.”

He floated an analogy, back on the cliff in Constitución. “Swimming is something you do alone, if the water is calm enough,” he said. “Surfing means riding a wave that is so much more powerful than you, but, if you can manage it, it is also so much cooler than swimming. I’m not sure that a private house is especially interesting as architecture, in that it’s either the client’s vision or the architect’s. A school or public housing project operates in a more complex space where everything becomes negotiable, which I think is more creative, more difficult, more challenging for an architect and more rewarding.”

In case you missed it, visit facebook.com/tmagazine for a tour of the Venice Architecture Biennale with this year’s director, the Pritzker prize-winning architect Alejandro Aravena.


