


President Obama wants more of us to have insurance that would make up the difference between a job we might lose and any new, lower-paying one we might take. He said so in his State of the Union address in January.

But what if you couldn’t get a new job, or wanted to hold out for one that paid as much or more than your last one? That’s where private unemployment insurance may come in. It could make up some of the difference between your state unemployment check and your old salary.

When I last wrote about this in 2009, the prospects for insurance companies selling such coverage seemed grim.

But since then, a product called IncomeAssure has emerged that might serve at least some worried people well. In exchange for a monthly premium, you receive a check for half of your weekly pretax pay before the job loss minus whatever you get in your state unemployment check.

Anything this unique comes with a pile of catches and caveats — and legal ways to game the system. IncomeAssure’s FAQ tackles some of them, but I’ve done my own with some pointed additions.

So what am I buying here?

Let’s say you live in New York and earn $100,000 annually. The highest possible weekly unemployment check is $425. But your weekly pretax salary is $1,923. Half of that is $961.50. So if you signed up for the maximum benefit from IncomeAssure and then lost your job, you would receive a weekly check for $536.50, which is the difference between $425 and $961.50.

The product covers the gap for people earning up to $250,000. If you earn more than that, you’ll get a check (and pay a premium) based on only $250,000 in annual income. The check is taxable income, just like unemployment checks.

There is a two-week pause before payments kick in, and they continue for a maximum of 24 weeks after that. If your state doesn’t pay unemployment benefits for that long, IncomeAssure will add money to your check whenever your state stops paying. The extra amount will get you to that 50 percent replacement rate for the remainder of the 24 weeks.

What does it cost?

It depends on where you live, what you do for a living and how much coverage you want to buy. IncomeAssure has a calculator where you can get a quote. It uses recent unemployment data to figure out what to charge.

A construction worker who lives and works in New York, earns $100,000 and wants the biggest possible IncomeAssure check for the longest period of time (though you can pay less and get less if you want), would pay a whopping $181.29 each month, according to the IncomeAssure quote calculator. That kind of job is hardly recession-proof, after all. Someone working in the leisure and hospitality industry would pay $114.46, the second highest premium among the 13 categories. Those who work in public administration would pay the least: $34.75.

If you earn more, you pay more, since there’s a bigger gap to fill to get you to 50 percent of your former salary. In states like Florida, where unemployment checks are smaller, you’ll pay more, too. Policies renew each year, and premiums may go up or down depending on unemployment rates.

So what’s the catch?

There are bunch of them, aside from the two-week wait, the 24-week limit and the 50 percent cap.

You cannot collect a check covering your gap in pay if you lose your job within six months of signing up for the insurance. Why? Well, it’s hard to get hurricane insurance after the warnings have sounded, too.

“Anyone who knows they are going to be laid off after six months, I am happy to sell them an insurance policy,” said David Sterling, chief executive of SterlingRisk, which administers IncomeAssure. “I’d like to buy some lottery tickets and stock tips from them, too.” If you lose your job before six months have passed, you get your premium back, but nothing else.

IncomeAssure won’t pay you unless your state agency has approved you to receive unemployment benefits. This may be impossible or close to it if you’re a contractor or freelancer. Any severance will probably affect your eligibility, too. (Check with your state’s unemployment office for the specific rules.)

Isn’t an emergency fund a better option?

Yes. But many people can’t or don’t save enough to add up to the $12,875 or so that IncomeAssure may pay out to a $100,000 earner in New York, or they must dip into that fund for half a dozen other unpleasant surprises.

Who are the IncomeAssure people?

Great American Insurance Company is the underwriter here, and its industry ratings suggest that it is healthy. SterlingRisk, a large insurance brokerage firm, is the administrator.

What if my employer has announced layoffs or buyouts?

Another catch. If it’s a layoff, you probably won’t be able to buy coverage, though it’s worth trying if the cuts are in a division other than yours. The application asks, point-blank, if your employer has “announced or implemented a plan or program of job reduction, reduction in force, or departmental or company restructuring.”

If your employer is offering buyouts, then you’re a lot like me, since my employer announced them as I was writing this column. Here, again, you’re probably out of luck, though IncomeAssure may allow you to buy in again at a later date.

Don’t lie. IncomeAssure has seen bursts of applications from certain employers before, and its staff can usually figure out why in about 10 seconds of Internet searching. If you are the subject of an investigation during the claims process or afterward, and it turns out that your employer had announced layoffs right before you bought a policy, you’ve probably committed insurance fraud (and IncomeAssure definitely will not cut you a check).

Could you pull the wool over everyone’s eyes? Sure you could. But it’s a risk, and it ruins things for everyone else. “If we took enough hits on the chin from chief financial officers of small companies, we might rate them differently, but we haven’t,” David Ferron, product management director at Great American, said of the sorts of people who might have precise knowledge of an employer’s plans. “If you have enough bad experiences with people who slip through the net, you build a different net.”

What if there was a recent acquisition announcement?

Mergers and acquisitions often come with layoffs on both sides, but it may take months for that to happen. If your company goes up on the block, there’s a chance that six months may go by before a buyer emerges, the deal closes and the restructuring happens. IncomeAssure does not ban people who are in this situation.

What if I just got a bad review?

If you did, you’ve got an elevated chance of losing your job in the next round of layoffs, but IncomeAssure won’t ask about that.

Does IncomeAssure use my race or age in underwriting?

No, but it makes sense to wonder, given how much discrimination exists in the workplace. Age comes up on the application, but IncomeAssure says it does not use the answer in the underwriting.

Will this business model work?

IncomeAssure has existed for five years, there are about 1,000 active policyholders and people have collected over $1 million in claims.

“It has been disappointing that we haven’t been able to find a cost-effective way to get the word out that this exists,” Mr. Sterling, SterlingRisk’s chief, said. It’s also understandable. If nobody is aware that something exists, it’s hard for people to find it if they don’t know to look for it in the first place.

Insurance agents generally don’t want to sell something unless it earns them a fat commission, something this product cannot pay because of its modest premiums.

Mr. Ferron said that claims have about matched the company’s predictions. “We’re in it for the long haul,” he added.

So are you buying a policy?

No. My family has some savings and a home equity line of credit.

But if I were the sole breadwinner? If I knew my extended family could not or would not help me out? If I was the type of person who could not sleep unless I had every possible coverage for any eventuality?

Then I would give this a close look, especially given that I work in an industry where layoffs and buyouts are a regular occurrence. And isn’t that most of us these days?


