


What would it mean to have a national drink? In May, the brewing company Anheuser-Busch announced that it would temporarily rename its best-known product. From the summer until Election Day in November, Budweiser beer will instead be called “America,” and the new name will be splashed across its red-white-and-blue labels and cans as part of its “America is in your hands” campaign. To my ears, the language sounds ambiguous at best, and at worst downright ominous. Or opportunistic. Or cynical. Or something else I don’t particularly want in my beer glass. But the rebranding of Bud did compel me to think about this notion of an American beverage, and to pull down from my bookshelf the delightful (and often delightfully overwrought) 1953 compendium “The American Drink Book,” by S.S. Field.

It’s an entertaining, eccentric, engagingly written account of American drinking preferences and customs since the colonial era, but much is embellished; although it is a work of nonfiction, Field was not the sort of writer who let the facts stand in the way of a good story. It contains significant measures of whimsy and wonder — qualities that might normally conspire to put me off drink altogether — yet I find Field’s book irresistible. We do not learn from the author how the God-fearing Puritans came to be besotted with demon drink. But we are told, “It was in the tavern over Flip, Toddy, Bounce and Sling — over Shrub, Sour Julep and Punch,” all venerable drinks, that Americans “came to grips with the moral issues of witch burning, religious persecution, the dignity of the individual, freedom of speech, civil liberties, political independence and human slavery.”

This all may sound pretty grand, and also pretty speculative, but there’s no denying the importance of the tavern in early America. By law, “ordinaries” — the precursors to taverns — had been widely established in New England after 1634, “usually sited in the center of each settlement, alongside the meetinghouse and the stocks,” writes Iain Gately in “Drink: A Cultural History of Alcohol.” And taverns and rum went together. “Rum was one of the few civilized benefits of the New World,” Field writes, “and its temple was the tavern.”

To say that rum was one of the few “civilized benefits” of the New World is to sugarcoat its entanglement with the slave trade, which Field mentions quickly, then drops. But it is always worth considering how our food arrives on our plates, and our drinks in our glasses, even if it creates discomfort. It should. In his poem “Pity for Poor Africans,” the 18th-century English poet William Cowper tartly illustrated the hypocrisy of many of his peers, who claimed to abhor the slave trade but couldn’t do without the rum produced by its horrors: “I OWN I am shock’d at the purchase of slaves,/And fear those who buy them and sell them are knaves;/What I hear of their hardships, their tortures, and groans,/Is almost enough to draw pity from stones./I pity them greatly, but I must be mum,/For how could we do without sugar and rum?”

“Sugar gets taken for granted, but it is very much a part of who we are in the Americas, and its presence explains why some of us are here at all,” the culinary historian Jessica B. Harris writes pointedly in her book “Rum Drinks.”

Among rum’s first uses in a mixed drink is the flip, in which it was combined with egg and sugar. If you don’t think this cousin of eggnog sounds refreshing on a summer day, I assure you that it is. The flip, Field says, “unquestionably has had the greatest per-capita consumption and spiritual influence of any mixed drink ever made ... about which was once written in a faded, 18th-century hand, ‘It is both food and drink — and if you have enough, it is also lodging for the night.’ ” I’ve tried to tease out exactly what the unnamed 18th-century source meant by that — whether it was an allusion to the sleeping quarters that were offered by taverns, a tribute to its warming qualities or just a hint that too many flips are likely to make you very, very sleepy.

Although Field surveys the major historic drink categories — flips, juleps, punches, shrubs and such — “The American Drink Book” isn’t limited to the long-ago past, nor is rum the only spirit subjected to his scrutiny. He turns his attention to whiskey and to the drink most Americans love best: beer. In 1953, Field claims, per-capita consumption stood at 16.9 gallons per year; today it is closer to 27 gallons, and the United States has more breweries than any other country.

There’s a fascinating list of “the 100 Greatest American Drinks,” too. It includes obvious candidates like the Manhattan, the martini, the Old-Fashioned and the Sazerac, but there are also surprises like the Between the Sheets — lemon juice, rum, brandy and Cointreau — which, Field reports, “when properly shaken makes a ‘ha-cha’ sound that goes well with the rhythm section in Charleston music.” There’s the Blinker: whiskey, grapefruit juice and grenadine, obscure even in Field’s day (“if you call for this one by name and the bartender doesn’t blink, bow respectfully to that gentleman. He is of the old school”). And the Mary Pickford (named for the actress known in the 1920s as “America’s sweetheart,” never mind that she was Canadian by birth) — pineapple juice, a tiny amount of grenadine and rum.

Can a book about our national drinking customs deliver a sense of clarity about being American during a political moment that feels especially fraught, divisive and anxious? Of course not. “There is a reasonable and disappointing certainty that these pages on the subject of drinking will bring about something less than the absolute eradication of human ridiculousness and the resulting transformation of the world overnight into a completely delightful place,” Field concedes. But the buoyant, hopeful enthusiasm of his prose — and the drinks he serves with it — are pleasures in themselves. And his list of the great American cocktails may come in handy during the months leading up to the election: We’ll surely be needing a few good, stiff drinks.

Recipes: Rum Flip | Rum Sour


