


Pop quiz: The New York City Ballet principal Robert Fairchild is dancing to the sounds of Gershwin, in choreography by Christopher Wheeldon. The title of the work contains the word “American.” Where are we?

“An American in Paris”? That’s Mr. Wheeldon’s Tony Award-winning musical, which has starred Mr. Fairchild in the storied Gene Kelly role since it opened on Broadway last March.

A reasonable assumption. But no.

The scene was a New York City Ballet rehearsal room, where Mr. Fairchild was absorbing a correction from Kathleen Tracey, the rehearsal director for “American Rhapsody,” Mr. Wheeldon’s new ballet set to Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue.” The dance will have its premiere at the New York City Ballet’s gala performance on Wednesday, alongside “Mothership,” a new piece by Nicolas Blanc, and Alexei Ratmansky’s 2008 “Concerto DSCH.”

Mr. Fairchild listened intently to Ms. Tracey explain that he should use his arms in a more complex way while swirling across the room. “I don’t know whether that is going to happen,” Mr. Fairchild said. “Because I can’t, not because I don’t want to!”

Until this March, when Mr. Fairchild left “An American in Paris” and his role as the G.I. Jerry Mulligan, to rejoin City Ballet full time, he was performing on Broadway up to eight times a week. The role earned him a Tony nomination (the musical received 12 and won in four categories) and several other awards for outstanding actor in a musical. And he became accustomed to being stopped in the street for his autograph and greeted at the stage doors by gaggles of screaming fans.

While “American Rhapsody” repeats the winning Gershwin-Wheeldon-Fairchild combination (and its City Ballet performances will be conducted by Rob Fisher, the music director of “An American in Paris”), it was not conceived as a way to capitalize on the Broadway success, said Peter Martins, the company’s ballet master in chief. It was Mr. Wheeldon who had suggested “Rhapsody in Blue,” he said when asked if City Ballet had thought this could be a way to attract audiences who might not otherwise attend the ballet. “I didn’t think about that at all,” Mr. Martins said, “although that would be nice.”

In a telephone conversation from Stockholm, Mr. Wheeldon, who was City Ballet’s resident choreographer from 2001 to 2008, said: “I was really just having a love affair with Gershwin’s music. I don’t think I was ready to let go.”

It’s not entirely unknown for ballet-makers to cross over to Broadway: George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins are the most illustrious examples. (In his biography of Balanchine, Bernard Taper notes that it was Balanchine who asked for the Playbill credit to read “choreography by,” rather than “dances by.”)

Still, Mr. Wheeldon pointed out, the fortunes of choreography had been variable on Broadway. “Of course there was a wonderful era of dance,” he said, “but it sort of went away when the megamusicals, like ‘Les Misérables,’ ‘Miss Saigon’ and ‘Phantom of the Opera’ came in. Twyla Tharp was the only trailblazer in between. But now shows like ‘American in Paris’ and ‘On the Town’ have shown there is a real appetite for serious dance.”

He added: “It would be lovely to think that audiences of ‘American in Paris’ have come away with their eyes open a little bit about ballet. They would be flabbergasted if they spent a couple of nights at City Ballet.”

(In an email, Karen Girty, City Ballet’s senior director of marketing and media wrote: “In our experience, Broadway audiences at large do not cross over into ballet,” but that the company was making an effort to reach that demographic through social media and publicity.)

Asked why he had chosen such a well-known piece as “Rhapsody in Blue,” Mr. Wheeldon said that he was drawn to its grandness of scale and unconventional structure. “The themes don’t really resolve, they just keep on coming, which makes choreographic structure quite challenging.”

The ballet, which he described as a pure response to the music, has two principal couples (Mr. Fairchild and his wife, the principal dancer Tiler Peck, and Amar Ramasar and Unity Phelan) and a corps de ballet of 16. “It is quite classical, although there are a few jazz-inflected movements,” he said. “It’s hard actually, quite virtuosic, and particularly demanding on Robbie.”

Mr. Fairchild, who has appeared sporadically at City Ballet over the last year, said he was finding the full-time return to ballet physically difficult.

“There is nothing like being faced with yourself in the studio to remind you, let’s get real,” Mr. Fairchild said good-humoredly after the rehearsal. On Broadway, he said, he was performing the same dance steps every day, as well as acting and singing. “You are at peak fitness to deliver in a particular way, but that is not the same way as being a dancer in a ballet company doing so many different ballets, all with different vocabularies and styles. At the moment, I have much less stamina for what we do here.”

He continued to do a ballet barre — the first part of the daily class that is an essential element of a dancer’s life — every day while performing in “American in Paris,” as well as some other physical conditioning. But, Mr. Fairchild acknowledged, he had not maintained the full training routine that he would have at City Ballet.

“I discovered that it was much harder to sing when I did a full ballet class, with all the turning and jumping,” he explained. “Your muscles do a certain thing for ballet. There has to be a certain tension and readiness in the body to spring, to jump, to turn. But singing needs the opposite, room and relaxation in the upper body so that the lungs can expand and a vibration can happen.”

Working to regain his stamina and full technique for City Ballet had been “tough but interesting,” he said. “How can I have two completely different techniques of body awareness and bleed the lines a little?”

Mr. Wheeldon said he felt Mr. Fairchild had grown as an artist through his Broadway experience. “He walks into the studio every day and there is much more of a sense of a leading man,” he said. “He is in command; the other dancers look up to him.”

Asked whether he was conscious of choreographing for a ballet audience rather than a Broadway audience, Mr. Wheeldon said it was a question of practicalities rather than expectations. “You are serving a story, having to think singing, acting and a lot of scene changes. And you have to work out what can be reproduced night after night for months or years on end, how far you can physically push the dancers.” There was more freedom in working purely with movement, he added, but also more fear. “That blank canvas can feel very blank and very large,” he said.

Both men said they would like to work on Broadway again; Mr. Fairchild will have another stab at his role when “An American in Paris” opens in London in 2017. But both also spoke of their pleasure in returning to pure dance.

“Both worlds are amazing,” Mr. Fairchild said, “and I love the crossover thing that has happened. When someone came to me and said they had seen ‘American in Paris’ eight times and had just bought their first ticket to City Ballet, I was so thrilled.” He grinned. “Pressure. I’d better live up to that.”


