


A retired New York City police officer was accused on Tuesday of running a multimillion-dollar online escort service that catered to clients at their homes and at major Manhattan hotels, arranging assignations that cost as much as $20,000 a night.

The former officer, Michael Rizzi, was charged with money laundering in connection with managing his service, BJM/Manhattan Stakes and Entertainment, since 2012, which he advertised through nearly 60 websites with names like Lush Playmates and Elite Club NYC. Prosecutors said that BJM promoted prostitution. After personally interviewing candidates, Mr. Rizzi, 44, of Brooklyn, would send them out on jobs with wealthy customers, one of whom requested an escort named Jade to accompany him on a private jet for a five-day trip to a secluded resort in Jamaica, according to a federal complaint.

Speaking to reporters outside Federal District Court in Brooklyn, Javier Solano, Mr. Rizzi’s lawyer, said his client ran a legitimate business that provided companionship — and only companionship. “There was no sex involved,” Mr. Solano said, adding that Mr. Rizzi had in fact fired some women after he discovered that they had engaged in illegal activity with clients.

According to telephone and real-estate records, Mr. Rizzi is married to Jill Juliano, whose father, Richard Juliano, a soldier in the Gambino crime family, pleaded guilty to illegal gambling charges in 2003. Mr. Rizzi joined the Police Department in 1991 and retired with a pension in 2000 after suffering a line-of-duty injury, Mr. Solano said.

In 2009, Mr. Rizzi was arrested on charges of serving as a “super agent” for a separate gambling ring by officers from the Police Department’s Organized Crime Investigation Division. Two years after his arrest, he pleaded guilty to promoting gambling — a misdemeanor — and was penalized with a fine.

According to the complaint, the inquiry into the escort service began in 2012 when the police and agents from the Internal Revenue Service and the Homeland Security Department began investigating a Staten Island man named Marc J. Schulman, who ran a prostitution company called Pure Platinum Models. Prosecutors claim that financial records linked shell companies that Mr. Schulman used to Mr. Rizzi’s business, BJM. Mr. Rizzi eventually took over Pure Platinum Models, the prosecutors added, renaming it and running it out of his home in Bensonhurst, after Mr. Schulman pleaded guilty to money laundering charges in 2015.

The complaint said that Mr. Rizzi received email applications for his service from various women and then arranged face-to-face meetings with them at hotels across the city. In one of those emails, the complaint said, a potential candidate wrote: “I am a fun loving girl who loves sex. I love sex and if I can get paid for it why not?”

When one applicant refused to meet in person, Mr. Rizzi sent her an email in response saying it was a requirement of the job. The complaint quoted him as writing: “I get the most business, my girls make the most money, my clients are the wealthiest people in the world. I will never send a model I haven’t interviewed to them.”

A typical appointment with a BJM escort cost $400 to $2,000 an hour, prosecutors said, but longer sessions were occasionally booked at rates of $7,200 for 12 hours or $8,400 for 14 hours. A fleet of drivers was employed to squire the escorts to clients’ home or to deluxe hotels like the Park Central and the Mandarin Oriental, the complaint said.

Prosecutors added that financial records showed that Mr. Rizzi had processed more than $2 million in credit card receipts through BJM over the last few years.

Magistrate Judge Viktor V. Pohorelsky agreed to set him free on bail of $500,000. But while searching Mr. Rizzi’s residence, investigators found an antique .32-caliber pistol and rearrested him on state gun charges before he was released.


