


Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.

1. This victory is not a surprise to the average American, such as graduates with master’s degrees working for $12 an hour, trying to pay off $30,000 in student loans or 50-year-olds with $400 left in savings after being unemployed for two years.

We need jobs, not handouts. Hillary wants to help the poor.

Here’s a better idea — create jobs so there aren’t any poor to help. Trump gets it. He is one of the few who understand what the average American is going through.

— Lark, reacting to an article about Donald J. Trump all but securing the Republican presidential nomination after the Indiana primary.

2. I’m voting for Trump because he is the best chance we have to destroy the Republican party. He may get to try some crazy stuff for two years. However, he is president, not dictator.

Then, in two years, liberals (I hope a liberal Third Party develops) take over Congress. Then, in four years, we got a generation of liberal control.

Since the media and the Democratic party destroyed Bernie (our real hope for change), the only option left to produce radical change is to vote Trump.

— Jacqueline in Colorado.

3. What sank Cruz is that despite liberal assurances to the contrary and even Republican fears, the people clearly believe that Trump is the most electable Republican — and I agree.

As president, Trump clearly wouldn’t apply ideological litmus tests to decisions, but identify what he perceived to be America’s interests and decide on that basis. Doubtless, there would be both Democrats AND Republicans who disagreed with him; but, you know … I suspect that I wouldn’t.

— Richard Luettgen in New Jersey, reacting to a column by Frank Bruni about Senator Ted Cruz of Texas ending his bid for the Republican presidential nomination.

4. I joined the party of Lincoln and Reagan, but I cannot belong to the party of Trump.

I’ll likely vote for Gary Johnson in November, but if somehow the polls show a close race between Trump and Clinton, I’ll do what six months ago I would have considered inconceivable: vote for Hillary Clinton. Time for a shower now … — Michael in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., reacting to an article about prominent Republicans questioning whether they can vote for Mr. Trump.

5. Regardless of the outcome of this primary, Bernie Sanders has indeed been crucially important in reminding the Democratic Party that — yes, indeed — the people support, and are willing to fight for, progressive policies.

These are the same policies which once defined the Democratic Party until they jettisoned them in the late eighties in their pivot to the right.

Like it or not, the views of Bernie Sanders are the future of the Democratic Party.

If they want to keep winning elections — including this one — they had better internalize this, and start acting on it.

— Dominic in New York, reacting to an editorial about Senator Bernie Sanders’s role in pushing the Democratic Party further left.

This comment received over 790 reader recommendations.

6. Here’s the deal. The people cited in this article — obese subjects and the researchers alike — can complain, overstudy, overmedicate ... whatever.

But the truth is the truth. Want to stay skinny and look good? Prepare to work out hard every day ... and to be hungry.

It’s that simple.

— IJN in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., reacting to an article about a study conducted on former contestants on “The Biggest Loser,” and why they struggle to maintain weight loss.

This comment received 46 reader responses.

7. When I had toddlers, I child-locked all the kitchen and bathroom cabinets, I gated off the stairs, I child-proofed the house.

I put them in car seats and strollers with straps. They slept in cribs with high rails and bumpers. I tested the temperature of their bottles.

I treated them like the fragile precious beings that they were.

My number one job for the first five or six years of their lives was to make sure they didn’t accidentally kill themselves.

The thought of leaving anything dangerous within their grasp let alone a gun gave me anxiety.

What kind of person leaves a gun anywhere near a child?

— Aimlow Joe in New York, reacting to an article about four toddlers who accidentally shot and killed themselves during one week in April.

This comment received over 1,100 reader recommendations.

8. I’ve worked with a lot of women and gay men (I’m a psychologist) who have been involved in sex trafficking and prostitution. I’ve yet to find one who found it empowering, or thought they had any other choice.

Legalizing it will not change it or make it safe, just like legalizing drugs does not eliminate the underground drug market.

It should not be legal, and it is not victimless.

If we really want to make a difference, how about creating programs to give at-risk women and youth other options?

And for those that like prostitution and have the luxury of being able to freely choose it — rest assured, there will always be a market for you.

— PG in New York, responding to a Times Magazine article about a movement among sex workers and activists to decriminalize prostitution. This comment had over 320 reader recommendations and 22 reader responses.

9. The word “purse” has always disgusted me.

A combination of the sound and also the thing — the constant piece of luggage that women are sentenced to lug around.

Hate the closed jaws. Just hate the word and the thing. Yuck.

— Socanne in Tucson, reacting to an article about a study that explores why some words induce a “visceral disgust reaction.”

10. As a food lover, this is horrifying and absolutely disgusting. Nails are one of the dirtiest places on the human body.

— Calla Meza on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about KFC marketing a line of lickable, edible nail polish in two flavors, Original, and Hot and Spicy, in Hong Kong.

This comment received 83 likes.


