


New York comes with a beat that certain people, like the choreographer Alexei Ratmansky, can instantly follow. “It welcomes you,” he said in a recent interview at American Ballet Theater’s studios on lower Broadway. “You don’t feel like an outsider.”

Since 2006, when he choreographed “The Russian Seasons” for New York City Ballet, Mr. Ratmansky, now 47, has been beguiling audiences in the city with dances that hint, loosely and not, at Russia — or rather his Russia, with its wealth of pageantry, theatricality and history. But there is an American sensibility in the mix as well. Why do his dances, even those with a Russian tone, feel so free, so American?

George Balanchine, another St. Petersburg transplant, introduced a jazz sensibility to the classical form in dances like “The Four Temperaments” and “Agon.” What Mr. Ratmansky brings to ballet is a singular voice, unpredictable yet recognizable; he uses classical technique, but allows it to breathe in the joints — it’s loose, rangy, forthright.

This season at Ballet Theater, where he has been the artist in residence since 2009, that mingling of the Russian and American spirit will be on display in heavy rotation with programming that includes his masterly “Shostakovich Trilogy”; “Firebird,” the Stravinsky vehicle that put Misty Copeland on the map; and “Seven Sonatas,” a subtle, luminous ballet set to Scarlatti.

In June, he will present his take on Pushkin’s “The Golden Cockerel,” inspired by Michel Fokine’s 1914 Ballets Russes production. And the season closes with his staging of “The Sleeping Beauty,” which brings the spirit of Marius Petipa’s 1890 choreography to life.

But first comes a new ballet to be unveiled at Ballet Theater’s gala on Monday, May 16: an exploration of love set to and named after Leonard Bernstein’s “Serenade After Plato’s Symposium.” For Mr. Ratmansky, creating a ballet to Bernstein — it’s not his first; he has choreographed two versions of “The Dybbuk” — is a chance to pair his choreography not only with an American composer but also one who is synonymous with New York City.

“I was looking for American music,” he said. “When I discovered it, I fell in love.”

The 1954 score, according to Bernstein’s notes, is not a literal rendering of Plato’s text but rather “a series of related statements in praise of love.” As Mr. Ratmansky said, “I don’t believe that philosophy can be translated into dance; but it’s about love, which is very much part of our field for ballet.”

In “Symposium,” seven men, or speakers, ruminate on aspects of love; a woman, Diotima, about whom Socrates speaks, appears near the end of the ballet. Each of the men, the dancer Calvin Royal III said, has an individual voice. His, he explained, is “more pensive and lyrical — very introspective. It’s not in any way showy, but it’s expressive and definitely has something deeper and important to say.” He added: “I think it’s unlocked many things in me.”

And, as usual, it is physically taxing. “It’s a little too ambitious to only have eight dancers for a half an hour of big symphonic music,” Mr. Ratmansky said. “So I think they’re all going to die at once.”

He laughed and added: “Which they always do in my ballets, I’m afraid.”

At the time of this conversation, Mr. Ratmansky was half- finished with the dance. It’s not his favorite place to be as a choreographer. “I call it mid-process crisis,” he said. “I can’t say more about it, because it hasn’t taken shape yet.”

Developing his choreographic vision was a process itself. Born in St. Petersburg and raised in Ukraine, he trained at the school of the Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow. He performed with the National Ballet of Ukraine before moving to Canada to dance with the Royal Winnipeg Ballet. It was there, under its artistic director, John Meehan, that he transformed as a dancer, performing works by George Balanchine, Frederick Ashton, Jerome Robbins and Twyla Tharp. He acquired speed and, he said, more turnout in the hips. He also learned how to push more from the floor for jumps.

“I did change quite fast I think,” he said. “It took a year, and then I was completely opposed to the Russian school, which was not right of course, but it was my reaction. And then I learned how to see balance: good things and less good things on both sides.”

Mr. Royal, who has worked extensively with Mr. Ratmansky over the years, described his style as composed of many elements. “Expressive, dramatic, demanding,” he said. “Quick feet, a very lush port de bras. He’s always asking us to make his movements look more organic. To look more natural, but not necessarily at ease. It’s organic in making it seamlessly fit with the music and the people you’re dancing with onstage.”

Dancers in a Ratmansky piece form a society. There is an insistence that they must work together — performing with and for each other to immerse themselves into the perfume of each particular world. And it’s not only the dancers of Ballet Theater who get to live inside such realms this spring. New York City Ballet continues performances of his “Concerto DSCH” this month. And Miami City Ballet brought his “Symphonic Dances,” set to Rachmaninoff, to Lincoln Center in April.

As he considers the season and the prospect of all of his ballets coming at once, Mr. Ratmansky is uneasy. “I’m scared,” he said. “But I’ll survive.”

That fear comes, in part, because of the hours required to prepare his ballets for the stage. “It’s a lot of work, and it needs to be done precisely with a lot of details,” he said. “The commitment is there, but details, the polish.” And also, he said: “I worry about the sales — maybe the audience will say it’s too much of this guy.”

But the lineup demonstrates the versatility of what Mr. Ratmansky, who received his citizenship this year, has created while living in the United States. He said that he doesn’t see himself as any more American now: “I don’t feel I’ve changed much. Of course, my understanding of ballet is completely different from when I was at school.” The loosening of the Iron Curtain, as he put it, changed much for Mr. Ratmansky. “We started to get information, and that really made a big impact on me,” he said. Even now, he added, “I love Google Books.”

Mr. Ratmansky may make his home in America, but he has something that can’t be taken away: a kind of Russian poetry, and a reverence for ballet history. His reconstructions of “The Sleeping Beauty” and, more recently, “Swan Lake,” performed in February by the Zurich Ballet, are just as important in advancing the classical form as his new productions. (Of all his reconstructions, he said, he has a soft spot for “Swan Lake.”)

Mastering the Stepanov notation — a system of recording dance that dates to the turn of the 20th century — took time, but, he said, “It opened the treasury room for me.”

He has inserted vintage steps into recent ballets; there will be some in his Bernstein premiere. “When I run out of steps, that gives me steps,” he said, laughing. “But I know that Petipa did a lot of that, and I know Balanchine did a lot of that. I believe that all choreographers do that. Petipa presented the works of his predecessors like Balanchine did with Petipa’s ballets. I don’t feel like I’m stealing something. There is a good side to it: You have the hand of someone behind you that supports you. It’s a good feeling.”


