


“London was my dream place to host the show,” says Nina Yashar, the grande dame of the Milanese design scene whose gallery, Nilufar, has decamped to London for the fifth iteration of its traveling exhibition Squat. “It’s the place for talent. So many of my designers are based here — Martino Gamper, Bethan Laura Wood, Michael Anastassiades. It’s incredible.” It’s already popped up in Paris and been to Beirut, but now Nilufar’s eclectic offerings of historical and contemporary design objects inhabit the first floor apartment in a Victorian terra-cotta building above Erdem’s store in Mayfair. The sumptuous space, which couldn’t be further from the threadbare realities that its title summons, has over the last five months been restored by the interior and architectural designer Shalini Misra. There are gems at every turn, and everything you see is for sale, from the floral configurations of Gio Ponti ceiling lights to the customized Dedar curtains and elegant Matisse sketch that hangs discreetly on the reception room wall — to even the property itself.

“The space feels so finished and refined,” says Yashar, gesturing to the high-spec series of rooms that open from the monochromatic marble-floored atrium. “We’ve never had a perfect bathroom or kitchen at Squat before. Thanks to Shalini, it’s so complete I could actually sleep here tonight!” Yashar first came to the British capital some 30 years ago on the hunt for Aubusson carpets. “I remember it very well,” she explains of her visit to the city’s back-room dealers for the antique French carpets that she still sells. “It has changed so much since then. It has become so important for art, for exhibitions, for museums — but there are not so many design galleries here. There’s Fumi and Kreo and David Gill, but for some reason the wealth of London talent seems better translated elsewhere.”

It’s this gap that Yashar is on a mission to bridge. Squat will remain open into the fall, with the intention of attracting the same serious investors who flock to fairs such as Frieze, PAD London and Masterpiece. But though the influential gallerist enjoys the village-y feel of Hackney, and loves exploring the Royal College of Art’s graduate shows, she admits to feeling overwhelmed by the sheer scale of the city: “I’m always relieved when I get back to Milan. It’s more provincial. I feel at home there. I get lost in London,” says Yashar, who wears a Prada coat covered with motorcars. A warm and commanding presence, she is unequivocal in her assessment of the design market whose exponential growth she’s observed over her long career: “Suddenly people understood that they cannot have nice artworks at home with bad furniture,” she says. “You have to have important design pieces to match those five-million-dollar works of art.”

In the above slide show, the design doyenne takes T on a tour of Nilufar’s luxurious temporary lodgings.


