


Once mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have sometimes become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The New York Times will pose questions from readers (and some of our own) to notable showrunners.

This week we hear from Robert Carlock, the co-showrunner, with Tina Fey, of “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.” The frenetic comedy returned for its second season on Netflix this month, resuming Kimmy’s plucky efforts to make a life in New York after years as a hostage in an underground bunker.

“It’s a classic story,” Mr. Carlock said. “We used to describe it as ‘Elf’ meets ‘Silence of the Lambs.’”

Ms. Fey and Mr. Carlock met as writers on “Saturday Night Live,” teaming up on “Weekend Update” before Mr. Carlock moved on to write for shows like “Friends” and “Joey.” They reunited to create “30 Rock,” the madcap backstage satire that won three consecutive Emmys for best comedy.

Below, Mr. Carlock discusses Big Biscotti, Ellie Kemper’s paradoxical gifts and the show’s adventures in identity politics. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.

Previously: Nahnatchka Khan of “Fresh Off the Boat,” Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould of “Better Call Saul,” Joe Weisberg and Joel Fields of “The Americans” and more.

The show was originally developed for NBC but you knew Season 2 would be on Netflix. Did you approach it differently as a result?

We knew Netflix wanted the episodes to be longer — they like the shows to be around 26 minutes, is what they told us, as opposed to 21:15 on network. That meant that while this is still Kimmy’s show, we didn’t always have to wait for our spots to start telling meatier stories with the other actors. We could be following Kimmy’s big journey into the world and her dealing with her demons, but also at the same time let Titus have a real relationship, for example. Last year you couldn’t have had an episode where both of those things were happening. We ended up telling fuller, richer stories for all of the characters, which was a goal going into the year.

How has binge-watching affected the way you conceptualize a show like “Kimmy Schmidt”? — Allison

It does allow us to think of the 13 episodes as a whole. It doesn’t mean we don’t do the broadcast thing of having story endings within episodes, just because we find that more satisfying. We realized we could play with time a bit more because people could catch up to a mystery. We flashback three months in the first episode and then spent eight episodes catching up to that first scene — I’m not sure we would’ve done that in broadcast. We weren’t super daring but we definitely did some small things, including calling back jokes between episodes. I think three times we had jokes about biscotti being inedible — traditionally all three of those jokes would have to be in one episode. But three episodes after the first biscotti joke, we found ourselves at an Italian family dinner and thought, let’s take another shot. Let’s take down Big Biscotti!

Is there more freedom to write a show for Netflix? — Janice, Nashville

Obviously content-wise, you could do almost anything. But we had written a show about a woman who was in many ways childlike and inexperienced, and it didn’t make a ton of sense to change what was working, or for that character to suddenly start swearing and having people take their pants off. I think in one of the fake American Songbook songs Titus sings, there is an s-word. I think that was the only time we said a word that you couldn’t say on broadcast.

One of the things you run up against in broadcast are not standards issues, but sales issues. We tend to write a lot of jokes — and we did on “30 Rock” as well — that reference brands and people in the real world, and that can be a conflict in the broadcast business model. It’s nice not to have to deal with that in streaming.

Were there any jokes you had to spike at “30 Rock” that you still regret?

What I remember are the ones we got away with. At one point we mentioned that Jack Donaghy and his ex-wife co-owned an Arby’s franchise, and there was a little pushback on that. Then we’d push back against these poor people who are just trying to protect their client relations. “It’s gotta be Arby’s! It sounds funnier!” We wore them down.

Which are your favorite characters to write for? — Allison, Austin, Tex.

I always get a lot of joy out of giving lots of jokes to a guest star — the manager of the theater, or the doctor. I like the feeling of “Oh, these people aren’t just there to move the story along; they’re their own weirdos.” That’s partly what leads to these overstuffed, five-jokes-a-page things, but I never like the traditional way, when the person comes in, gives the information and raises an eyebrow at your character’s jokes. I like these incidental characters that you’ve never seen before to live in a consistent world with your other characters.

“30 Rock” had that same fast-paced, silly-sharp style of comedy. Where did that approach come from?

Tina and I once tried to answer that question for ourselves. We determined that we like well-intentioned people who think they have solutions to everything but are, like most people, wrong. Titus, Kimmy, Jacqueline and Lillian all have different visions of what they think the world should be, which are all centered around themselves. So you get that conflict, and when you have characters with strong points of view and strong beliefs, these well-intentioned dummies, they talk a lot. So we end up with these characters who are constantly jabbering at each other, and you look at it and say, “This is boring — how do we make it funny?” And then it gets jam-packed with jokes.

In Episode 3 this season, Titus does a geisha bit that becomes a source of protest and outrage Was that explicitly a response to some of the criticism the show has received for things like the Native American subplot?

I don’t know if it was explicitly that. We like writing about those things. A lot of our writers are in the middle of that conversation, and Tina and I for years have written about where we rub against each other — that sounded wrong. I mean where people have friction in their opinions, and that means writing about that stuff. We think a comedy show can be part of the conversation in a variety of ways. And our show did become part of that conversation — not always in the way that we wanted, but perhaps that was worth writing about. It’s in the air even beyond the show, the ideas about appropriation and identity. We find all that really interesting, and I know it’s often hard to look at a comedy show talking about that stuff and not think the conversation itself is being diminished. But that’s not our intention.

You’ve been in the business since the 1990s. Is it harder now to write comedy? Do heightened sensitivities in these areas make for more of a minefield when you’re just trying to make a funny show?

We’re certainly conscious of things we weren’t conscious of 20 years ago, writing on “S.N.L.” I think all that’s good. It’s good that there are more voices. It’s good that the trend is toward sensitivity and inclusiveness. Our belief is that inclusiveness includes being part of the joke.

As opposed to being the butt of the joke?

As opposed to being up on a pedestal, you know? If certain things can’t be part of a comedy show, then where’s the inclusiveness?

Thank you for this hilarious show! How do you make sure that diversity (in many forms) is represented in a way that is reflective and respectful of the unique melting pot that is New York City? — Hannah

One of the many reasons we love living and working in New York is people are not in their bubble of car-office-home. You run into many kinds of people and, again, that’s where we think comedy comes from, when different kinds of people are butting heads. How conscious are we about it? Only in that we want this to look like New York and, in part, this is a show about people who are on the margins — the disenfranchised, the striving, the liminal. And that’s a diverse bunch of people. Now, when you’re at Jacqueline’s gala, it should be striking that the background does not look like New York. You should be aware of that, and that’s intentional.

How early in the development of the show did you bring in Ellie Kemper?

We built this premise around her. Physically she’s very funny, and she communicates strength and at the same time she’s got this great Midwestern open face. She plays these two paradoxical things on camera: strength and naïveté. So we played around with a variety of ways to exploit that. It called for [a character] who hasn’t experienced the typical path through our information-saturated age. We ended up in an extreme place, but that extreme place fed into many things that interest us in terms of the way women are treated, and the way the media treats these kinds of stories. There’s no show without Ellie’s ability to pull off that dichotomy of someone who is tempered steel on one hand, and kind of open and sometimes clueless about the world on the other.

Were there other scenarios you considered?

We talked about a woman coming out of a coma. We talked about prison at one point, but “Orange Is the New Black” has that. We talked about a nunnery. We ended up in a dark place, but we really like how that dark stuff kind of underlines a lot of things in the show.


