


The Islanders and their fans waited more than two decades for a night like Sunday. The team had not had a chance to clinch a playoff series at home since 1993, when its current captain, John Tavares, was 2 years old. That also was the last time the Islanders won a playoff series.

It appeared, after more than 59 minutes of regulation time against the Florida Panthers at Barclays Center, that nothing would change and that there would be a Game 7 on Tuesday in Florida.

But with goaltender Thomas Greiss pulled for an extra skater, Tavares somehow found a loose puck in the crease and slid it past Panthers goaltender Roberto Luongo at 19 minutes 6 seconds of the third period to force overtime.

And for the second consecutive game, the teams battled into double overtime — and Tavares scored again, at 10:41 of the second extra period, to lift the Islanders to a 2-1 victory and into the second round. It was Tavares’s fifth goal of the series, which the Islanders clinched, four games to two. They will next face the Tampa Bay Lightning.

“Our fans were dying for this,” said Tavares, who was the first overall pick by the Islanders in the 2009 draft. “They deserve it.”

The uproarious celebration inspired by their third overtime win of the series, which was also the longest home game in franchise history, gave the Islanders a signature moment in their first year in Brooklyn after 43 years on Long Island.

“It’s been a long road, a lot of years of losing, but this is incredible,” said Frans Nielsen, 32, the longest-tenured Islander, who first skated for the team during the 2006-7 season. “We had to work so hard for it. It is really satisfying sitting here right now, the way we did it.”

Jonathan Huberdeau had given the Panthers a 1-0 lead at 18:58 of the first — an advantage that seemed destined to stand, as Luongo continued to frustrate the Islanders.

Coming off a double-overtime road win in Game 5 on a goal by the rookie Alan Quine in the second-longest game in franchise history, the Islanders were poised to advance but knew they would need a solid effort to oust the Panthers, who finished first in the Atlantic Division this season.

As the game began, the capacity crowd gave the Islanders the customary thunderous welcome and waved rally towels.

Late in the tight first period, Huberdeau fired a wrist shot while falling past Greiss, the fifth time in six games that the Panthers scored first.

The Islanders had a power play in the first after Jaromir Jagr was whistled for hooking, but they were not able to generate pressure on Luongo. Jagr, 44, was playing in his 208th career playoff game, tying him with Wayne Gretzky.

Jagr won the Stanley Cup with the Penguins in each of his first two seasons in Pittsburgh and played in the seven-game series they lost to the underdog Islanders in 1993. Somehow, all these years later, Jagr is part of Islanders history again. 

“It was close — I thought we had it with one minute left, and we were so close to scoring the empty-netter,” said Jagr, the third-leading scorer in league history, who had two assists in this series. “I thought we had it in the bank and it’s going to be Game 7.”

In the second, the Panthers made Greiss work, and they carried the play. A power-play opportunity emerged for the Panthers midway through the second period when the Islanders’ Nikolay Kulemin was called for hooking. The man advantage had the crowd chanting, “Defense.”

In the third, the back-and-forth play continued, and when Tavares finally netted his fourth goal of the series to tie the game, 1-1, the crowd erupted.

The Islanders carried the play in the first overtime period, outshooting the Panthers, 15-8. The Islanders had a 51-42 advantage in shots over all.

The Islanders had not won a series since the second round in 1993 against Pittsburgh, when David Volek scored in overtime to upset Jagr and the Penguins, the defending champions.

The Islanders were trying to close out a postseason series at home for the first time since the opening round, also in 1993, when they outlasted the Washington Capitals and won Game 6 at Nassau Coliseum.

The Islanders had forged the long-awaited opportunity for another home clincher with overtime wins in Games 3 and 5 and a 5-4 road victory in the opener.

Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said after the double-overtime Game 5 victory in Florida on Friday that his team would have to play on home ice to advance. The coach reiterated that stance earlier on Sunday after his team’s morning skate.

“We expect Florida to play their best game of the series,” Capuano said before the game. “Our guys understand that and realize that. It’s about desire and desperation.”

Capuano became only the third coach in Islanders history to win a playoff series. The Hall of Famer Al Arbour won 29 series — including four Stanley Cups, from 1980 to 1983 — while Terry Simpson recorded a win in 1987.

Capuano’s hard-working squad ultimately proved its coach correct and will now face a second playoff opponent for first time in the careers of Tavares and Nielsen, as well as those of the longtime Islanders Kyle Okposo and Travis Hamonic.

“It was excitement, joy, happy the game was over,” Hamonic said of the feeling of winning a playoff series in overtime at home. “You see someone like Johnny put it in, it’s fitting.”

SLAP SHOTS

Panthers center Nick Bjugstad was scratched after being injured when he was checked headfirst into the boards in Game 5 on Friday. ... The Islanders played with the same lineup as Game 5, using the veteran forward Steve Bernier over Ryan Strome and defenseman Marek Zidlicky in place of the injured rookie Ryan Pulock.


