


In the week since he received a six-month jail sentence for committing sexual assault, the former Stanford University student Brock Turner has become a symbol of the rapist who got off easy. But other aspects of the case suggest a different interpretation, signaling that the cultural and legal responses to rape are shifting, in the direction that victims and their supporters have long fought for. Turner’s light sentence means that the reform they advocate is incomplete. But his conviction, the punishment he received from Stanford and the public outcry over his sentence all suggest that men who act like Turner have far more reason to think they’ll pay a price than they once had.

One day in January 2015, at around 1 a.m., two male Stanford graduate students from Sweden who were riding bicycles spotted Turner, then a 19-year-old freshman, on top of a woman behind a Dumpster outside the Kappa Alpha fraternity house on campus. The graduate students could see that the woman wasn’t moving. When they got off their bikes to intervene, Turner tried to run away. They stopped him and called the police. The victim, a college graduate who was 22, was “completely unresponsive,” according to the authorities. She was taken to the hospital, where she woke up about three hours later.

Earlier in the evening, she’d gone to a party at the fraternity with her sister. Turner was also there, and they each had several drinks. The victim’s blood-alcohol level was about three times the legal limit when it was tested. At some point during the party, she blacked out, and in the hour or so before she was assaulted, she made incoherent calls to her boyfriend and her sister (who’d left the party), which she couldn’t remember afterward. She also couldn’t remember what happened between her and Turner. His blood-alcohol level was twice the legal limit, and he told the police that though he was drunk, he could “remember everything,” according to the police report, and that he’d “consciously decided to engage in the sexual activity with the victim,” digitally penetrating her and then thrusting against her with his pants on. He also said she “seemed to enjoy” it — a characterization the victim said she found unforgivable, in a statement she read aloud at Turner’s sentencing hearing.

Nonetheless, the case could have ended with Turner’s assertions of the woman’s consent. “Many campus officials — police and prosecutors, too — wouldn’t get past a woman saying ‘I don’t remember,’ ” says Deborah Tuerkheimer, a law professor at Northwestern who teaches and writes about rape law. Turner was a star swimmer. The victim had been drinking. He might have been believed. She might have been dismissed or blamed.

And yet at every stage of this case, until the sentencing, it was Turner’s account that was discredited. Certain facts help explain why. The victim’s vagina was lacerated and had dirt in it, a nurse told her. The graduate students who appeared on the scene could testify to her inability to respond at the moment of the assault. One of them cried while he recounted the incident to the police, saying “it was a very disturbing event” to witness. The victim wasn’t verbally protesting or physically struggling, but the graduate students knew something was terribly wrong because she wasn’t moving. The prosecutors and the jury saw it the same way when they charged and convicted Turner. Less than two weeks after the incident, he withdrew from Stanford and was banned from the campus — “effectively an expulsion,” according to Lisa Lapin, a university spokeswoman.

All of that marks significant progress, in Tuerkheimer’s view. She has researched cases in which women have received no justice after reporting that they couldn’t consent to sex because they were incapacitated by drinking. Such outcomes reflect a reluctance to hold men accountable when they might have thought, however wrongly, that consent was implied. Blackouts can be especially confounding for courts and campus officials, because people can keep walking and talking even as their memory shuts down. The writer Sarah Hepola, author of “Blackout: Remembering the Things I Drank to Forget,” calls this state “spooky, alcohol-induced amnesia.” She is careful to say that a person who is unconscious has passed the point of being able to consent to sex, but looking back at her own experience of blackouts, she thinks that for her, “the difference between incapacitated sex and intoxicated sex looked more like a giant question mark.”

When a man accused of assault has also been drinking, the courts at times have considered his intoxication a reason to excuse his belief that sex was consensual. At Turner’s trial, the jurors were instructed to convict if the defendant knew or reasonably should have known that the victim was too intoxicated to give consent. That’s the usual standard. But should the drunkenness of a sexual aggressor factor into evaluating his state of mind? The American Law Institute is currently re-examining the sexual-assault provisions of the Model Penal Code for the first time since 1962. The general rule in criminal law is that recklessness resulting from intoxication does not lessen culpability, but the A.L.I. is considering making an exception to that rule, specifically for rape law. A preliminary proposal acknowledges that this would create a legal “anomaly,” giving the hypothetical example of a college student at a frat party who drinks two beers and a shot of whiskey. “Is it sensible to assume,” the proposal asks, that “he is aware of a substantial risk that he will commit rape?” At Turner’s sentencing hearing, Judge Aaron Persky said a defendant who is intoxicated has “less moral culpability,” according to The Guardian.

Yet the outraged reaction to Turner’s light sentence — he faced up to 14 years in prison — suggests that it has become increasingly unacceptable to excuse sexual aggression because of drinking. “ ‘We were both totally out of it’ is just not a defense,” Kathleen A. Bogle, a sociology and criminal-justice professor at LaSalle University, and Anne M. Coughlin, a law professor at the University of Virginia, argued in Slate two years ago. “It would be unthinkable — wouldn’t it? — to acquit killers, kidnappers or thieves for this reason.” More than 750,000 people have signed a petition to recall Judge Persky, who has also been criticized for expressing concern that a longer sentence for Turner would have had a “severe impact” on his future.

The victim’s own words made all the difference in the public response. The searing statement she read in court, posted on Buzzfeed, described her mounting horror as she realized first what had happened to her, and then how hard it could be to hold Turner accountable. “Worst of all, I was warned, because he now knows you don’t remember, he is going to get to write the script,” she said. “I had no power, I had no voice, I was defenseless.” She has found her voice and taken back any power she lost. It’s Turner who is the target of a giant wave of internet shaming. (The anger extends to his father, who wrote a letter to the judge in which he called the verdict “a steep price to pay for 20 minutes of action out of his 20 plus years of life.”) In his own letter before the sentencing, Turner expressed remorse, but he’ll be remembered for blaming campus drinking culture and “sexual promiscuity” for his actions rather than simply taking responsibility for them.

Turner’s punishment also includes registering for life as a sex offender. “That doesn’t expire,” the victim said in court. “Just like what he did to me doesn’t expire, doesn’t go away after a set number of years. It stays with me, it’s part of my identity.” The crime is part of Turner’s identity too. In previous generations, a man might well have succeeded in shrugging off this kind of behavior. It might never have been defined as a crime in the first place. But Turner is bearing the weight of the new opprobrium that sexual assault, in forms that used to go largely unrecognized, now brings.


