


Republican candidates have a model to emulate as they struggle with growing concerns that Donald J. Trump could drag down their party in November: the late Muhammad Ali and his famous “rope-a-dope.”

Ali, who died on June 3 and was laid to rest last week, perfected this technique in his 1974 “Rumble in the Jungle” bout against George Foreman: He’d lean back against the ropes, absorbing the punches coming at him and allowing his opponent to exhaust himself.

More and more Republicans are leaning away to avoid Mr. Trump, after controversies such as his racially tinged charge that the judge overseeing a fraud case against Trump University is biased because his parents were from Mexico. A few, including Senator Mark Kirk of Illinois, Gov. Charlie Baker of Massachusetts and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, flatly declare that they won’t vote for him. Others are waiting to see whether there will be more rants.

For Republicans from solidly conservative regions, the Deep South and some Western states, there’s no price to pay for supporting the ticket, however they view the nominee.

That’s not the case for Republicans from blue, or Democratic-centric, places. “The safest course for them is to denounce Trump, say they are completely opposed and won’t support him,” says Whit Ayres, a prominent Republican pollster. That’s the case with Mr. Kirk, who faces an uphill re-election battle.

It’s more complicated for those in purple, or swing, states and districts, where a winning coalition would include Trump champions and more independent-minded voters turned off by him. “Their best strategy is to localize the race and say it has nothing to do with the presidential race,” Mr. Ayres says. This is the real political rope-a-dope. Yet few politicians are as skillful as Ali.

Take Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, where Mr. Trump scored a huge victory in the February primary but where the general election features more centrist, independent voters. She said she would support Mr. Trump but not endorse him. Last week, she rejected his comments about the judge and demanded that he apologize. Mr. Trump tends not to do apologies.

Other challenged incumbent senators, such as Rob Portman of Ohio or Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania, offer lukewarm support along with criticism, or they simply try to keep a distance. A few of their colleagues, such as Richard Burr of North Carolina or Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, who earlier were joined at the hip with Mr. Trump, seem to be backing away.

Probably no one is more torn than Senator John McCain, whose unassailable record of heroism as a prisoner of war was mocked by Mr. Trump, and who has a solid pro-immigration record. But he’s in a tight re-election fight and can’t afford to alienate the Trump brigade in Arizona.

And House Republicans now worry about what had been considered impossible only a month ago: a loss of 30 seats and the party’s control of the body. There are two distinctly different types of districts where they fear incumbents could get swamped by an anti-Trump tsunami.

One is upscale: politically moderate suburbs outside Philadelphia, Denver, Minneapolis-St. Paul, Chicago or Washington. President Obama carried most of these districts, where the political profile is hostile to Mr. Trump. The other is a collection of heavily Hispanic districts, including several in California’s Central Valley and one in the Florida Keys. These are represented by Republicans who support Hispanic interests, but these lawmakers could go down if Mr. Trump’s rhetoric generates a huge turnout of Hispanic voters.

To be sure, there are places where Mr. Trump might help, including a few New York districts and the Iron Range in northern Minnesota, an economically distressed old mining district with a Democratic incumbent.

Perhaps Mr. Trump will change and become a more disciplined candidate. If not, and his polls slip, scores of additional Republican candidates will be tempted to stop leaning away and just jump out of the ring.


