


The American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio sent a letter to the City of Cleveland on Thursday, threatening legal action if it did not begin acting on applications for permits to assemble and hold marches and rallies during the Republican National Convention.

The convention is scheduled for July 18-21 in Cleveland. Organizers began applying for parade permits in February, the A.C.L.U. letter said, but have either received no response from the city or were told by city officials that no decisions on the permits would be made until about two weeks before the convention.

The A.C.L.U.’s letter said that such delays would interfere with the applicants’ First Amendment rights. It was written on behalf of Organize Ohio, a group that has joined nearly 30 others to plan an antipoverty march during the convention; Citizens for Trump, which supports the presumptive Republican nominee; and John Penley, an antiwar activist from New York.

“Nominating conventions are important for individuals and organizations to assemble and express their points of view on issues they care about — in other words, to engage in quintessential, protected First Amendment activity,” said the letter, which was signed by Freda J. Levenson, the legal director for the A.C.L.U. of Ohio, and Norman Siegel, a prominent civil rights lawyer from New York. “The city’s decision to delay the granting or denial of permit applications for another seven weeks threatens to stymie” the groups’ right to free speech, the suit added.

In a phone conversation, Ms. Levenson said that city officials had said during meetings that they needed to set up security plans with the Secret Service before making permit decisions. She added that Philadelphia, where the Democratic National Convention will be held on July 25-28, had begun issuing permits.

Dan Williams, a spokesman for Cleveland, said Thursday that officials had not yet received the A.C.L.U.’s letter, adding that the city’s policy was not to comment on pending litigation. He added that there was “a process in place” to handle permit applications but could not yet say when the city would begin issuing decisions.

The letter from the A.C.L.U. said that delays in addressing permit applications also denied organizers the ability to challenge the city’s decisions in court, a measure that protesters have resorted to previously.

Antiwar organizers sued New York City in federal court in 2004, saying that officials had violated their free speech rights by denying permits to hold a rally in Central Park just before the Republican National Convention. A judge declined to rule for the organizers but urged the city to negotiate with them.

In 2008, protesters sued St. Paul, where the Republican convention was held, for not approving a march route and adopting special guidelines governing permit applications. A federal judge declared the guidelines for the event “null and void,” but rejected a request by protesters that the city be compelled to approve a particular route, writing “the court expects the parties to work together” to plan the march.


