


BOSTON — A former admissions officer at Phillips Exeter Academy, a prestigious boarding school in New Hampshire, turned himself in to the Exeter police on Friday in connection with sexual assault charges stemming from the 1970s.

Arthur Peekel, 74, who now lives in Palatine, Ill., was an admissions officer at Exeter from 1967 to 1974. The police said that between November and December 1973, he assaulted a prospective student at the school.

It was the latest charge to emerge as a raft of private, independent schools across New England confront past allegations of sexual misconduct. In most of those cases, the statute of limitations ran out long ago, and few people have been charged.

But Mr. Peekel left New Hampshire shortly after the reported encounters, which essentially stopped the clock on the statute of limitations, Chief William Shupe of the Exeter police said.

As a result, the charges against Mr. Peekel constitute the first set of criminal charges to be brought against a teacher or administrator at Exeter.

Mr. Peekel did not return calls on Friday seeking comment.

Had Mr. Peekel stayed in New Hampshire, the statute of limitations would have expired in the late 1990s, 22 years after the 18th birthday of the accuser, Lawrence Jenkens. Mr. Jenkens, 56, is the head of the art department at the University of North Carolina in Greensboro. He told his story publicly in late March on Facebook after Exeter announced that Rick Schubart, a longtime Exeter teacher, had admitted to earlier instances of sexual misconduct.

This prompted several alumni to report numerous other episodes involving other staff members and students.

“I wanted to add my voice to the stories of victims who were coming forward,” Mr. Jenkens said in an interview on Friday.

He was 14 when he visited the Exeter campus in 1973 as a prospective student, Mr. Jenkens said, and Mr. Peekel insisted he sleep in his room. During the night, Mr. Jenkens said, Mr. Peekel reached under the covers and fondled him. He said Mr. Peekel also used the boy’s hand to stimulate himself.

The next day, Mr. Jenkens said, he told his mother what had occurred, and his uncle then met with several teachers and administrators. The police were not informed at the time. The Boston Globe has reported that school officials confronted Mr. Peekel in 1973 with the accusations, which he denied.

He took a leave of absence and resigned in 1974 from Exeter, saying he had to care for his mother in Illinois. He continued to teach and in 1991-92 was named Illinois Teacher of the Year.

He was arrested and charged Friday with two counts of sexual assault and released on $25,000 bail. Arraignment is set for July 5.

Each charge carries a prison term of up to one year and a fine of up to $2,000 or both.

In a statement, the school said it would refrain from commenting on Mr. Peekel’s case because it did not want to jeopardize it.

But it added, “We are in open and active discussion with our community about how to come to terms with this disturbing part of our past and address the needs of those who have been harmed.”


