


In her first ad of the general election campaign, Hillary Clinton will use Donald J. Trump’s words to portray him as a violently divisive candidate who is intolerant of the diverse fabric of the American electorate.

“Today, we face a choice about who we are as a nation,” Mrs. Clinton says in the ad, called “Who We Are” and scheduled to air in battleground states on Thursday. Footage then appears of Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, responding to a protester by saying, “I’d like to punch him in the face.”

Mrs. Clinton continues, “Do we help each other?” Mr. Trump appears again, telling a crowd: “Knock the crap out of them, would you? Seriously.”

In another sequence, Mr. Trump is shown mocking a reporter with a disability before Mrs. Clinton is seen strolling through a factory, meeting workers and talking to schoolchildren. “What kind of America do we want to be?” Mrs. Clinton says. “Dangerously divided, or strong and united? I believe we are always stronger together.”

The ad’s overarching theme echoes a new slogan, “Stronger Together,” that the Clinton campaign will emphasize this week, beginning with a speech Mrs. Clinton plans to deliver in Cleveland on Monday in which she will accuse Mr. Trump of racism and call for the country — including Republicans turned off by their party’s nominee — to get behind her candidacy.

The ad also speaks to the liberal supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders, Mrs. Clinton’s top Democratic rival until she secured enough delegates for the Democratic nomination.

“It’s time to unite behind some simple, common goals — to build a strong economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top,” she says.

Mrs. Clinton already has a significant advantage over Mr. Trump in broadcast advertising thanks to the support of Priorities USA Action, the main “super PAC” supporting her candidacy.

Priorities USA ads have been on the air since mid-May and are now running in eight states deemed essential in the general election: Ohio, Florida, Virginia, Colorado, Nevada, New Hampshire, Iowa and North Carolina.

A spokesman for the Clinton campaign declined to say where the “Who We Are” ad would run.

Since capturing enough delegates to become the presumptive Republican nominee, Mr. Trump has not aired a broadcast ad, preferring to continue his campaign through large rallies that are often broadcast live, giving him free media exposure.

Mrs. Clinton’s first broadcast ad of the general election demonstrates a change from the main themes of her primary ads. Her campaign’s most used ad during the primary against Mr. Sanders asserted her readiness for the presidency, and she often ran ads highlighting her support in and connection to minority communities.

But the campaign also ran ads about unity; in one, titled “Love and Kindness,” original music by Andra Day enhanced a message of harmony.

Having Mrs. Clinton narrate an ad, rather than hiring a narrator or using clips from her speeches, is also a departure from the primary campaign, although it is not a total surprise. A first ad in a general election is often meant to reintroduce a candidate to the electorate, even one as well known as Mrs. Clinton.

The Clinton campaign has shown a willingness to advertise on television frequently, spending nearly $50 million in broadcast advertising during the primary campaign.


