


WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton and her advisers have offered a series of explanations over the last year for her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state, a decision that she said again on Thursday had been “a mistake.”

She did not want the inconvenience of carrying two phones, Mrs. Clinton said initially. She did not want a government account that might pull in nonwork matters, she said later. Or perhaps, an adviser has said, she simply did not want Republican lawmakers rifling through her personal emails.

Yet another explanation emerged Thursday: She was not comfortable with using a computer to read email.

Lewis A. Lukens, a former State Department administrative official, said in a sworn deposition last week that after Mrs. Clinton became secretary of state in 2009, he had proposed accommodating her by setting up a desktop computer in her office that would not be connected to the department’s system. That would have allowed her to send and receive email on a personal account, Mr. Lukens said in the deposition, which he gave as part of a lawsuit brought by Judicial Watch, a conservative legal advocacy group. The group released a transcript of the deposition on Thursday.

But that idea was abandoned, Mr. Lukens testified, after an aide to the secretary told him that Mrs. Clinton was “very comfortable checking her emails on a BlackBerry, but she’s not adept or not used to checking her emails on a desktop.”

His explanation will not be the last word. Nor will a highly critical report that came out Wednesday from the State Department’s inspector general, which challenged many of the explanations Mrs. Clinton and her supporters have offered over the past year.

While the report said that Mrs. Clinton had never been authorized to set up a private email server and that her decision to use one had compromised security at the department she ran, it left a number of questions unanswered. One was why she had decided to use her own server, and ultimately risk damage to her political career, in the first place.

And it raised new questions, including why Mrs. Clinton had declined to speak with the investigators who prepared the report.

Asked about that decision in an interview with ABC News on Thursday, Mrs. Clinton said only that she had already testified for 11 hours before the select House committee investigating the attacks in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012, and that she had offered repeatedly to speak with the F.B.I.

“I have talked about this for many, many months,” she said.

She sounded exasperated by her inability to move past the controversy and defended her actions as common practice at the State Department, even as she again acknowledged that the private server had been a mistake.

“As I’ve said many times, if I could go back, I would do it differently,” she said. “I know people have concerns about this. I understand that, but I think voters are going to be looking at the full picture of what I have to offer, my life and my service.”

Mrs. Clinton said once again that the arrangement had been “allowed” at the time, though the inspector general’s report said that she had not sought permission and that it would not have been granted because of security concerns.

She also said that her use of a nonofficial email address had been “widely known,” though the report said the extent of her use had not been known beyond a small number of officials who were privy to her private accounts.

At the State Department on Thursday, a spokesman, Mark C. Toner, faced repeated questions about why the department had not done more to ensure that Mrs. Clinton’s email arrangement complied with department rules and federal laws. “There was only a partial understanding of how much Secretary Clinton relied on personal email, and we just did not have a complete picture,” he said.

According to the inspector general’s report, two records information officials in the department raised concerns as early as 2010 that emails sent and received on Mrs. Clinton’s server might contain information that should be preserved under federal law.

Their superior told them that the arrangement had been reviewed and approved, though the inspector general found “no evidence” that this had happened. The supervisor told them their job was to support the secretary and “instructed the staff never to speak of the secretary’s personal email system again.”

The report did not name the supervisor, but several people with knowledge of the episode identified him as John Bentel, the former director of information resource management in the State Department’s Executive Secretariat office. Randall J. Turk, a lawyer for Mr. Bentel, declined to comment Thursday.

Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, mentioned Mr. Bentel’s role in remarks Thursday on the Senate floor, and complained that Mr. Bentel had refused a request to speak with the committee.

“Good and honest employees just trying to do their job were told to shut up and sit down,” Mr. Grassley said. “Concerns about the secretary’s email system being out of compliance with federal record-keeping laws were swept under the rug.”

He also said Mr. Bentel had warned Mrs. Clinton that any emails that passed through the State Department’s systems would be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.

For Mrs. Clinton, the biggest obstacle to getting past the email controversy is the F.B.I., which has not yet completed its criminal investigation to determine whether any laws were broken in the handling of classified material or other matters relating to the emails. Mrs. Clinton is expected to be interviewed as part of the investigation, but it is not clear when that will happen.

The investigation could drag past the Democratic National Convention this summer and what is expected to be the kickoff to Mrs. Clinton’s general-election campaign against Donald J. Trump. In the meantime, depositions will continue in the Judicial Watch suit. Cheryl D. Mills, a longtime confidante of Mrs. Clinton who was her counselor at the State Department, is scheduled to testify on Friday, and at least a half-dozen other former officials are scheduled to follow.


