


The power struggle continues between Kesha and her longtime producer, Dr. Luke.

On Tuesday, Kesha, the 29-year-old pop singer, said that despite earlier approval, she had been barred by her record label from performing at this weekend’s Billboard Music Awards amid her contract dispute with Dr. Luke, who she claims in a lawsuit sexually and emotionally abused her for years while she was signed to his companies. (Dr. Luke denies the allegations and has sued Kesha for defamation and breach of contract.)

Now, just days before the awards show, which will air on ABC on Sunday, Dr. Luke’s Kemosabe Records has once again granted its permission on the condition that Kesha not mention the lawsuits at the event.

“Kesha’s performance on the Billboard Music Awards was always approved, in good faith,” the label said in a statement. “Approval was only suspended when Kemosabe learned Kesha was to use the performance as a platform to discuss the litigation. Now that Kemosabe has obtained assurances, that it is relying upon, from Kesha, her representatives and Dick Clark Productions that neither Kesha nor her supporters will use the performance as such a platform, the approval has been restored.”

Dick Clark Productions, which is overseeing the show, said in a statement on Thursday, “We are pleased that Kesha and Kemosabe Records have reached an agreement and very much look forward to having Kesha perform.”

After her appearance was initially cut, Kesha said that she had planned to sing a cover of Bob Dylan’s “It Ain’t Me, Babe” without reference to Dr. Luke. “I was never going to use a picture of him, speak of him or allude to my legal situation in any way,” she wrote on Instagram. The performance was to be introduced by the writer and actress Lena Dunham, said a spokeswoman for Ms. Dunham.

A representative for Kesha added that she had assured Dr. Luke in writing on Monday that she would not use the show to address the producer or her legal situation. (Kesha’s performance was subject to approval by Kemosabe because the broadcasts of her live performances fall under her contracts with Dr. Luke.)

On Wednesday night in Los Angeles, Kesha appeared as a surprise guest at a concert by Ben Folds, who had been scheduled to accompany her onstage at the Billboard Awards, for a performance of “It Ain’t Me, Babe.” Last month, Kesha released her first song since 2013 with approval from Dr. Luke and Kemosabe.

At the same time, dueling lawsuits between the two parties are continuing in New York — where Kesha’s counterclaims were rejected in April — and in California, where her legal team is now trying to revive its suit.


