


In the years after the Sept. 11 attack, as redevelopment officials bickered about and dithered over the future of the World Trade Center site in Lower Manhattan, thousands of pilgrims came to ground zero from all over the world. They found — nothing.

No memorial. No commemoration. No exhibition. Little signage and less interpretation. Just impenetrable construction barriers, crowded sidewalks, hawkers selling lurid photo books and Harry John Roland, a self-appointed guide whose cry was: “History, don’t let it be a mystery!”

The 9/11 Tribute Center stepped into this void. The private, nonprofit, ad hoc center was founded in part by Lee Ielpi, a retired firefighter whose son, Jonathan Lee Ielpi, also a firefighter, was killed in the attack.

The center opened in 2006 on a shoestring budget in a former delicatessen at 120 Liberty Street, opposite ground zero. George E. Pataki, who was then the governor of New York, said the 9/11 Tribute Center would offer an “interim destination” until the real museum opened.

Here it is, two years after the National September 11 Memorial Museum opened. Not only is the tribute center still around, it is also to move into a new space nearby, at 88 Greenwich Street, where it will occupy 35,000 square feet, almost three times as much as it has now. The lease runs 36 years.

The announcement is to be made on Tuesday. The new center is to open next spring.

“The memorial museum has done a spectacular job capturing the essence of that day,” Jennifer Adams-Webb, the other co-founder of the Tribute Center, said last week. “Our mission has evolved into long-term recovery and resilience.”

One-third of the exhibition area will cover the events of Sept. 11 and the immediate aftermath. (Jonathan Ielpi’s turnout coat and helmet are part of this section.) The next third will deal with how survivors dealt with their loss and trauma through philanthropic and voluntary work. And the final third will invite visitors to consider how they might be of service to their own communities.

“We can’t change the past,” Mr. Ielpi said. “I can’t bring my son back. But we can certainly change the future.’”

As important as the space is, the Tribute Center will also continue to organize tours of the Sept. 11 memorial. Its 812 volunteer guides are related to victims of the attack; or they responded to the attack as firefighters, police officers or other emergency workers; or survived the attack themselves; or helped with the cleanup and recovery of the trade center site; or lived downtown at the time.

“Our volunteers not only share their experience of that day,” Ms. Adams-Webb said, “but how they’ve grown from that and where they’ve come to today — how it’s shaped their lives.”

The annual number of visitors to the center peaked in 2011 at 550,000, Ms. Adams-Webb said. Last year, it was 400,000. Paradoxically, tourism in the neighborhood is greater than ever. But the tight confines of the center’s current space prevent it from accommodating large tour buses, she added. That is one reason — besides the expiration of the lease at 120 Liberty Street — it is moving.

Ms. Adams-Webb estimated the total cost of the new center at $7 million. She said Thor Equities, the owner of 88 Greenwich Street, was building the unfinished space at its own expense.

The center still needs to raise about $4 million, she said, most of which would cover the exhibition, which is being designed by the Lee H. Skolnick Architecture and Design Partnership.


