


Good morning. Passover starts this evening for some of us, and you probably have a menu planned already. But in the event that you don’t or you’re looking for sweets to bring to a Seder, take a look at our extensive collection of Passover recipes for inspiration. Matzo toffee with candied ginger? We could knock that out before sunset for sure. See what you think. Prince is our soundtrack, of course: “Breakfast Can Wait.”

As for gentiles, you know what could be a nice thing to make this weekend? Grilled pizza. The cooking works as well on a gas grill as on a charcoal one, which is to say pretty well, and if the results are more flatbread-y than with traditional oven-baked pies, they come with a delightful char on them and, in the case of a charcoal fire, a delicious smokiness that heralds the coming long summer of cooking outside.

Martha Rose Shulman waded into the subject of grilling pizza a few years ago for The Times. She has a recipe for one with cherry tomatoes, mozzarella and arugula. Another for grilled red onions and feta. A third for grilled eggplant, also with cherry tomatoes. Those are all great.

Me, I tweaked our classic recipe for the pizza dough made at Roberta’s pizzeria in Brooklyn, replacing half of the all-purpose flour with whole wheat so that the dough would have a little more structure. When it was ready, I formed a pie, grilled one side, flipped the dough and topped it with a scant handful of shredded mozzarella, some dots of ricotta and a healthy shower of grated Parmesan. To finish it, I topped the grill, let it all get a little melty, and removed the pie to a cutting board. Put a few handfuls of fresh arugula dressed in olive oil and lemon juice on top of that? Two or three of those make a nice family meal.

Another good thing to cook this weekend: asparagus. (Here’s how to cook it well.) We may make Amanda Hesser’s recipe for asparagus alla fontina. Or Mark Bittman’s recipe for asparagus in miso butter. Did you run into some white asparagus? Try Elaine Sciolino’s recipe for white asparagus with a cashew cream sauce, an adaptation of one the French chef Akrame Benallal served at his Restaurant Akrame in Paris.

Also (always): chicken. We may keep at the grill and make a big platter of barbecued chicken thighs. Or make Mark’s recipe for chicken negimaki. We could stay inside and make Melissa Clark’s recipe for salt-and-pepper roast chicken. It’s never a bad idea, on the weekend, to make chicken-liver pâté, especially if you accompany it with bacon-onion jam.

You can find other recipes to cook this weekend on Cooking. Save the ones you’re interested in to your recipe box and then, when you’re done, tell us what you think by affixing a rating or a note to the recipe. And if you run into problems, do let us know. We’re standing by at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

Finally, we close today with wise words from Jacques Pépin, who was on PBS recently to declaim a truth about recipes, which is that it is far more important to understand what it is the instructions are telling you than to follow the recipe exactly. Of course you should follow a recipe closely the first time you make it. After that, however, let experience rather than fealty be your guide. Make each recipe your own. Have a great weekend.


