


The director Julie Taymor was on a quiet rooftop in Shanghai late one recent Saturday night, talking on the phone. She was in China with “The Lion King,” but the topic of conversation was “The Taming of the Shrew.”

It’s a play she relishes, partly because she sees it as being about a profound love and partly because Shakespeare put at its center not the alluring Bianca, a young woman with a queue of eager suitors, but Bianca’s older sister, Kate, who is prickly and brilliant, and whom no man will have.

“He actually wrote a play about the unmarriageable, or the undesirable,” said Ms. Taymor, who played Kate at Oberlin College in the early 1970s and directed the play in 1988 at Theater for a New Audience. “It’s not about the beautiful princess or the lovely daughter. And I think that’s astounding.”

This is what good directors do, isn’t it — persuade you to consider a work in a way you hadn’t before? I’d need more convincing to buy the bit about true love between Kate and her Petruchio, but the undesirability argument is intriguing.

My own position is this, though: I have always hated “The Taming of the Shrew.”

Of all of Shakespeare’s plays, it’s the only one that upsets me just to think about, and I’ve been thinking about it a lot ever since I saw Phyllida Lloyd’s current all-female production, which continues through June 26 at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.

“Shrew” is supposed to be a comedy. The ending, which finds Kate docile at last, is meant to be winsome. But when she gives her final speech, reminding women of their duty to their husbands — to be pretty, grateful and, above all, obedient — it always makes me feel sick. It always makes me cry.

Whatever I’ve hoped walking into a theater, I inevitably despair of the play by the end of that speech, right at its most toxic line. Kate, newly wed to Petruchio, exhorts the other wives to “place your hands below your husband’s foot,” in submission.

I know: It’s not like I’m alone in my unease. Open your program at the Delacorte, and you’ll find a prominent note from the Public Theater’s artistic director, Oskar Eustis. Shakespeare in the Park has done “Shrew” in the past — Meryl Streep played Kate opposite Raul Julia as Petruchio in 1978, and Tracey Ullman teamed with Morgan Freeman in 1990 — but not on Mr. Eustis’s watch.

Until Ms. Lloyd talked him into it, he writes, “Shrew” was the only major Shakespeare play he’d never produced or directed — because he’d “never been able to get behind the central action of the play, which is, well, taming a woman.”

For her part, Ms. Lloyd said she’d declined “many, many times” to stage the play before finally agreeing to do it in 2003, at Shakespeare’s Globe in London, also with an all-female cast.

“A play that climaxes with an apparent happy ending in which a woman is offering to make herself a doormat for her husband — any well-educated woman in the 20th or 21st century should approach with great caution,” she said in an interview earlier this month. “Because you might be in grave danger of reaffirming a patriarchal society.”

Single-gender productions — like Ed Sylvanus Iskandar’s all-male “Shrew” in Washington right now, starring Maulik Pancholy as Kate — are one way directors have tried in recent years to deal with such trickiness. Back in 2003, when Mark Lamos directed “Shrew” at Yale Repertory Theater, I hoped in vain that the all-male cast would lessen the ending’s sting. Without straight-ahead naturalism, the gender dynamics of the play automatically translate differently. But only to a point.

Ms. Lloyd’s version, starring Cush Jumbo as Kate and Janet McTeer as Petruchio, begins by gleefully mocking Donald J. Trump and ends boisterously, with a defiant Joan Jett song. (Ms. Lloyd, who directed the all-female “Julius Caesar” and “Henry IV” seen at St. Ann’s Warehouse, also did “Mamma Mia!” on Broadway.) The production’s framing device — which posits female existence as one long, maddening beauty pageant — gives Ms. Lloyd, not Shakespeare, the last word.

Yet it left me profoundly sad, because the misogyny onstage, which Ms. Lloyd doesn’t wink at or try to mask the way so many directors do, didn’t feel like a relic of the late 16th century. It felt much more immediate than that.

This, I am beginning to believe, is part of the ugly brilliance of “Shrew.” Writing about the play in 1897, George Bernard Shaw admired its “realistic comedy.” With a nod to the sylvan romance “As You Like It,” he pronounced Petruchio, who pursues Kate out of lust for the cash that comes with her, “worth fifty Orlandos as a human study.”

Shaw had no trouble with Petruchio’s taming Kate “by the methods used in taming wild beasts.” But the play’s last scene, which he deemed both unrealistic and “altogether disgusting to modern sensibility,” ruined it for him.

“No man with any decency of feeling can sit it out in the company of a woman without feeling extremely ashamed,” for two reasons: the bet Petruchio makes against other husbands, each trying to prove he has the most obedient wife, and “the speech put into the woman’s own mouth.” By “the woman,” of course, Shaw meant Kate, and he is right that this feels like a violation.

The director Tina Packer, in her book “Women of Will,” calls “The Taming of the Shrew” “a nightmare, because the sexism is so completely accepted.” Still, she has directed it three times and produced it three more.

“I see it as a painful play, and I think there’s a hell of a lot of use in us doing it,” Ms. Packer said by phone from Shakespeare & Company, the theater she founded and ran for decades in Lenox, Mass. For her, as for Ms. Lloyd and Ms. Taymor, the enduring resonance of the play’s misogyny, whether Shakespeare endorsed it or simply depicted it, is an argument in favor of putting it on.

“It’s the way it is,” Ms. Taymor said. “So it’s good that we show it, and talk about it. A loudmouth woman with a strong opinion is still considered a shrew in our society.”

During rehearsals, Ms. Lloyd said, she did several online searches for Hillary Clinton and the word “shrew,” and got “thousands and thousands” of results.

“What you see in the play is that a man can get away with murder, and a woman has to tread very carefully in order not to become a social pariah,” she said, noting that the same rule applies among theater directors. “You know, men can be mad, bad and alcoholic and still be eminently employable, but you really do have to be quite well behaved as a female director.”

So there is, “unquestionably,” an emotional cost to working on the play, especially for the actor cast as Kate, Ms. Lloyd said. “The more appallingly Petruchio behaves, the more the audience seems to love him. And the more Kate rails, the more she gets crushed by the play.”

Ms. Packer, currently directing another so-called problem play, “The Merchant of Venice,” said there is always a toll to doing Shakespeare. Sounding jovial yet not quite joking, she referred to “Shrew” as “an emotionally wrecking play.”

“I don’t even know whether I’ll go and see the one in the park,” she said. “I might. I’ll see how my psyche’s doing.” She laughed a long laugh.

Here is the thing about theater, though. Each new production is a chance to reconsider. Even before I saw Ms. Lloyd’s “Shrew,” I knew I was hoping she would solve the play for me. Now I think it may be untamable, and that’s probably good.

Ms. Taymor — who sees Kate and Petruchio as in cahoots by the end, equals merely pretending the kind of dynamic that their society expects — considers “Shrew” fun. To her, Kate’s defiance makes it “an amazing play about a woman who has said, ‘I am not going to go with the flow.’” Ms. Taymor would like to direct it again, perhaps as a movie, with a theatrical production first.

And if she does? Maybe I’ll come around to seeing it her way, too.


