


The print was one of dozens of pieces on display on a long white wall in Queens last week, mounted among bright and cheery watercolors. From a distance, the 10-inch-square image looked like a patch of ice with a round area missing, drilled for fishing perhaps. A closer look revealed the ice to actually be shattered glass, the round hole left by a bullet.

It was a stately setting for a gritty image — a silent auction of works by Long Island City artists “that reflect the diversity and glorious breadth of talent in the L.I.C. community,” according to the program for the event, the LIC Arts Open.

The bullet-hole print on canvas was made from a photograph taken nearby by Rita Frazier Normandeau. “It’s beautiful,” Ms. Normandeau, 69, said on Thursday, admiring her work on the eve of the auction.

She would know. She and her husband of 47 years, Raymond Normandeau, 72, have been chronicling gunfire and photographing its aftermath as tenant activists in the Queensbridge Houses public-housing complex for more than 30 years. While other couples their age stroll through New York City’s parks in search of exotic birds, the Normandeaus are on the hunt, cameras in hand, for the countless hazards and annoyances of life in Queensbridge, from cracked and broken steps to dog feces to bloodstains and bullet holes.

“I think it helps point to a problem that people just don’t pay attention to,” Mr. Normandeau said. “People think gunshots are normal, and they shouldn’t be.”

Born in Canada, Mr. Normandeau moved to New York City in the 1960s and met his wife in a store in Brooklyn where she shopped and he worked demonstrating products. They married in 1969. She jokes that she tried to take him back to the store to return him — no luck.

Later, he worked as a carnival barker in Coney Island. “The two-headed baby from Puerto Rico!” he shouted last week from memory, “The 5-year-old mother from Peru!” She was an actor, appearing in bit parts in “Law & Order” and an episode of the comedian Dave Chappelle’s “Chappelle’s Show.”

They moved into the Queensbridge Houses in 1977, when the smell of baking bread at the Silvercup Bakery, now a film studio, still filled the neighborhood.

When crime spiked in the projects amid a citywide crack epidemic in the 1980s and 1990s, the Normandeaus produced the Queensbridge Enquirer, a one- to four-page free handout of journalism in a distinct shade of yellow. Short stories on each page might be serious (“John Gotti Linked to QB Contractor”) or informative (phone numbers of city agencies for whistle-blowers to call) or lyrical (“There were April showers in the housing projects. Showers of gunfire and stabbings.”).

The most popular edition, Mr. Normandeau recalled proudly, included the headline “Mother Eats Baby Alive,” about a crack addict who bit her child. “People were Xeroxing that and sending it to relatives,” he said.

The publication had a setback when the messenger who delivered freshly printed stacks to Queensbridge was robbed there and refused to come back.

The couple stopped printing the paper a few years ago. “With everyone with a smartphone in their ear, it’s harder to give out papers,” Mr. Normandeau said. But the spirit of the Enquirer lives on at their website, www.queensbridge.us.

Updated every couple of days, the website, crude in appearance by today’s standards — “junky,” was Mr. Normandeau’s word — invites readers to inform the Normandeaus about events: “Art show? Performance? Gunfight? Pit Bull Fight?”

Shootings are down in Queensbridge, according to Mr. Normandeau. “Haven’t heard one in two weeks, I think,” he said. When he hears gunfire, he said, he calls 911 and makes his rote report: “No description of perpetrator. Unknown if any injuries.” He writes a post on the website and if he can add a photo of a bullet hole, all the better. Some photos, like one described on the website as “Gunshots through windows at Queensbridge supermarket,” are for sale. Cost: $10. It is not a big seller.

In 2011, a friend in the housing complex asked Ms. Normandeau if she had heard the shots on a recent night, and showed her a shattered hallway window in her 12th Street building. Ms. Normandeau took out her point-and-shoot camera. She mounted the picture and gave it to the LIC Arts Open, whose auction was held on Friday. The image’s new setting, before a wine-sipping crowd more familiar with art galleries than with crime scenes, lent the picture cachet, and in return, brought a snapshot of realism to the proceedings.

The bullet-hole print, untitled, went for $100, the minimum opening bid, Mr. Normandeau said. He did not believe many people were in the market for such images. “If they wait long enough, a bullet may come through their window,” he said, “and they won’t have to buy a picture of one.”


