


Michael Cerveris has lived at the same address, a prewar co-op building in Chelsea, for 19 years. It’s a number that astonishes him, because during his first three years in New York he hung his hat in 13 different places. This, by the way, is not a just a convenient figure of speech; Mr. Cerveris routinely wears a hat.

“Like most kids coming out of college and coming to the city, I didn’t have much in the way of money or possessions, so I sublet and house-sat and stayed with friends,” said Mr. Cerveris, 55, who won a Tony last year for his portrayal of a closeted gay man in the musical “Fun Home.” A dedicated moonlighter, in February he released an album of original folk/Americana songs, “Piety,” and last month, the single “Pony Girl,” a fragment of which Mr. Cerveris sings to his onstage daughter in “Fun Home.”

Through the 1980s and most of the ’90s, work often took Mr. Cerveris out of town and out of the country. After playing the title role in the rock musical “Tommy” on Broadway, he went with the show to Germany for a year and a half. Then, when his contract was up, he bought a Eurail Pass and meandered around Eastern Europe.

Back in New York in 1997, he was poleaxed by the high rents. “I wasn’t sure what to do,” he said. “And then a friend told me I had enough money to make a down payment on an apartment. That was like the last month it was possible for regular people to buy an apartment in New York.”

Mr. Cerveris’s stints as a house-sitter and couch surfer nonpareil had taken him to the Lower East Side and Upper West Side, among other locales. Chelsea in the West 20s was an unfamiliar neighborhood when a real estate agent began showing him around, but he took to the area quickly. There were few skyscrapers and many mom-and-pop stores (alas, no longer the case), and the subways and the river were close at hand. “I really like being able to walk so quickly to the Hudson,” Mr. Cerveris said. “That sense of feeling the edge of the island helps make it feel not so claustrophobic.”

The one-bedroom apartment he settled on had some of the Old World charm he feared he had left behind in the Old World. “Coming back from Europe, I didn’t want the sort of apartment where you open the front door and you can see every room,” he said. “I liked that there was a little foyer and that you had to walk down a hallway to get to the bedroom.”

The very deep kitchen sink helped seal the deal. “It felt as from another era,” he said. “Probably every other apartment in the building had the sink removed long ago, but I love it.”

A nook for an office or overnight guests would have been welcome, but “for a Manhattan apartment, the rooms I’ve got are pretty large,” continued Mr. Cerveris, who shares those rooms with his energetic dog, Evangeline, family pictures and photographs of himself in costume shot by Amy Arbus. Particularly cherished is an evocative oil painting of a tree and a half-sunk rowboat by Rebecca Rebouché, an artist in New Orleans, where Mr. Cerveris, a frequent visitor to the city, bought a house three years ago. “I really connected with it,” he said of the painting. “There are the words ‘mud’ and ‘creek’ in the picture, and I grew up on a creek in West Virginia. And the boat is named Mercy. That’s kind of moving to me.”

Mr. Cerveris’s aesthetic is something of a work in progress. Initially, the apartment contained many items of furniture with a common thread: They were picked up off the street and they filled a void.

“But a few years ago, I decided that it looked too much like a college dorm room. I still had milk crates for storing things,” said Mr. Cerveris, who upgraded to a large shelving unit that he built himself.

“I thought it was time for me to be a bit more of an adult, so I bought some pieces of furniture that sort of matched some other pieces of furniture in the place. I think my philosophy of furniture is similar to my philosophy of musical instruments I own,” he continued, indicating a guitar, a violin and a dulcimer hanging just inside the entrance to the living room. “I like pieces that have a history and life in them that preceded me. I don’t buy a lot of brand-new things.”

Thus, the antique farmhouse cupboard he bought upstate and the vintage pedestal sink in the bathroom that he laboriously carted home from a loft sale to replace a more modern fixture. “When I turned over the basin, the workman’s name and the date were scrawled on the bottom,” Mr. Cerveris said. “It was 1937, which was when my building was built, so I thought, ‘Perfect. This is what was meant to be.’ ”

But Mr. Cerveris’s fondness for items that are pre-owned is preference, not policy. He made exceptions for the Theodore Alexander bookcases and for the pub table and bar chairs, recent acquisitions from ABC Carpet & Home that sit in a corner of the living room. (Mr. Cerveris used to eat at the coffee table; the assiduous Evangeline made this a losing proposition.) It does help, though, if the new things seem old — for example, the yellow retro Northstar refrigerator and stove.

About the same time Mr. Cerveris decided it was time to stop living like an undergraduate, he made another major decision: to take down the numerous show posters and plaques lining the hallway to the bedroom. “It looked like an agent’s office,” he said. They all went into a closet, to be joined by his Tonys for “Fun Home” and “Assassins.”

Recently, though, “I’ve made peace with the whole thing,” he said. “I’ve finally given the awards pride of place.”

Well, not exactly. They’re on a high shelf in a corner of the living room. “I have an ambivalence about awards in the arts, especially competitive awards,” he said. “But I’m grateful to have them and grateful for the memory of the work they represent.”

There are places in the apartment where the boards creak, and there are times during the year when the bathroom door can’t be counted on to close and stay closed.

“But I sometimes enjoy that the floor is going to creak,” Mr. Cerveris said. “There are nuisances that become endearing, not everyday, but you’d miss them if they were gone. So while it’s annoying to not be able to close the door every time you want to close it, there’s something about the fact that I’m subtly being reminded that the season is changing and that time is passing. It kind of helps me stay grounded, I suppose.”


