


There have not been any real shocks in the French Open thus far — at least when it comes to the tennis, with most of the top seeds breezing through the first few rounds.

When it comes to the clothes, however, it’s a different matter. This year, Adidas decided to put its athletes in “an audacious one-of-a-kind range made to disrupt and inspire.”

Translation: eye-boggling black-and-white zebra stripes.

Simona Halep wears them on a top with a black ruffled skirt and suspenders. (Suspenders!) Ana Ivanovic had a striped-all-over tank dress with a trompe l’oeil drape at the waist. Alexander Zverev wears the stripes in a shirt, headband and sneakers. Jo-Wilfried Tsonga wears them in a shirt and shoes. And so on.

We’re used to out-there tennis outfits in all sorts of blinding colors. The Williams sisters, with their penchant for pushing the fashion envelope on the court, have altered expectations and tolerance; the French player Alizé Lim showed up at the Roland Garros stadium in short overalls by Le Coq Sportif. But even in that context, the Adidas looks, which are part of its Y-3 collection, are … well, pretty unexpected.

Especially when compared with Nike, which chose to outfit its players, including Serena Williams, Rafael Nadal and Eugenie Bouchard, in a surprisingly muted — even dull — palette of blue, thus making the Adidas looks stand out even more. Not necessarily in a good way.

Consider some of the commentary:

The company says the pattern is, in fact, a reference to an old print, a “dazzle camouflage from the ’40s and ’50s,” inspired by a military pattern used on ships during World War I. It was not supposed to do what most camouflages do, which is conceal, but rather (according to The Economist) “distort an enemy submarine commander’s perception of the ship’s size, shape, range, heading and speed, so as to make it harder to hit.”

Aha!

In a statement revealing the style, Graham Williamson, the Adidas senior director of tennis, said, “We designed the apparel as to minimize distractions for the players,” but he was talking about the Adidas athletes themselves. When it comes to their opponents, the clothes probably work the opposite way, much as the military intended. It must be hard to keep an eye on the ball when faced with a riot of animal print.

Part of the shock also comes from seeing these clothes in France, the home of fashion. Traditionally, each of the four big slams has its own fashion identity: the Australian Open, at the start of the year, is more relaxed (and often neon); Wimbledon is conventional and all white; the U.S. Open is the chance to pull out all the stops and make a statement; and the French Open is — well, more elegant. Trickle-down from the catwalk heritage and all that.

You can argue, justifiably, that zebra print is a very direct fashion statement. And it is true, the Paris runways were full of tiger stripes last season. But this particular translation is so unsubtle as to be silly. The players look like refugees from a 1980s disco party.

(Of course, the 1980s are also having a moment.)

Why does all of this matter?

Well, partly because the style affects athletes’ images, and partly because the items are available now in Adidas stores (what we see on court is what may soon be coming to a weekend player’s closet near you), and partly because it ups the ante, trendwise, for the U.S. Open. What could be next?

In her new book “The Singles Game,” Lauren Weisberger, author of “The Devil Wears Prada,” has her tennis player protagonist hit center court in a Swarovski-studded tiara. Don’t laugh. It is no longer as far-fetched as it sounds.


