


SEOUL, South Korea — A tussle between the two Koreas over 12 waitresses from the North who defected to the South spilled into a courtroom in Seoul on Tuesday, where human rights lawyers accused the authorities in the South of unlawfully detaining them.

The 12 women, together with their male manager, flew to Seoul, the South Korean capital, in April after deserting their North Korean government-run restaurant in the Chinese city of Ningbo. South Korea welcomed the women and described them as having defected of their own free will after growing fed up with their totalitarian government.

North Korea immediately accused the South’s spy agency, the National Intelligence Service, of kidnapping the women. It has since arranged for their parents to give interviews with the Western news media, during which they have demanded that South Korea allow them to meet with their daughters to learn their true intentions. The South has dismissed the demands as propaganda.

The inter-Korean standoff took an unexpected turn recently, when a South Korean human rights group, Lawyers for a Democratic Society, asked a court in Seoul to release the women from a tightly guarded government facility south of the city where they have been kept since their arrival, so they could speak for themselves.

The group accused the National Intelligence Service of blocking the women’s access to legal services and their right to speak freely about their trip to the South. Lawyers for the group presented the court with a power of attorney, which they said they had obtained from the women’s North Korean families.

The government has denied the lawyers access to the women, saying that the defectors do not want their services. It has also said that if the women appeared in court and testified that they abandoned North Korea of their own accord, that would prompt the North to persecute their relatives in retaliation. During interviews with journalists, defectors often insist on anonymity because of fears for their families.

The closed-door court hearing on Tuesday ended in limbo, however, as the women did not show up.

The human rights lawyers, for their part, asked that the case be transferred to another judge, complaining that the presiding justice, Lee Young-je, had not tried to summon the women again.

“We didn’t think the court was trying the case fairly, and we don’t think it will,” one lawyer, Chae Hee-joon, told reporters after the hearing.

The case has drawn keen attention in South Korea because of the way it might affect the country’s handling of other North Korean defectors.

By law, the National Intelligence Service can keep North Koreans who flee to the South at the secluded facility outside Seoul for as long as six months for debriefing and to ferret out spies. Human rights researchers and opposition lawmakers have quoted some former inmates as saying they were subjected to abusive language, violence and threats of deportation while they were held there.

The agency has responded that it honors all inmates’ human rights.

But three years ago, events inside the facility, once called the Joint Interrogation Center, became the focal point of a scandal that eventually led to the resignation of the government’s intelligence chief.

In 2013, a court threw out a spy charge that the intelligence agency had built against a refugee from North Korea. The charge relied on confessions the defector’s sister had made at the facility. But the sister later said that she had been coerced into making false accusations against her brother while being held for 179 days in near isolation and without legal representation.

President Park Geun-hye later apologized for the scandal, and the facility was renamed the Center for Protection of North Korean Refugees.

Some of the lawyers who exposed that scandal are among those demanding access to the 12 waitresses as part of a campaign to make the location more transparent.

They have also faced a backlash. The conservative news media in the South has accused them of abetting North Korea’s tactic of using the women’s families as leverage against them. Outside the courthouse on Tuesday, conservative activists and defectors rallied, calling the lawyers “commies.”

“Their power of attorney is not from the women’s families but from the North Korean government,” said a statement from the Solidarity of Lawyers for Liberty and Unification, which criticized the other lawyers’ group.

Thousands of North Koreans have defected to South Korea in recent years, but the women’s defection as a group was highly unusual.

A typical defector takes weeks or months to flee to the South, often traveling through the jungles of Southeast Asia with human traffickers. By contrast, the waitresses arrived in Seoul the day after they fled their restaurant in China. Their former colleagues in North Korea claimed that the male manager had conspired with the South Korean authorities and had taken the women to the South after telling them that they were being relocated to a restaurant in Southeast Asia.

South Korea has denied any improper role in the defections.


