


He was the Greatest, something we have been reminded about and deeply moved by in the days since Muhammad Ali went ahead of us. He was called Champ, when it mattered, when it was a title that had been bestowed on Jack Dempsey, Rocky Marciano and Joe Louis.

In the day, it was reserved for the “heavyweight champeen of the world” and commanded respect from the public at large. Howard Cosell rasped it reverently and those sweet scientists were star attractions on talk show couches alongside Jack Paar and Johnny Carson.

It wasn’t a one-size-fits-all crown that has been worn by Floyd Mayweather, Ronda Rousey or Roman Reigns and a host of other hardly majestic combatants in the pay-per-view era. It was the heavyweights who leaned us into the radios for the latest Fight of the Century — my first was Ali versus Joe Frazier on March 8, 1971, from Madison Square Garden, which was absolutely mind-blowing for a 9-year-old kid in Kansas City with a transistor radio in hand.

This was the golden era of the heavyweight division, not only because of Ali and Frazier and eventually George Foreman, but for the tough and colorful contenders, whose stories landed in newspapers on our breakfast table told by an accomplished generation of boxing writers and beamed into our living rooms through ABC’s “Wide World of Sports.”

It has been a joy to watch clips of Ali’s bouts and remember the back stories of some of his opponents. Jerry Quarry, the Bellflower Bomber, was the perennial great white hope. Ron Lyle had done seven and a half years in prison for second-degree murder, the product of gang warfare, and was a rehabilitated gentleman fighter. Earnie Shavers was completely bald, earning him the nickname Acorn, and completely ripped, with cast-iron hands responsible for 24 first-round knockouts.

Best of them all was Ken Norton, a Marine and former sparring partner of Frazier’s who, on March 31, 1973, became a legend by not only beating Ali, but silencing him by breaking his jaw. He was the tomato can who did not play his part that day in San Diego, and he became a player in boxing’s most glamorous division.

Take a look at The Ring Magazine’s heavyweight champion and its 10 contenders; there is nothing glamorous or even familiar about them. Boxing is no long an American pastime.

The Englishman Tyson Fury is the reigning champion after taking the belt from Wladimir klitschko, a Ukrainian, last fall in Germany. Among the top contenders are two more Englishmen, a Cuban, a Bulgarian, a Canadian and a New Zealander. Two Americans made the list: Deontay Wilder at No. 2 and Bryant Jennings at No. 8.

The truth is that the heavyweight division was left for dead 20 years ago when Mike Tyson, “the baddest man on the planet,” lost his title to Evander Holyfield. Iron Mike was the Champ at 20 — the youngest ever — and a convicted rapist at 26. In between, there was a divorce to the actress Robin Givens, disputes over his contract with his managers, Don King and Bill Cayton, and headline-generating drama and boorish behavior.

In 1995, Tyson was released from prison and won a championship belt the following year, but he was no longer the electric and fearsome fighter of his youth. Holyfield was on the comeback trail himself and was thought to be a shot boxer at 34, twice retired, and a mere steppingstone for Tyson.

Instead, Holyfield took the fight to Tyson, frustrating and battering him. It was stopped in the 11th round with Holyfield winning by technical knockout.

On June 28, 1997, the boxing fate of Tyson, as well of the heavyweight division, was sealed when Iron Mike was disqualified in the third round for biting Holyfield on both ears. It was bizarre, controversial and downright macabre after a piece of Holyfield’s right ear was found on the ring floor after the fight.

The British-born Lennox Lewis, who fought out of Canada, had a dominant and classy run as undisputed heavyweight champion from 2000 until his retirement in 2004. But his polished and civilized style, both inside and outside the ring, failed to captivate boxing aficionados or reality show devotees hoping to see car wreck human behavior.

In the years since, boxing’s decline has been blamed on everything from its multiple and dubious sanctioning organizations, corruption within its management ranks and a business model that puts the sport’s premier events behind an expensive pay wall.

Bob Arum, once Ali’s promoter and still a force, says it is simpler than that: Boxing is a desperate sport for desperate people.

“It is too brutal for all but a few,” he said.

In America of late, finding athletes who fit that description are hard to find.

So not only is the Greatest gone; the title of Champ has been retired.


