


WHIPPANY, N.J. — Nothing has changed, visibly, on the practice field. The Red Bulls still show up at their pitch-perfect facility for training, still under the calm tutelage of Coach Jesse Marsch, still instructed by his staff in the art of systematic, high-press soccer.

But then the games begin, and they hardly resemble those during the 2015 season that earned the Red Bulls a tie for the best record in Major League Soccer. Heading into their home match on Sunday against Orlando, the Red Bulls are 1-6, and they have scored a total of one goal in their last four games, all losses. Bradley Wright-Phillips, who scored 49 goals during the 2014 and 2015 seasons, has taken 25 shots this spring without scoring even once. The central defense, once anchored by Matt Miazga and Damien Perrinelle, is an erratic patchwork quilt.

Matters have grown desperate in a hurry. In order to reach 49 points in the standings, a typical cutoff point for the playoffs, the Red Bulls would have to average slightly more than 1.7 points in the standings from each match — a pace that only Dallas and the Red Bulls managed in 2015.

“We did the math, and we sort of reset our goals,” Marsch said Friday. “We basically said: ‘We have 27 games left. Here is what we think it’s going to take.’ We’ve divided them by three, into nine-game increments.”

Marsch added: “It’s an uphill battle. We know that. But this is where we’re at. We think we have the players that can achieve that goal. I told them when you look at the table now, we’re only one win out of the playoffs. There’s still so much to play for.”

Marsch certainly owns a reservoir of good will within the organization, after being named the 2015 M.L.S. coach of the year in his first season with the club. Several Red Bull executives from Salzburg, Austria, visited the club recently — including Oliver Mintzlaff, head of Red Bull Global Soccer — and each vowed his support of the coach.

“Oliver, the first thing he said to me is, ‘Nobody’s nervous in Salzburg,’ ” Marsch said. “Everybody’s really proud of this team. They say, ‘We know you guys will get out of it.’ ”

It is no secret how opponents have troubled the Red Bulls starting late last year, through the 2015 playoffs, and then during the start of this season. Other teams adjusted to the Red Bulls’ attacking pressure with numbers in the back and then have taken advantage of defensive errors.

Wright-Phillips’s inability to finish his chances has created more pressure on defenders, who are already trying to make up for Miazga’s transfer to Chelsea and injuries to center backs Perrinelle and Kemar Lawrence. Likewise, the offense could use the services of the injured midfielder and forward Gonzalo Veron.

“We just have to get the anxiety out of the team,” midfielder Dax McCarty said. “If you look at the blueprint for how teams have beaten us, it’s sit back, absorb pressure, let us have possession and then try to hit us on the break when we don’t have many numbers in the back and capitalize on mistakes. And we’ve been making a lot of mistakes.

“We have to make sure that when we attack, we have the right balance, the right number of players defending.”

That will be especially true in Harrison, N.J., on Sunday when Kaka, the Brazilian attacking midfielder, can be expected to float all over the field to create scoring opportunities for Orlando.

Last season, the Red Bulls averaged 1.82 goals per game while giving up 1.26. So far this spring, they average 0.71 of a goal while giving up 2.5, betraying shortcomings in both tactics and execution. But Marsch will not give up on the high-press strategy, which is as integral to his coaching philosophy as the triangle offense is to that of the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson.

Marsch said he would continue to “tweak” his system without abandoning its main concepts.

And Wright-Phillips was convinced he would soon break out of his slump.

“It’s been a bit of everything: bad luck; not enough composure,” he said. “When you miss, you start to think about it. When the team is losing, it’s magnified. But I feel like the goal is going to come. And when it does, they all will come.”

Poor starts for good soccer teams are not uncommon. Chelsea, the reigning champion of the Premier League, began its season so terribly last summer that it flirted with the relegation zone. As the season winds down, the Blues sit safely in the middle of the table. Marsch, however, would like to avoid the fate of José Mourinho, the Chelsea coach who was fired along the way.

This Sunday, the Red Bulls will pass the 20th anniversary of the franchise’s first home game at Giants Stadium, an infamous defeat for the then-MetroStars caused by an own goal by the lyrically named Nicola Caricola — an event cited for decades among fans as the onset of a curse.

Marsch said there had been times when that supposed hex had come to mind.

For now, the coach has taken out his frustration on his lawn instead of his players.

“When things aren’t doing as well, I find myself doing a lot of yard work,” Marsch said. “I might be the only one in Princeton who does his own lawn.” And at the moment, he added, that lawn is immaculate. He’d much rather have a shoddy lawn, he said, and “a lot of points in the table.”


