


CAIRO — Two Egyptian courts on Saturday sentenced to prison 152 people who took part in a street protest last month, in a sharp escalation of a campaign by President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi to suppress political dissent in the country.

The protesters, who had been demonstrating against the transfer of two Red Sea islands to Saudi Arabia, received sentences of between two and five years, according to public prosecutors and defense lawyers. Also, fines of 100,000 Egyptian pounds apiece — about $11,260 at the official exchange rate or $9,000 at the parallel rate — were levied against 101 of those convicted.

The tough sentences come at a time when Mr. Sisi has appeared unnerved by a sudden wave of criticism over Egypt’s faltering economy, and has become intolerant toward even playful opponents.

On Monday, the police arrested five members of a satirical performance group who posted videos online that mocked Mr. Sisi. They joined a wave of writers, poets and activists jailed since January. The government has also barred prominent human rights campaigners from leaving the country or has frozen their assets.

The arrested satirists, ages 19 to 25, face a number of charges, including incitement of terrorism. In response to the crackdown, some Egyptians have struck back at Mr. Sisi on the Internet with mocking slogans that suggest he fears mobile phones.

At least 400 other demonstrators still face prosecution over the two protests in April about the Red Sea islands, Tiran and Sanafir. Sameh Samir, a lawyer representing some of the 51 people convicted on Saturday, said many had been randomly picked off the street, and would appeal their sentences.

Thousands of Egyptians have been jailed since 2013, including many who are languishing in pretrial detention. Others have fled the country, fearing arrest. On Saturday, Sanaa Abdel-Fattah, a prominent activist, started a six-month sentence for insulting the judiciary.

Even so, Mr. Sisi’s government has sought to project itself as a key ally in the West’s fight against Islamist extremism across the Middle East. On Friday, Egypt’s foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, met with Secretary of State John F. Kerry in Washington to discuss their “common visions that would increase stability in the region,” an Egyptian statement said.

The United States provides Egypt with $1.3 billion in annual military aid and is a key weapons supplier. The State Department notified Congress on Friday that it intended to sell Harpoon II submarine missiles to Egypt in a deal reportedly worth $143 million.

The safeguards that underpin such military sales to Egypt have been questioned by the United States Government Accountability Office. On Thursday, the office issued a report that detailed how Egypt had hindered American efforts to verify the use and security of sensitive military items such as night-vision goggles and riot-control gear.

Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida, said the report showed “an alarming and unacceptable amount of deficiencies” in America’s human rights vetting programs for Egypt.

In response to international criticism, Mr. Sisi has made speeches alluding to foreign conspiracies and urging Egyptians to follow him without question. Still, he continues to face criticism from sometimes surprising quarters.

On Friday, Seif Eldin Mustafa, the Egyptian who hijacked a passenger jet that was forced to land in Cyprus in March, appeared in court in Cyprus wearing a T-shirt that read, “Release the 63 Egyptian girls, you liars,” The Associated Press reported. The T-shirt was referring to women held in Egyptian jails whose release was a demand made by Mr. Mustafa. Lawyers for Mr. Mustafa, whom the Cypriot authorities describe as psychologically unstable, are resisting an Egyptian extradition application, arguing that he would face torture and an unfair trial in his home country.


