


It’s really not so much the floral prints as the floaty lightweight garments that make warm-weather dressing so enjoyable. Who needs button closures and form-fitting trousers when you can look just as good when you’re … well, unrestricted? Here are three new New York designers who are doing those shapes in a good way.

Off Season, A line from Abra Boero and Judi Rosen, is pleasingly undone, with gauzy cotton caftans and one-pieces that are down to earth. Ms. Boero has a store of the same name in the Rockaways in Queens. “People are day-tripping more,” she said, “and New York has a strong growing beach culture that we wanted to speak to.”At offseasonnyc.com in mid-May.

Svilu, an environmentally conscious label founded by Britt Cosgrove and Marina Polo (who met while working for Peter Som), specializes in organic cotton sundresses and refined everyday shapes. Their spring collection draws on traditional Indian styles, as in a Rabari jacket (above right) reimagined in embroidered linen. At svilu.com.

Tosia was founded by Sara Hankin, who cut her teeth at Ralph Lauren and J. Crew. Her spring collection includes chic cutout tees, open-shoulder cotton tops and an off-the-shoulder jumpsuit with frayed trim that Margot Robbie just wore on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert.” “My dream is to create that 20 percent of your closet you find yourself wearing 90 percent of the time,” Ms. Hankin said.At tosianyc.com.

To inject some springtime fun into your look (if hot pink jeans are not for you), a bit of rainbow-colored ornamentation is an approachable way to go. Karlie Kloss gave her neutral Coachella look a pop with a multihued Roxanne Assoulin choker (which is now back-ordered for at least six weeks). Yes, a little goes a long way, so do it with a rainbow-bright necklace, earrings or a hair comb that will brighten any drab-hair day.

From left, clockwise: SheBee rainbow topaz drops, $950 at shebee.com; Dsquared Perspex origami flower necklace, $675 at luisaviaroma.com; Colette Malouf crystal-embellished wire comb, $135 at colettemalouf.com.

Slipping on a pair of shoes wrapped with a giant bow can’t help but put you in a childlike good mood. Sweet as can be but clearly modern, they will add just the right amount of flair to your streamlined basics.

From top left, clockwise: Joshua Sanders denim slip-ons with an oversize bow, $450 at Saks Fifth Avenue; saks.com; Delpozo flatform slingbacks with an origami bow, $1,000 at modaoperandi.com; Brother Vellies leather slides with a hand-woven Madras cotton bow, $285 at Brother Vellies; brothervellies.com; Orderll leather bow sandals, $375 at Pas Mal; pasmalnyc.com;


