


Albania preserved its hopes of qualifying for the knockout stages of the European Championships with a 1-0 victory over Romania in Lyon, France, on Sunday, eliminating its opponent.

The Group A victory catapulted Albania into third place, above Romania, in the group rankings. The team must wait until the group stage has been completed before it finds out whether it will be one of the four third-place teams that will make it to the round of 16.

Armando Sadiku scored the only goal in the match, in the 43rd minute. It was the first goal Albania had scored in an international tournament. Ledian Memushaj picked out Sadiku drifting at the far post with a well-placed cross that the striker coolly nodded back over Romania goalkeeper Ciprian Tatarusanu, who had left his line.

After going without a goal in two hard-fought losses to Switzerland and France, Albania stuck to its defensive approach. Romania failed to produce many chances, its best effort coming in the 76th minute when the substitute Florin Andone hit the crossbar with a ferocious strike.

Albania’s players celebrated the victory with Coach Giovanni De Biasi after the final whistle, while the team’s large contingent of fans cheered wildly at the Stade de Lyon.

In the Albanian capital, Tirana, fans erupted in joy after the win. Thousands gathered in fan zones, lighting firecrackers, sounding car horns, shouting loudly and waving the red and black national flag.

The 3 points Albania earned with the victory may be not enough to qualify it for the next round, but it is still the biggest success in the international sports arena in the tiny Balkan country’s history.

“Goooooooooool …,” Prime Minister Edi Rama wrote on his Twitter account after Sadiku scored.

Moscow Rejects Accusations A spokesman for the Kremlin rejected as “anti-Russian hysteria” a suggestion by senior British government officials that it might have deliberately sanctioned violence by Russia soccer fans at the Euros.

The Kremlin spoke after The Observer, a British newspaper, published a report citing unidentified British officials who said that the Russia fans’ actions looked like a continuation of President Vladimir Putin’s “hybrid warfare” against the West and that many of the Russian hooligans were in the uniformed services.


