


Name Lil Freckles

Age 28

Hometown Eastchester, N.Y.

Now Lives In a four-bedroom apartment in Bushwick, Brooklyn, with her three best friends.

Claim to Fame Lil Freckles (her real name is Emma Carroll) is a pixie-faced rapper whose unapologetic and raunchy lyrics betray the high-low melodrama of millennial life. She has performed at the Cake Shop on the Lower East Side, the closing party for Tandem in Bushwick, the Woodstock Comedy Festival in Brooklyn, and the Fun Fun Fun Fest of music and comedy in Austin, Tex.

Big Break Ms. Carroll graduated from Marymount Manhattan College in 2010 and was a production assistant on “Girls” when she began to take rap more seriously. “Everyone was very cool about the music, and Lena wrote me into a scene,” she said, referring to Lena Dunham, the show’s creator. Lil Freckles made her debut TV performance in the show’s third season as the musical act that preceded Marnie and Desi in a scene filmed at Glasslands in Brooklyn.

Latest Project Her second mixtape, “Sleep on It,” written in collaboration with the hip-hop artist Kyle Rapps (real name Kyle Sutton), was released in December. “I wrote one song at a time for about a year, about things that were going on in my life,” she said. “The music is funny, but it’s not a joke.” She hopes the lyrics, which deal with friendship, family and feminism, as in the song “Feminist Kings,” will resonate with all sorts of listeners. The tracks are also peppered with tongue-in-cheek samples of random cultural moments. “Our Mothers” begins with a few bars from “I Dreamed a Dream” from “Les Misérables.” Midway through “Classic Case,” there is an audio clip from the 1994 attack on the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan, when she wails, “Why? Why? Why?”

Next Thing Ms. Carroll is working on her next album, which she began writing on a recent trip to Mexico City. “The vibe is triumphant,” she said of the new music. In May, she will headline a spring concert at Hollins University, a small, private women’s college in Roanoke, Va.

#WhiteGirlProblems Ms. Carroll is very much aware of how she may be perceived artistically. “I think a lot about being a white person participating in a black art form,” she said. “How can I be helpful? How can I use whatever voice I have to help?”


