


MEXICO CITY — Four men have been arrested in the murder of a Honduran environmental and indigenous rights activist whose killing two months ago prompted international condemnation, the authorities said on Monday.

The activist, Berta Cáceres, led a decade-long fight to block construction of the Agua Zarca Dam along the Gualcarque River, which is sacred to her Lenca people. Despite numerous threats and the killings of other members of her organization, she was undeterred.

She was awarded the prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize last year, but the international acclaim was not enough to protect her. On March 3, gunmen burst into the house where she was staying in La Esperanza, her hometown, in western Honduras, and fatally shot her.

The suspects were arrested in raids early Monday. Two of them are linked to the Honduran company that is building the dam, Desarrollos Energéticos S.A., or DESA.

Since the killing, the Honduran government has been under intense pressure to find Ms. Cáceres’s killers. The murder occurred as President Juan Orlando Hernández has been trying to project a new image of his country, one of the most violent in the world.

Alongside the gang and drug violence, a steady drumbeat of assassinations of journalists, lawyers, labor and peasant leaders and environmental activists has come to mark Honduran politics ever since a 2009 coup.

One of the suspects arrested on Monday, Sergio Rodríguez Orellana, is a manager for social and environmental issues for DESA, the company said in a statement, noting that it was “surprised” by his arrest. “We trust that all employees’ actions are within the law,” the company said, and denied “any material or intellectual connection” to the murder.

The company said it had complied with all investigators’ requests.

A second suspect, Douglas Geovanny Bustillo, had worked in the past for a security company hired by the dam project, DESA wrote in response to an email.

A military spokesman told the local news media that the two other suspects are an army major and a retired captain.

Ms. Cáceres’s family said they learned of the arrests from news reports. They questioned whether the investigation would ultimately lead to those who planned and ordered the killing. Ms. Cáceres was not under police protection when she was killed.

“Because we have been excluded from the investigative process from the start, we have no way to judge whether the arrests are the result of an exhaustive investigation, nor do we know if they included the intellectual authorship at all its levels,” according to a statement Monday from Ms. Cáceres’s family and the organization she founded, the National Council of Popular and Indigenous Organizations of Honduras.

Silvio Carrillo, a nephew of Ms. Cáceres, wrote in an email that officials had told the family last week to expect an arrest soon.

The family asked for an independent investigation by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, but the Honduran government rejected it.

“As we have stated since the assassination,” Mr. Carrillo wrote, “the Honduran government lacks the veracity and political will to conduct a just, thorough and professional investigation.”


