


BALTIMORE — Manager Joe Girardi was midway through another dispiriting postmortem, speaking to reporters outside the visitors’ clubhouse, when the dark blue backdrop with the logos of the Yankees and their sponsor began to fall away from the curtain rod from which it hung.

It was a fitting epitaph for another frustrating night in a young season that has been filled with them, as the Yankees were beaten by the Baltimore Orioles, 4-1, on Tuesday night.

It was the Yankees’ sixth straight defeat, and perhaps not the only loss they suffered. In the fifth inning, Alex Rodriguez left clutching his hamstring after running out a ground ball. He will undergo a magnetic resonance imaging exam Wednesday morning to determine the extent of the injury.

“I don’t know how bad it is,” Girardi said. “It’s definitely worrisome. He just started swinging the bat, too.”

That tone of weariness is becoming a familiar one for the Yankees, who once again struggled to do anything more at the plate than hit singles — or string many of them together. It was the 13th time in 24 games that they have not managed more than two runs.

Luis Severino turned in his best start of the season, but his few mistakes were too much to overcome. He allowed two home runs to Mark Trumbo and dropped two soft tosses from Mark Teixeira while covering first base, the second of which allowed another run to score.

As he walked back to the mound after the second drop, Severino was patted on the back by Teixeira, a gesture of support and encouragement that the Yankees are finding themselves increasingly needing as they sit in last place in the American League East at 8-16. The last time they were this many games below .500 was in 2007, when they started the season 21-29.

Before the game, General Manager Brian Cashman tried to direct some of the heat away from his players, coaches and Girardi by accepting blame for the poor start and reiterating that no changes were afoot — for the moment.

“The reality is, the talent level that we currently have in that clubhouse is good enough to be a force,” Cashman said. “So we shouldn’t have to be thinking this way. I shouldn’t be sitting in front of you right now having to talk about such an awful April. We left spring training feeling really good about ourselves.”

Tuesday’s defeat prompted left fielder Brett Gardner to refer to Wednesday’s game as a must win. “We’ve been struggling here for a few weeks,” Gardner said. “I think everybody knows — I guess it’s never a must win in May, but it feels like it. It’s important to us to get things going in the right direction. For whatever reason, it hasn’t happened.”

The Yankees’ sense of urgency is an unwelcome sign for Girardi, who was asked afterward if there might be any anxiety over games in May that suddenly have the importance usually reserved for contests in August or September.

“Anxiety?” Girardi said. “You cannot be anxious for anything. It does you no good. I think the players are frustrated. I think they come prepared every day and they expect good things to happen, and right now they’re not happening. But that will turn around.”

The Yankees trotted out their usual lineup and looked little different from the way they have all season. The seven runs they posted Sunday night in an 8-7 loss at Boston looked like an aberration as the night wore on.

Their only run came in the second when Didi Gregorius grounded a two-out single up the middle, scoring Brian McCann. A potentially robust inning had been undercut one batter earlier, when Starlin Castro grounded into a double play.

The Yankees put runners on in each of the first six innings, but every half-threat petered out. The only extra-base hit was Gardner’s double off the right-field wall in the first. And a promising start to the sixth, in which Teixeira walked and McCann blooped a single to left, soon fizzled. Carlos Beltran lined out to right, and Castro lined into a double play when McCann was caught off first.

The Yankees struck out nine times against Chris Tillman, who matched his career high. He had entered the game with a 4.96 E.R.A. against the Yankees.

Rodriguez, who had shown signs of coming alive with two home runs over the weekend in Boston and five R.B.I. on Sunday night, flied out, struck out and grounded out in his three at-bats. It was not clear how long he would be out. He missed two games last week when he tweaked an oblique muscle.

“It wasn’t a big pop,” Rodriguez said. “I’ve done that before in my career. I’m hoping for the best. Hopefully, it’s just a small setback.”

But it could be another one that the Yankees find difficult to absorb.


