


It is not exactly accurate to say no one uses the $1.1 million public dock that was installed off the shoreline of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, two and a half years ago. It was praised by city officials for the access it would give local residents to the shore and for the resiliency of its construction, but it closed after one season when the gangway snapped off and was never repaired. Then the pilings holding it to the bay floor started bending. Today, it sits more than seven miles away in Sheepshead Bay, where it was towed for storage, lashed to a bulkhead and kept behind a gate.

There, it is in almost constant use — a flock of swans and sea gulls have colonized it, coating it with feathers, feces and bits of fish.

“It’s always a pit in my stomach when I bike past it, to see the Eco Dock missing,” said Roland Lewis, the president and chief executive of the Waterfront Alliance, an advocacy group for water access that facilitated the dock’s installation in October 2013 at the American Veterans Memorial Pier. For one summer, it was a home for historic ships and hosted school groups taking kayaking lessons. “The real shame of the situation is how loved and used the dock was for the time it was up,” he added.

Intended as a way to connect people who live in Bay Ridge to their underused bay, the 40-by-60-foot dock was the culmination of years of planning and over $800,000 in financing provided by Councilman Vincent J. Gentile, a Democrat who represents the neighborhood. (The remaining amount was provided by the offices of Michael R. Bloomberg, then the mayor, and Marty Markowitz, the Brooklyn borough president at the time). And for a season, as school children and residents took to the water off the dock, Mr. Gentile, said, “We realized that dream.”

But attached to the end of the 69th Street pier, which juts out about 600 feet into Upper New York Bay, the dock was buffeted by waves from passing commuter ferries and the currents sweeping underneath the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. That is probably why the metal gangway attaching it to the pier split from the dock in November 2014, according to a timeline provided by the Waterfront Alliance.

But other nearby docks that appear to be of similar size, including one operated by the New York Fire Department just across the bay on Staten Island, seem to be holding up, Mr. Lewis said. He theorizes that the Bay Ridge dock was poorly designed by Ocean and Coastal Consultants, a nautical engineering company in Connecticut, which was contracted by the city to build it. It is now part of an engineering firm, COWI North America, which is based in British Columbia, Canada.

Philip Chan, a spokesman for COWI, declined to discuss the dock’s condition, including the quality of the work.

New York City’s parks department, the agency responsible for the dock, could not provide a date for when it would be repaired. “The timeline for replacing the dock is contingent upon a design,” Maeri Ferguson, a spokeswoman for the agency, said in an email. “The gangway will be included in the re-engineering of the support pilings.” The gangway was never fixed because of the long review process city projects must undergo, the department said.

“What was all that wasted money for?” said James Aponte, 26, who lives in East New York, Brooklyn, and goes to Bay Ridge regularly to fish for bass and flounder from the 69th Street pier. The dock could have kept children “out of trouble,” just as fishing did for him, he said, by introducing them to the serenity of the water. Though it is a waterfront community, Bay Ridge has few of the aquatic amenities of other coastal Brooklyn neighborhoods, like Brooklyn Heights, where a new marina recently opened in Brooklyn Bridge Park.

But the gangway became the least of the dock’s problems when it was dealt another blow the past winter, this one fatal: Around January, the pilings that anchored it to the bed of the bay, called spuds, bent. The pilings were no longer deemed stable, and the dock was towed by the parks department to its current swan-filled location in Sheepshead Bay, where it lingers, just across the street from the giant lobster-shaped sign of Randazzo’s Clam Bar.

What bent the pilings, which are made of solid steel and 26 inches in diameter, is a mystery, even after the company that designed the dock sent a team of divers to inspect it, according to a report filed with the parks department by Stephen A. Famularo, the chief project manager for the company. Something may have smashed into it, the findings indicated. “While there were no indications of impact on the dock or the piles,” Mr. Famularo wrote, “the force required to displace piles of this size is significant.” The report said it was prepared by Ocean and Coastal Consulants on behalf of COWI.

Mr. Lewis, of the Waterfront Alliance, says he does not believe the dock was ever hit. “It was not designed well enough for that piece of water and the beating a structure takes in that location,” he said. His organization has drafted a letter but has not yet sent it to COWI demanding that the company make the needed repairs.

“They said it would withstand the storm of the century and it didn’t,” Mr. Gentile said.

On the 69th Street pier on a recent warm afternoon, Jonathan Nolan, 51, a construction project manager, sat fishing a few feet from where a green-and-white parks department sign read “Eco Dock,” attached to a metal gate beyond which lay nothing but water.

“It would have been nice,” Mr. Nolan said, “to have something for the people in Bay Ridge.”


