


Friday is the start of North Korea’s most important political meeting in 36 years: the seventh congress of the ruling Workers’ Party. Thousands of delegates from around the country are in Pyongyang, the capital, whose residents have been mobilized to welcome them. But beyond the choreographed pageantry and fervor, there are reasons to watch the proceedings closely.

In theory, the Workers’ Party rules North Korea, and the congress is where its most important decisions are made. Delegates will elect the party’s central committee, which will choose the Politburo and the party’s top boss, the first secretary. (Kim Jong-un is, to say the least, highly likely to retain that post.) The congress also reviews past policies and adopts new party lines.

That’s the theory. In reality, all decision-making power is concentrated in one supreme leader, Mr. Kim, and all political events are dedicated to ensuring what the country calls his “monolithic leadership.” The charter of the Workers’ Party commits it to upholding Mr. Kim as its “center” while abiding by “the Kim Il-sung/Kim Jong-il ideology as its only leadership philosophy” (referring to North Korea’s two previous supreme leaders, Mr. Kim’s grandfather and his father).

_____

It is not entirely clear. According to its charter, the Workers’ Party is supposed to hold its congress every five years. But this is only the seventh in the party’s 70-year history; the last one was held in 1980, before Mr. Kim was even born. Kim Il-sung was in charge then.

By the time Kim Jong-il inherited power in the mid-1990s, the North’s economy had collapsed after decades of mismanagement, the disintegration of the Soviet bloc and a series of droughts and floods. Famine is believed to have killed more than two million citizens during the 1990s. Kim Jong-il’s response to the crisis was to rely on a military of 1.1 million to ensure internal security, and the army replaced the Workers’ Party as the main governing body. Kim Jong-il retained his party titles as well as military ones, but he never convened a party congress, which spared him from having to address the subject of the famine.

Though conditions in the North are far less dire now, Kim Jong-un has done little to improve living standards since taking power a few years ago. Nevertheless, he announced in October that a party congress would be held this month. He has been billing himself as a leader who can protect the country’s “independence and dignity” with nuclear weapons, and three recent (failed) attempts to launch midrange ballistic missiles were seen as efforts to bolster his image before the congress.

_____

“With this party congress, Kim Jong-un is restoring the party as the main governing agency,” said Lim Eul-chul, an analyst at the Institute for Far Eastern Studies in Seoul, South Korea. Under Mr. Kim, the Workers’ Party has regained powers and perks that it ceded to the army under his father’s rule, including the lucrative right to export coal. The new party leadership he puts together — approved by delegates who, though technically chosen in local elections, are actually handpicked loyalists — will make the party truly his own. That is why some analysts have likened the congress to Mr. Kim’s coronation and called it the official start of the Kim Jong-un era.

_____

In his New Year’s speech in January, Mr. Kim said that he would present “an ambitious blueprint” for the country during the congress, and he vowed to treat improving the people’s living conditions “as the most important of the numerous state affairs.” Analysts are watching to see if he introduces economic reforms.

Mr. Kim has shown some tolerance for private enterprise, giving rise to a new moneyed class that has thrived on smuggling goods from China. He has made improvements to his showpiece capital, opening water parks and building high-rise apartments along the Taedong River, but most of the country lives in misery, without enough food or electricity. In 2013, Mr. Kim adopted his so-called byungjin policy, calling for rebuilding the economy while expanding a nuclear arsenal. The idea is that nuclear weapons will provide security that allows the country to focus on economic recovery.

Now that North Korea claims to be a nuclear power, some analysts expect Mr. Kim to shift more attention to the economy. The United States and South Korea say the byungjin policy will not work, and they have vowed to deepen the North’s isolation until it abandons its nuclear weapons. But few expect that to happen any time soon. Indeed, the party may amend its charter to define the North as a nuclear power, South Korean analysts say. (The North’s Constitution was amended to that effect in 2012.)

_____

It’s hard to say. Kim Il-sung used past congresses to help remove rival factions and tighten his family’s grip on power. At the sixth congress in 1980, Kim Jong-il grabbed crucial party posts that cemented his status as his father’s heir. (During that meeting, North Korea presented a vision for a reunified Korean Peninsula: a “Democratic Confederal Republic of Koryo,” in which the South and North would exist in peace as autonomous regions respecting each other’s political systems.)

At that congress, North Korea also mobilized a million people in Pyongyang for a rally. Nearly 120 countries sent delegates to the capital that year, including senior officials from the Chinese and Soviet Communist Parties. This time, as the North’s circle of friendly nations has shrunk considerably, the congress will be a domestic affair, though some foreign journalists have been invited to cover it.


