


OAKMONT, Pa. — It is a compliment that stings, the golf equivalent of being known for a winning personality. Over the last decade, Dustin Johnson, Sergio García and Lee Westwood have taken turns wearing the “best golfer never to have won a major” label.

They are a combined 0 for 170 in the majors. But when the third round was suspended on Saturday at the 116th United States Open, Johnson, García and Westwood were still out on the Oakmont Country Club course, within glory’s grasp at two under par, three strokes off the lead held by the Irishman Shane Lowry, who had four holes to play.

Alone in second was Andrew Landry, an American playing in his first major, who was three under with five holes to go. The leader in the clubhouse was Branden Grace, a South African who posted a four-under 66 for a 54-hole total of one-under 209.

Of the six players in red figures, none have won a major. Circling at one over was the world No. 1, Jason Day, who equaled Grace’s 66 in the gloaming. He was tied with the rookie Bryson DeChambeau, who posted a 70, and with two players who did not finish: Daniel Summerhays, whose 65 in the second round equaled the low score of the week, and the two-time major winner Zach Johnson.

Day, the reigning P.G.A. Championship titleholder, covered the first nine holes in four-under 31 to whittle away at the nine-stroke deficit he faced at the round’s start. After opening with a 76, Day, a three-time winner in 2016, has steadily, if not stealthily, climbed the leaderboard. It is not hard to imagine his appearance on the first page of the leaderboard casting a discomfiting shadow over the players he is chasing.

“I feel like if I can just put my name on the scoreboard, hopefully they’ll start to slow down a little bit,” Day said, adding, “I was trying to push forward today.”

Grace, 28, was in contention down the stretch of last year’s United States Open, which Jordan Spieth won after Dustin Johnson three-putted the 72nd hole, finishing one stroke back. Grace followed his tie for fourth at Chambers Bay with a third at the P.G.A. Championship. The confidence he brings into the majors has been like a 15th club in his bag.

“I think you just kind of relax as you go into the weeks now,” said Grace, who shot 73 and 70 in the first two rounds this week. “You get out there and you’re in the run, especially in a major — there’s no feeling like it, honestly.”

Day and Grace expressed relief that they would not have to return to the course Sunday at 7 a.m. to finish their rounds. But Lowry, who had four holes to play, welcomed the chance to come back fresh after a quick night’s rest.

“I was getting tired toward the end,” Lowry said, adding, “If I had to play another four holes, it would have been quite difficult.”

Lowry endured a difficult break in shooting his second-round 70. He called a one-stroke penalty on himself when his ball moved on the green after he addressed it. He two-putted from 30 feet, making a clutch 8-footer that was for a bogey because of the penalty. If he had missed that putt, Lowry said, his week might have gone downhill faster than any ball landing above the holes on the Oakmont greens.

Johnson is 31, Westwood 43 and García 36. They all have short-documentary-length lowlight reels from the majors, and they have a combined 49 top-10 finishes. Johnson, who will turn 32 next week, is two years younger than Phil Mickelson was when he won his first major (and three years younger than Ben Hogan was when he did).

Earlier in the week, Mickelson, who missed the cut, explained what it is like to walk a major week in the shoes of a perennial contender.

“The more it’s discussed, the more you start thinking about it,” Mickelson said. “The challenge is really on Friday and Saturday nights when you have opportunities and you start putting that self-imposed pressure, because then you never play free. You never play with a kind of a loose attitude, where we all play our best.”

With 11 top-10 finishes in majors, Johnson is battle-tested, but also battle-scarred. “I’ve been in the position before,” he said. “I know what to expect. I know how to handle it. So hopefully, the ball falls my way tomorrow.”

Johnson, who made one bogey in the first two rounds, had a double bogey and two bogeys in the first 10 holes of his third. “Golf swing feels good,” he said, “so I’m happy where I’m at.”

Day was asked if his status as a major winner would give him an advantage on Sunday.

“If they want to go out there and they think they’re ready to win a major, then it’s obviously going to be tougher,” he said, referring to the players ahead of him, “because they’re going to be focused and ready.”

But so will Day, who said, “I think I’ve given myself an opportunity.”


