


The first person to eulogize Coca Crystal — the writer, cable television show host, political agitator, feminist, mother and frequent smoker of marijuana on camera — at a memorial service in an East Village poetry club on Sunday was an actress playing Ms. Crystal, who died in March at 68.

The actress, Danielle Quisenberry, wore a wig to evoke Ms. Crystal’s mop of dark hair, a jean jacket and an African print skirt that reached the ground. Channeling Ms. Crystal’s loose-limbed, splashy stage presence, Ms. Quisenberry surveyed the crowd that had packed the club.

“The good news is we’re here,” she said. “The bad news is we’ll never be here again. This is our very last show, live from the Nuyorican Cafe.”

Ms. Crystal’s ashes sat nearby, in a black box atop a bar stool on the stage.

“I want you to describe something that we did together, in three words or less,” Ms. Quisenberry said.

“Fed a horse,” someone shouted.

“Climbed a volcano.”

“Man from space.”

“Oh, I want to talk about that later,” Ms. Quisenberry said. “Three words or less, darlings!”

“Refused to vote.”

“Traveled across America.”

“Yes, we did indeedy do.”

Ms. Crystal was born Jacqueline Diamond in 1947 and grew up in Mamaroneck, N.Y. Her father, Jack, owned J. Diamond Furs.

She was “the black sheep daughter of a Westchester furrier who dropped out and never bothered to drop back in,” according to a vintage news report shared at the memorial. She died of respiratory failure, after suffering from complications of lung cancer.

In New York, in the early 1970s, she became a concierge, writer and all-around gatekeeper of the alternative newspaper The East Village Other. Later, she wrote for publications like The Ace, using an orange typewriter she said she had grabbed during a riot at Columbia University.

She wrote about serenading a burglar, and finding herself on a hijacked flight to Cuba (“I was one of the only people who had a good time”). In 1977, she began hosting her own public-access cable television show, “If I Can’t Dance, You Can Keep Your Revolution,” which ran until 1995. Asked by a reporter what it was about, Ms. Crystal said, “About an hour!”

In a highlight reel shown at the service on Sunday, Ms. Crystal could be seen on the program’s bare-bones set, mugging in front of a droopy burlap sign and talking casually with guests, including the singer and musical archivist Herbert Khaury, known as Tiny Tim; Deborah Harry and Chris Stein of the band Blondie; the singer Tuli Kupferberg of the Fugs; and Abbie Hoffman, the Yippie provocateur.

“Coca Crystal, TV star,” as she often called herself, would stretch out on the floor, or sit cross-legged in cowboy boots. She once extracted a joint from a pot of daisies on her Wednesday night show (“For all you know, I’m smoking felt,” she told viewers) and smudged her forehead with ashes from a pipe, while declaring it “Hash Wednesday.” She often offered her guests a toke.

She was dismissive of television characters who glamorized the lifestyle of single young women, like Mary Tyler Moore. “They’re always walking around in $800 outfits,” she said. “I can’t even go to a restaurant.” As for her place in the counterculture, she said, “I’m an institution.”

At the service, ex-Yippies, hippies and beatniks filled the windowless room, their hair long since gone gray. Poems were read, folk songs sung. T-shirts and stickers bearing the name of the Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders were the only sign that it was 2016. The audience included Leslie Bacon, once accused of plotting with the Weathermen; Sylvia Topp, Mr. Kupferberg’s wife; and Bob Fass of the radio station WBAI.

Ed Sanders, a writer who was also in the Fugs, read a poem while playing a three-string strumstick. He talked about helping Ms. Crystal write books about her life during her long battle with lung cancer.

Some knew Ms. Crystal from the days of the Emma Goldman Brigade, a feminist group that staged protests, including releasing rats at a banquet at the Waldorf Astoria honoring Pat Nixon, the wife of President Richard M. Nixon.

Jill Seiden, who said she was the one who had released the rats, described meeting Ms. Crystal during an organizing session for May Day in 1971. “She stood up and did a parody of everyone: ‘I’d like to propose an amendment to the motion to amend the amendment,’” she recalled. “She was exuberant, rebellious, fun.”

Others remembered Ms. Crystal from her writing days. Charlie Frick, a photojournalist, introduced himself as a “boy reporter from The East Village Other.” “I was still in high school, I was pushing a broom,” he said. “She was the den mother.” He said that after she lost the ability to speak, she was still writing in the hospital.

One man sat in silence. He had been a frequent guest on Ms. Crystal’s show and perhaps the star of her life, Gustav Che Finkelstein, or Gus, the son she adopted from her sister in 1975.

Mr. Sanders of the Fugs said he had once praised Ms. Crystal for giving up her career to take care of Gus, who is mentally and physically disabled. He said she had softly rebuked him. “She felt it gave her a career — having a loving presence,” he said. “They say we were all looking for salvation in those days, and that was her salvation.”

During the service, Gus, now 45, stepped up and handed Ms. Quisenberry a bouquet of orange flowers.


