


FRONT PAGE

An article on April 13 about wildfires that are burning earlier and longer referred incorrectly to the scope of fires that burned in the United States in 2015. The 10.1 million acres that burned that year were the most in a year since before 1960, not the most on record. (Statistics dating to 1916 show that in some decades the amount of acreage burned routinely exceeded 20 million annually and even 50 million at some points.)

•

An article on Thursday about the large number of corporate mergers that have been withdrawn in 2016 described a merger between the Irish drug maker Shire and Baxalta incorrectly. It is Shire that is acquiring Baxalta, not the other way around.

INTERNATIONAL

Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about President Obama’s planned visit to Hiroshima, Japan, erroneously attributed a distinction to Secretary of State John Kerry. He is the highest-ranking American administration official to visit Hiroshima, not the highest-ranking American official. (The highest-ranking American official to visit the city is Nancy Pelosi, a former House speaker.) The error also appeared in this space on Thursday in a correction for an April 12 article about a visit by Mr. Kerry to Hiroshima.

•

An article on April 16 about criticism of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, for allowing the prosecution of a German comic who had satirized the president of Turkey in crude terms misspelled, in some editions, the given name of a legal expert who said Ms. Merkel had faced a difficult decision. He is Constantin van Lijnden, not Konstantin.

•

An article on March 26 about arrests in the Brussels terrorist bombings and reports of newly discovered links between the Paris and Brussels massacres misspelled, at two points and in some editions, the surname of Belgium’s justice minister, who spoke at a parliamentary hearing. He is Koen Geens, not Keens. The errors were corrected online shortly after the article was published, but editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

NATIONAL

An article on Wednesday about opioid addicts who turn to Imodium and other anti-diarrhea medications to get high misstated some details about the death of a 19-year-old in Texas that involved loperamide, the active ingredient in the medications. The case was investigated by the Harris County Institute of Forensic Sciences, not the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. And it was Jeffrey Walterscheid, not Amitava Dasgupta, who used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to pinpoint loperamide as the culprit.

•

An article on Saturday about Harvard’s plans to impose restrictions on exclusive student clubs misstated the timing of a letter to The Harvard Crimson by Charles M. Storey, the president of the alumni group for one such club. His letter was sent the day before — not the same day of — a meeting between Harvard administrators and representatives of the clubs.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Wednesday about a mistrial that was declared in the Manhattan trial of Nicholas Santora and three co-defendants on charges of enterprise corruption misspelled the surname of one of the co-defendants. He is Anthony Santoro, not Santora.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Thursday about job market challenges for young people without college degrees misspelled the surname of a Massachusetts teenager who is graduating from a vocational school next month. He is Issac Cardoso, not Cordoso. The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.

THE ARTS

Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Wednesday with an article about the composer Carla Bley erroneously attributed a distinction to her. She works primarily as a composer; she is not a pioneer of free improvisation. (As the article correctly noted, it was her first husband, Paul Bley, who pioneered free improvisation.)

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


