


SAN JOSE, Calif. — The San Jose Sharks were pinching pennies during the N.H.L. lockout in 2005 and decided that an organist was a luxury the team could no longer afford. For more than a decade, only recorded music revved up the crowd.

But two months ago, the same organist, James Mikey Day, was back at the keyboard when the Sharks defeated the Washington Capitals. When he began playing “Time of the Season,” a rock song by the Zombies, live music had returned.

That change is one of several recent moves by a franchise that, as it marks its 25th anniversary this season, has become more concerned about retaining and attracting fans in the competitive Bay Area sports market. Attendance remains respectable, but sellouts, once routine, are no longer automatic.

Even in the playoffs, tickets have gone unsold for the first time in franchise history. With the Western Conference finals between the Sharks and the St. Louis Blues, tied at 1-1, shifting here Thursday night, there were still hundreds of tickets available Wednesday.

The Sharks have been aware for a while that they needed to take steps to improve their performance on the business side as well as on the ice.

“A team is not always going to win,” said John Tortora, the team’s chief operating officer. “Fans are going to recognize that wins and losses are going to happen, but if they feel valued by an organization, they’re going to keep coming back. That piece is what we were missing over the last two or three years, and that’s what we’re trying to bring back.”

Until the N.H.L. arrived in 1991, San Jose — the Bay Area’s most populated city, with more than a million residents — had no major pro sports teams. If residents wanted to see any of the other teams in the region, they had to make a one-hour trek to Oakland or San Francisco.

That and the team’s early success created a strong bond between the Sharks and San Jose. But the overall sports landscape has shifted.

The San Francisco 49ers moved to neighboring Santa Clara. The San Jose Earthquakes of Major League Soccer built a state-of-the-art, 18,000-seat stadium two miles from the Sharks’ SAP Center.

Beyond that, the Sharks’ most direct wintertime competition for fan attention, the Golden State Warriors, have become the darlings of sports fans everywhere after a history-making N.B.A. season.

Still, Tortora would not describe those developments as anything other than motivation for his organization.

“I think the success of the other teams around us has forced us to become better,” he said. “The competition around us is greater, the expectation from fans from a value standpoint is greater, and we need to respond accordingly.”

The Sharks’ response so far includes a nightly $10 food coupon per seat for those who renewed their season tickets earlier than usual. Playoff seats for season-ticket holders were priced even further below those on sale to the general public. And more video replays are being shown inside the SAP Center — a past sore point as the team was reluctant to show any play that might be considered controversial.

Attendance has been dropping the past two seasons, after the Sharks lost a 2014 playoff series to the Los Angeles Kings despite winning the first three games.

A 205-game sellout streak ended Oct. 25, 2014, and only 13 of 41 home games this season had an attendance listed at the 17,562-seat capacity. Ticket renewal rates, which were normally around 92 percent, slid to 85 percent last summer, Tortora said, and a season-ticket base of 14,000 is now less than 12,000.

To turn things around, Tortora said, the team added $3 million to its sales and marketing payroll. And he found it significant that the owner Hasso Plattner approved the plan after the Sharks missed the playoffs in the 2014-15 season.

“A lot of owners, when you miss that playoff revenue, tend to get conservative; Hasso is just the opposite,” Tortora said of Plattner, a founder of the German software company SAP. “He understands the need to invest in people; he understands the need to invest in research and development.”

There were surveys to determine what the team’s priorities should be beyond more wins. The changes have not gone unnoticed.

“I’ve felt like we were spending a lot of money, investing all of our time and energy to come and we weren’t really being recognized,” said Carol Gagliardi, a 10-year season-ticket holder. “Now they’re on the right path.”

The Sharks, however, are still searching for an answer to one issue. With demand down, many season tickets are going unsold in the resale market or are being sold at a significant loss. Some fans see the team as making the situation worse by offering discounted seats on a regional website.

Yakov and Brooke Libman said they attended only two regular-season games because they now have two toddlers. They said they could sell their tickets for only about two-thirds of the remaining games, often at a loss.

“Had we been able to at least break even, we would have kept our season tickets,” Yakov Libman said. “But because we weren’t able to sell enough, we weren’t willing to invest the money.”

Players are aware of some of the changes that have been made. Forward Logan Couture, for example, welcomes the live music.

But defenseman Marc-Edouard Vlasic knows where the responsibility ultimately rests for filling seats each night.

“I mean, you win, and people get excited,” he said. “That’s the bottom line.”


