


The roast beef at Mr. Donahue’s, which opened in February on Mott Street, is a testament to the virtues of simplicity. But there are moments when Ann Redding and Matt Danzer, the chefs at the NoLIta microdiner, find themselves wrestling with that.

“It’s weird,” Ms. Redding said as dinner service got rolling the other night. “It’s weird doing something so simple. It’s such a departure from what we do at Uncle Boons.”

Uncle Boons, around the corner on Spring Street, is where the chefs, who are married, tangle with the intricate and intense flavors of Thailand. At Mr. Donahue’s, a meticulously retro shrine to the milder, grandfatherly aesthetic of meat and potatoes, the objective is different: to avoid “too many components,” as Mr. Danzer put it.

“We have to stop ourselves sometimes,” he said. (Limitation has become something of a theme at Mr. Donahue’s. The room has only nine seats, five of which are counter stools, although the impending arrival of outdoor seating should more than double that.)

Such is the salty-crusted tenderness of the restaurant’s roast beef that it would be hard to imagine wanting to gild the lily. Ms. Redding and Mr. Danzer take a whole strip loin from Painted Hills, a ranch in Oregon, and brush it with a coating of whipped egg whites. That gives the seasoning (a generous packing of sel gris, cracked pepper, chopped fresh rosemary and thyme) something to stick to.

They slide the roast into the combi oven for a couple of hours or so in low heat — 200 degrees. That’s all. When someone orders it, the cooks slice off slabs that are about an inch thick.

At Mr. Donahue’s, the $26 roast beef comes (as do all of the main courses) with two sides of your choice: pickled beets, maybe, or asparagus amandine, or jerk mushrooms, or an artichoke with a little tub of dipping mayonnaise that’s suffused with the flavors of shrimp scampi.

The result winds up addressing a sort of longing in Ms. Redding. “I’ve always been obsessed with prime rib,” she said.


