


When I arrived one day a couple of years ago at the gemeente, or government offices, in Amsterdam to apply for Dutch citizenship, tucked under my arm were reams of immigration-course certificates, language-test results, bank statements, birth certificates, police statements and endless other proofs and verifications compiled over several years.

My number was called, and I found myself in a cubicle chatting with a young government clerk, a recent graduate who shifted about as if he wasn’t entirely comfortable with his position as an administrator. Sitting next to me was my girlfriend, Jikke, who had come along for support.

“You and the mother of your children are no longer together, correct?” he started.

“We separated almost three years ago,” I said. “But we’re co-parents and live close by each other.”

I had moved to Amsterdam from Manhattan six years before, when my Dutch partner at the time was pregnant with our first son. Soon after, we had a second son. Then we split up. We now lived only a few minutes away by bike, dividing time with our children. I had stayed in the Netherlands to be a father to my kids, and Dutch citizenship would give me the rights and legal benefits that my current visa did not provide.

“And are you two married?” the clerk asked, nodding toward Jikke.

“No, we’ve been dating a little under two years.”

I explained that, about a year after the mother of my boys and I split up, Jikke and I met online. She lived only blocks away, right between me and my kids, in a famous old Jewish neighborhood where brass plaques denoted the hundreds of families removed by the Nazis. Jikke would often come by for dinner. Play with the kids. Then go home. We were taking it slow.

The clerk listened to my story but was hesitating.

“I have some bad news,” he said, finally. “If you want to be a Dutch citizen, you’ll have to give up your American passport.”

I was dumbstruck. I flushed, but I was able to swallow my rage enough to point to the official immigration checklist. “That’s not printed there,” I said.

“As you know, the immigration office is becoming more and more strict,” he said.

“Are you kidding me?”

I knew the anti-immigration parties were trying to push through all sorts of new laws aimed at Dutch Muslims, but I hadn’t heard of this.

“There are a lot of immigrants who have two passports,” he went on. “They collect benefits here but live somewhere else, like Turkey or Morocco. They want to cut down on that.”

The clerk tapped his pen against the desk. “There is a way around it for you, however,” he said, his eyes moving between Jikke and me. “If you’re married to a Dutch citizen, you can have a Dutch passport and an American passport.”

“You mean he can keep his American passport if we’re married?” my girlfriend asked, wagging a finger between us.

The clerk, trying to be as conciliatory as possible, nodded. My girlfriend asked if we could have a minute. The clerk seemed more than happy to run off and have a cigarette.

“We can get married,” she said calmly, when he was gone.

I shook my head. “You’ve already helped me so much,” I said. “It’s not fair. I should propose properly. Not in a cubicle. And not because some politicians are trying to score points.”

My girlfriend held out her hand to me and smiled. “We have it good,” she said. “Be thankful.”

She urged me to think of the bigger picture. Once this process was over, no one could deport me from the Netherlands. “You’ll be permanently Dutch and American, for better or worse.”

“I promise I’ll do it right someday.”

“You don’t have to promise anything.”

So I reached for her hand, matched her smile and looked her in the eyes. The rest was a blur.

When the clerk returned, he immediately recognized the decision in our flushed faces.

“Congratulations!” he said.

Once I had a rubber stamp to be a Dutch citizen and another to be a husband, we celebrated by puttering around the Amsterdam canals with my rickety boat, drinking cheap champagne.

A year later, in the United States, I took her to a Colorado Rockies game. As we sat there stuffing our faces with frozen cheesecake and hot dogs, I pointed to the Jumbotron. “Jikke, will you marry me for real?” was splashed across the screen.


