


NATIONAL

An article on Thursday about a confirmation by federal health officials that the Zika virus damages infant brains misstated the surname of the deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. She is Dr. Anne Schuchat, not Schucat.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Friday about a fire started by incense that killed two young sisters in a Bronx public housing complex misstated the surname of a spokeswoman for the New York City Housing Authority. She is Jean Weinberg, not Weisberg or Weisman.

•

An article in some editions on Friday about a decision by a nanny charged with murdering two children under her care to reject a plea deal that would have given her a sentence of 30 years to life in prison omitted the given name of the mother of the slain children. She is Marina Krim.

SPORTS

Because of an editing error, an article on March 19 about the Cheltenham Festival, a steeplechase event in horse racing, referred incorrectly to a nickname for the former Barclays executive Rich Ricci, the owner of the mare Annie Power. He earned the nickname Fat Cat in the Hat before Barclays paid a fine in 2012 for rigging interest rates and cheating its clients; the moniker did not arise after that. The article also misstated the amount that Barclays was fined. It was about $450 million, not $700 million.

•

The On Baseball column on Wednesday, about the Los Angeles Dodgers’ honoring their longtime announcer Vin Scully at their home opener, misidentified, in some copies, the location in Brooklyn where the Dodgers used to play home games. While the team played in what was then the Flatbush neighborhood, its stadium was at 55 Sullivan Place, not on Flatbush Avenue.

•

An article last Monday about Jordan Spieth’s collapse in the final round of the Masters misstated, in some editions, the spot from which he hit a wedge after his tee shot at the 12th hole went into a water hazard. He chose to drop his ball 80 yards from the hole; he was not in the designated drop area.

•

A report in the golf roundup on April 8 about Arnold Palmer’s not participating in the ceremonial first tee shot at the Masters misidentified, in some copies, one of the golfers who appeared in the interview room after the ceremony. Along with Jack Nicklaus, Gary Player was there — not Palmer.

•

An article in some editions on Thursday about the success of the U.S.A. Hockey National Team Development Program misstated, in some copies, the age of Jack Eichel, a program alumnus who led the N.H.L.’s Buffalo Sabres in goals this season. He is 19, not 18.

WEEKEND

A picture in the Listings pages on Friday with an entry about a performance by the trio JF3 at the Harlem Stage Gatehouse, in Hamilton Heights, was published in error. It showed the vibraphonist Joel Ross, who has performed with JF3’s leader, the pianist James Francies; the picture was not of Mr. Francies.

•

An art review on Friday about a show of photograph dealers in the Park Avenue Armory described incorrectly the show’s participants. It is an international — not American — group of dealers.

SCIENCE TIMES

A picture caption on Tuesday with an article about a new tree of life published by scientists referred incorrectly to Methanosarcina, the organism shown. It belongs to the domain archaea, not bacteria.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


