


In the 1950s, California corporate executives wrapped suburban banks in murals and mosaics to attract customers. The walls, meant to signify prosperity, were patterned with glittering city skylines, flourishing orange groves and portraits of Hollywood stars and early California missionaries. The best-known designer of the works, Millard Sheets, recalled in a 1988 interview that when bank patrons were asked what appealed to them about the buildings, they replied, “We like to be associated with something beautiful.”

Adam Arenson, director of the urban studies program at Manhattan College, has spent six years documenting the banks, mostly part of the Home Savings and Loan chain, along with other public artworks by Mr. Sheets. Mr. Arenson’s book, “Millard Sheets and Home Savings: Mid-Century Modern Corporate Art and Urban Identity for Southern California and Beyond,” is due next year.

The projects of Mr. Sheets, who died in 1989, are scattered from Honolulu to Detroit and Boston. Mr. Arenson keeps hearing about discoveries from people who are researching them and protecting them from demolition.

He has been admiring the work since he was a child; he grew up in San Diego, near a Home Savings branch with a Sheets scene of California friars and vaqueros. The imagery, he said, “has this sense of myth and identity and region.”

Mr. Sheets, a native of Pomona, Calif., was tireless, traveling widely to paint scenes of Africa, Asia, the South Pacific and the Middle East. At his studio in Claremont, Calif., he supervised teams of designers to produce mosaics, murals, stained glass, sculpture and fountains.

Along with banks, the studio created works for restaurants, churches, hotels, airports, libraries, stores, government agencies, schools, hospitals, Freemasons and cemeteries. The varied mosaics and murals sometimes measure over 100 feet long. At the University of Notre Dame, a library’s exterior wall is filled with a stone mosaic of Christ reaching upward with arms in a U-shape; although its official title is “Word of Life,” it is widely known as “Touchdown Jesus.”

Mr. Sheets also designed calendars and movie sets, and he collaborated and socialized with celebrities like Walt Disney and the abstract artist Hans Hofmann. Still, Mr. Sheets’s output has not much interested art historians. It is often considered “art of the establishment” rather than avant-garde, Mr. Arenson said.

Mr. Sheets and his wife, Mary, raised four children. One of their three sons, the artist Tony Sheets, runs a website, millardsheetsart.com, and tracks his father’s artworks. When murals and mosaics are endangered, he helps transfer them to new homes.

“We keep a close eye on them,” he said.

Gilded mosaics of birds and deities from a Dallas bank have been moved to the Joule hotel in Dallas. (Other mosaics from the bank have sold for thousands of dollars each.) A tableau of industrial workers made for a Los Angeles department store was taken to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County. Paintings of California hills from a Hollywood home’s dining room have been hung at the Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens in San Marino, Calif. A mural of a 19th-century parade, painted on walnut panels, has been transferred from a Pasadena bank to the gym at Pasadena City College.

Mr. Arenson is still determining the fate of some Sheets works, including an abstract mosaic in fiery colors that filled a lobby wall at the former headquarters of Interpace, a ceramics manufacturer in Parsippany, N.J. It is no longer visible, and no information has emerged about when it was taken out or covered up. The original drawing for the project is priced at $5,000 at Alan Wofsy Fine Arts gallery in San Francisco, which has a large inventory of Sheets sketches, paintings and prints.

Paul Bockhorst Productions in Monrovia, Calif., released a documentary a year ago, “Design for Modern Living: Millard Sheets and the Claremont Art Community 1935-1975.” A sequel in progress, “Claremont Modern: The Convergence of Art + Architecture at Midcentury,” will explore Mr. Sheets’s contributions to Home Savings branches.

The painter Anna Mary Robertson Moses, known as Grandma Moses, became a celebrity in the 1940s, soon after her 80th birthday. She prolifically painted her memories of 19th-century New York and Vermont towns and farmsteads, and she sometimes incorporated forms copied from magazines, books, greeting cards and prints. With her Manhattan dealer, Otto Kallir at the Galerie St. Etienne, she licensed her nostalgic works to be reproduced on textiles, tiles and dinnerware.

Prominent critics dismissed her paintings as kitsch, although other art world luminaries of her time, including Elie Nadelman, Andy Warhol and Joseph Cornell, similarly borrowed from 19th-century imagery. In the catalog for an exhibition, “Grandma Moses: American Modern,” which opens June 18 at the Shelburne Museum in Vermont, the curator Jamie Franklin writes, “I simply find it astounding how resonant Moses’s practices were with larger trends in the art world, and how little it has been commented upon.”

Mr. Franklin is the curator at the Bennington Museum in Vermont, which owns about 40 of Grandma Moses’s paintings as well as her art supplies, needlework fabrics, the schoolhouse that she attended as a child and her 18th-century worktable covered in landscape paintings. (The Shelburne exhibition will travel to the Bennington Museum next year.)

Jane Kallir, an owner of Galerie St. Etienne, said that a complete catalog of Grandma Moses’s works is in progress. Pieces are still surfacing; in April, two Moses landscapes, one painted on Masonite and another on a ceramic pitcher, sold together for $15,000 at Doyle auction house in Manhattan. She had told the original owner how the idea for the Masonite panel came to her: “One morning I dreamed I saw this scene and got up and painted it before the vision of it faded.”


