


Baylor hired the former Wake Forest coach Jim Grobe on Monday to replace Art Briles and lead its football program through a tumultuous time.

Briles was suspended with the intent to terminate last week after a report commissioned by the school accused him of not responding to or inappropriately handling allegations of sexual assault and violence by members of his team. In eight seasons at Baylor, Briles had turned the Bears into a Big 12 powerhouse after they had languished at the bottom of the conference since joining in 1996.

Grobe, 64, has been out of coaching for two seasons. He went 77-82 in 13 years with Wake Forest, leading the team to some of its best seasons, including an Atlantic Coast Conference title and an Orange Bowl appearance in 2006. He also coached Ohio University for six years.

“As a coach, winning is important,” Grobe said in a statement released by the school. “At the same time, I want to assure the Baylor family that every decision we will make in this football program will be made with Baylor University, her students and our student-athletes in mind.”

There was speculation that Baylor would promote the defensive coordinator Phil Bennett to interim coach. Instead, the university went outside the program for at least a temporary solution amid uncertainty after also demoting the university’s president, Kenneth W. Starr, and putting Athletic Director Ian McCaw on probation.

Suspended Dolphin Seeks Return Miami Dolphins defensive end Dion Jordan plans to apply to the N.F.L. this week for reinstatement after sitting out last season for his latest violation of the league’s substance abuse policy.

Jordan, the No. 3 overall selection in the 2013 draft, is serving his second suspension under the league’s substance abuse policy. The suspensions have limited Jordan to 26 games, in which he has 46 tackles and three sacks.

Augie Garrido, who has the most wins in college baseball history, is out after 20 seasons as Texas’ coach. The decision comes after the Longhorns’ first losing season since 1998, and Texas will miss the postseason for the third time in five years.

Garrido, 77, has 1,975 victories and five College World Series titles: three with Cal-State Fullerton (1979, 1984 and 1995) and two with Texas (2002 and 2005). He was also honored six times as national coach of the year.

Around the Majors Xander Bogaerts extended his hitting streak to 23 games as the visiting Boston Red Sox beat the Baltimore Orioles, 7-2, in a matchup of the American League East’s top two teams. Travis Wood and three other relievers combined for seven perfect innings after starter Jason Hammel left with cramps, and the host Chicago Cubs held the Los Angeles Dodgers to one hit in a 2-0 victory. Collin McHugh struck out eight in his first career complete game as the visiting Houston Astros continued their recent surge with an 8-3 win over the Arizona Diamondbacks. Matt Carpenter had four hits from the leadoff spot and Carlos Martinez pitched eight shutout innings as the visiting St. Louis Cardinals beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 6-0.

U.C.L.A.’s Mackenzie McDonald became the first player in 15 years to pull off a double national championship.

About four hours after he upset top-seeded Mikael Torpegaard of Ohio State, 6-3, 6-3, to win the N.C.A.A. men’s singles title, McDonald and his teammate Martin Redlicki beat Arthur Rinderknech and Jackson Withrow of Texas A&M to claim the doubles championship, 6-4, 6-1.

Earlier, Danielle Collins of Virginia defeated top-seeded Hayley Carter of North Carolina, 6-3, 6-2, for her second N.C.A.A. women’s tennis national championship.

McDonald is the first player since Matias Boeker of Georgia in 2001 (and fifth since 1974) to win both titles.

Mexican authorities rescued the kidnapped soccer player Alan Pulido after he was able to dial an emergency phone number and alert authorities to his location, a state prosecutor said.

Tamaulipas state Attorney General Ismael Quintanilla said in a news conference that a bungle by the kidnappers led to the speedy rescue of Pulido, a 25-year-old forward for the Greek club Olympiacos and a national club veteran.

Pulido was nabbed by four armed people on a highway about 11:30 p.m. Saturday. Pulido’s family received the first ransom call around 1:30 p.m. on Sunday, Quintanilla said. Authorities found Pulido in safe house in the southern part of Ciudad Victoria, his hometown, and one of his captors was arrested.

United Extends Teenager’s Deal The teenage striker Marcus Rashford signed a new contract with Manchester United through 2020, a reward for a breakthrough season that could earn Rashford a place on England’s European Championship squad.

Rashford, 18, was plucked from the youth teams in February because of an injury crisis at United. He scored two goals in his debut — a Europa League game against F.C. Midtjylland — and two more against Arsenal in his first Premier League start three days later. In 17 appearances for United, he has scored eight goals.

Moving On Up A.F.C. Wimbledon, an English soccer club created in 2002 by disgruntled supporters after their original team was relocated and rebranded, continued its rise up the league pyramid by getting promoted to the third division. A.F.C. Wimbledon, which began life in the ninth tier, beat Plymouth, 2-0, in the League Two playoff final at Wembley Stadium.

Pau Gasol, who helped Spain win the silver medal at the 2008 and 2012 Olympics, is considering not playing at this summer’s Olympics because of the Zika virus.

Gasol said that there was too much uncertainty about the situation in Brazil and that anyone going to Rio de Janeiro for the Games should “think about” whether it was worth the risk. Brazil has been badly hit by Zika, the mosquito-borne virus linked to severe birth defects and possible neurological problems in adults.

Gasol, who plays for the Chicago Bulls, said other Spanish athletes had also expressed their concerns about the virus and were considering skipping the Games.

“We need to understand the seriousness of the situation,” Gasol said. “Even though there are some soothing words being said, we know that there are different opinions about the subject.”

Gregory Bourdy of France had rounds of 67 and 68 at Walton Heath to lead 13 players who earned spots in the United States Open at an international qualifier in Surrey, England.

The three-time major champion Padraig Harrington of Ireland seemed certain to join them until he finished bogey-bogey, three-putting the 18th green, to miss the playoff by one shot.

Joining Bourdy at Oakmont from June 16 to 19 will be the former Ryder Cup player Peter Hanson of Sweden, who is returning from injury, and Matteo Manassero, the 23-year-old Italian who has fallen to No. 887 in the world.

The rest of the qualifying for the United States Open will be June 6 at 10 sectional sites across the United States.

Rose Withdraws With Injury The former United States Open champion Justin Rose withdrew from this week’s Memorial tournament with a lingering back injury. Rose, ranked No. 10 in the world, has not played since finishing 19th at the Players Championship three weeks ago. He won the Memorial in 2010 and was second last year, losing to David Lingmerth in a playoff.

AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE


