


When a free diver from New Zealand broke one of the sport’s most-prized world records on Saturday, plunging 122 meters beneath the ocean’s surface, fans were awe-struck by the display of human endurance. But the mark was to be short-lived.

On Monday, the same diver, William Trubridge, broke it again.

This time, he added two more meters, descending a whopping 124 meters (about 407 feet) while holding a single breath for 4 minutes 34 seconds.

“He is the king of free diving,” said Dana Beck, a New York instructor who has trained with Trubridge. “The guy completely lives, eats, sleeps free diving. It’s complete devotion.”

Trubridge’s records in the “free immersion” category came during the annual Vertical Blue competition at Dean’s Blue Hole in the Bahamas, considered the sport’s premier event. In free immersion, divers descend without fins, pulling themselves along a weighted rope to depth and back to the surface.

In a video of Trubridge’s descent on Saturday — in which he extended by one meter the record he himself set in 2011, 121 meters — he pulls himself slowly along the rope, conserving energy, traveling a distance well beyond the height of the Statue of Liberty. He then breaks through the surface, filling his lungs with deep, purposeful breaths.

Trubridge, who owns Vertical Blue, both a diving school and competition host, and trains year-round in the Bahamas, has been a dominant force in the sport. He holds the world records in two of the three main ocean-based categories of competition: free immersion and the “constant weight no-fins” category, in which divers descend without pulling on a rope or using fins. A third category allows the use of fins.

Trubridge had not planned to repeat a record attempt on Monday, said Francesca Koe, a spokeswoman for Vertical Blue. Speaking by phone from the Bahamas, Koe said he felt strong after his Saturday dive, and decided to push the limit further.

When he emerged from the dive, the small crowd of fans and fellow competitors erupted in cheers, she said, adding, “We’re going to party tonight.”

Free diving has been gaining popularity in the United States as more people have viewed the videos and become enthralled by the tranquillity of divers’ gliding into the ocean depths. The sport has also attracted competitors from other disciplines, such as running, who hope to maximize their use of oxygen.

Concerns in recent years about the dangers of the sport have led the competition’s governing body, the International Association for Development of Apnea, to tighten safety protocols.

An American diver, Nicholas Mevoli, 32, died during a record attempt at a Vertical Blue competition in 2013. Last August, the Russian diver Natalia Molchanova, 53, one of the sport’s most celebrated athletes, disappeared during a recreational dive off the coast of Spain.


