


FRONT PAGE

An article on May 21 about Gaza residents’ fears that the rebuilding of attack tunnels to Israel puts Palestinians at risk referred incompletely to Israel’s suspension of cement deliveries to Gaza for reconstruction of homes destroyed in the 2014 war. The suspension affected only homes being rebuilt by private individuals; cement continued to flow to housing projects handled by foreign governments and international aid groups.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on May 22 about EgyptAir’s awareness of security threats to the Airbus A320 jetliner that crashed into the Mediterranean — including graffiti written in Arabic on the underside of the plane that said, “We will bring this plane down” — referred incorrectly in some editions to a cousin of the captain of the fatal flight. The cousin, Ezzat Shoukair, is a man.

NATIONAL

An article on Monday about the transformation of Wyoming’s energy landscape to wind power from coal misstated the position of Bill Miller at the Anschutz Corporation. He is senior vice president of energy and land resources, not the president and chief executive. The article also misstated the number of acres on which the Anschutz Corporation will build the Carbon County wind farm. It will be on 2,000 acres, not 200.

NEW YORK

An article on April 12 about two donors to Mayor Bill de Blasio and their connections with police officials who are under federal investigation misstated the rank of a former senior police commander. Philip Banks III, one of the officials under investigation, was once the highest ranking uniformed official in the New York Police Department, not the third-highest-ranking chief. The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption. This correction was delayed because editors learned of the error only late last week.

•

A correction in this space on June 1 for an article about the crash of a vintage warplane into the Hudson River misstated Albert J. Parisi’s title at the Army Air Forces Historical Association. He is its operations officer, not its operations manager.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Monday about allegations of conflict between Airbnb’s vow to eliminate bias in bookings and its policy of barring class actions by customers misidentified, in some editions, the university at which Jamila Jefferson-Jones, a law professor who commented on the issue, teaches. It is the University of Missouri, Kansas City — not Barry University School of Law.

THE ARTS

A theater review on Thursday about two works by the playwright Alan Ayckbourn now playing in repertory at 59E59 Theaters in Manhattan misstated the amount of time that came between their composition. “Confusions,” a group of linked sketches, was written 41 years before the new play “Hero’s Welcome” — not 30 years. The review also misstated Mr. Ayckbourn’s age at the time he wrote “Confusions.” He was 35, not in his mid-40s.

•

An article on Saturday about an installation on Italy’s Lake Iseo by the artist Christo misspelled, in one instance, part of the name of his wife and partner, who died in 2009. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, she was Jeanne-Claude, not Jean-Claude.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Sunday about the costume and set designer Desmond Heeley rendered incorrectly the name of a magazine that published an interview with him in 2011. It is Lighting&Sound America, not Light & Sound America.

•

An obituary on Sunday about the writer Michelle Cliff misstated the century in which the social reformer Lillian Smith, a collection of whose writings Ms. Cliff edited, was active. It was the 20th century, not the 19th.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.comor (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


