


The Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday that doctors should exercise caution in prescribing to pregnant women an oral drug for yeast infections because of new evidence suggesting a possible link to miscarriage.

An estimated 10 percent of women get yeast infections in pregnancy, a period during which they are especially susceptible. Symptoms include severe itchiness, painful sex and abnormal vaginal discharge.

The F.D.A. had previously warned that chronic high doses of the drug, fluconazole (brand name Diflucan), might be linked to “a rare and distinct set of birth defects” in infants whose mothers took it in the first trimester. Those doses ranged from 400 to 800 milligrams a day in several case reports.

Pregnant women in a recent Danish study, however, mostly took one or two doses of fluconazole, each just 150 milligrams, a dose that the agency did not consider a problem until now. The study, conducted by researchers at the State Serum Institute in Copenhagen, was published in January in JAMA.

The study, a review of medical records, included more than 1.4 million pregnancies over a 17-year span in Denmark. Among the roughly 3,300 women who took fluconazole seven to 22 weeks into pregnancy, about 150 miscarried, compared with roughly 560 of 13,000 women matched for maternal age and gestational age.

Women who used the drug in the first 22 weeks of pregnancy had a significantly higher chance of miscarriage than those who did not. There was no significant association between use of fluconazole and stillbirth, defined in the Danish study as fetal death after Week 23.

Lyndsay Meyer, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said it was uncertain when the agency would issue further recommendations. But “until F.D.A.’s review is complete and more is understood about this study and other available data, we advise cautious prescribing of oral fluconazole in pregnancy,” she said in an email message.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that only topical azole products be used to treat yeast infections in pregnancy, even for recurrent infections. Despite this advice, doctors still sometimes prescribe oral fluconazole for severe symptoms or repeat infections. Some patients prefer an oral remedy to vaginal creams.

Ditte Molgaard-Nielsen, the study’s lead author, and her colleagues also compared pregnancies of women who took fluconazole with those of women who used topical azole treatment for a yeast infection. Women who ingested the oral drug had a significantly increased risk of miscarriage, the researchers found.

Rachel Hooper, a spokeswoman for Pfizer, the maker of fluconazole, said in an email that the drug “has a well-established benefit risk profile supported by more than 25 years of patient experience.”


