


Last year, the for-profit Corinthian Colleges chain collapsed under the weight of government investigations and allegations of fraud. Its demise left tens of thousands of Corinthian students with loans that will ultimately cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars to forgive.

This week, the private accrediting group that allowed Corinthian to stay open for business will face its own existential threat, when federal regulators decide whether to shut it down. That decision will go a long way toward determining whether education companies will continue to have free rein to profit from government financial aid programs.

Corinthian’s accreditor, the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools (ACICS), has a lot to worry about. A recent Center for American Progress report on the accrediting group scrolls out a long list of incompetence and wrongdoing.

Seventeen different colleges and corporate entities approved by the accrediting group to receive federal financial aid have been under government investigation over the last five years. Since 2013, those schools have received $5.7 billion in federal grants and student loans. The group is the accreditor for the currently collapsing ITT Educational Services and the accreditor for the Brown Mackie chain of for-profit colleges, which announced this month that it would close.

The list includes Miami-based FastTrain College, which hired exotic dancers to entice young male students, until its president was sentenced to eight years in prison for illegally enrolling high school dropouts and using the profits from their federal student aid money to buy a private plane and a 54-foot yacht.

As Buzzfeed recently reported, the “nonprofit” Northwestern Polytechnic University in Silicon Valley used its accreditation to essentially sell student visas to foreign students, guaranteeing them good grades regardless of their work. The family running the college then used college funds to buy and live in multimillion dollar homes. A whistle-blower sent the ACICS group extensive documentation of the college’s sham practices. The group responded with a perfunctory request for additional documentation, then left Northwestern Polytechnic alone.

The rest of the Center for American Progress report is a long list of attorney general investigations, F.B.I. raids, illegal recruiting practices, deceptive marketing schemes, multimillion dollar legal settlements, falsified job placement statistics and student suffering. The one thing the various colleges had in common, other than enthusiasm for enrolling low-income student bearing hefty student loans, was that each was accredited in good standing by the ACICS group. Indeed, many were on its “honor roll.”

That could change starting Thursday, when a little-known regulatory body within the Department of Education called the National Advisory Committee for Institutional Quality and Integrity meets to decide whether the accrediting group should be allowed to continue operations. Twelve state attorneys general have called for the committee to shut it down. A staff report from the Department of Education has officially recommended terminating the group.

Despite receiving over $150 billion in federal grant and student loan dollars every year, higher education is largely a self-regulated industry. Instead of directly determining whether colleges are good enough for federal funding, the government outsources that decision to private accreditors, which are governed and financed by colleges themselves. Accreditors set and enforce their own standards. For-profit colleges that operate nationwide can shop around to find the accreditor with the easiest terms.

The national advisory committee’s job is to accredit accreditors. It decides which accrediting organizations can, in turn, make colleges eligible to grant visas and receive federal aid. Over the years, the committee has been loath to kick anyone out, relying instead on a system of stern warnings and requests for additional paperwork when things go wrong. In this way, it has mirrored the philosophy of accreditors themselves, which rarely find that one of their dues-paying members should be banned from the club.

And it was clubby. A ProPublica investigation last year found that at least two-thirds of the accrediting group’s commissioners worked as executives at for-profit colleges.

No accreditor has ever come before the committee with as many problems as the ACICS group. If the group is allowed to continue operating, it’s hard to imagine what would be bad enough to prompt loss of federal recognition.

Currently, higher education consumer protection relies on a combination of state regulation, accreditation and market forces to ensure quality. The failures of ACICS-accredited colleges, along with many other for-profit and nonprofit colleges with low graduation and student loan repayment rates, suggest that the system often doesn’t work.

That’s because higher education is a complicated market. It’s easy to spend $3 on a cup of coffee that suits your tastes. It’s a lot harder to make smart choices when you can’t experience the college you’ve chosen until after you’ve taken out expensive, nonrefundable loans. Even if you’re not enticed by exotic dancers. In a higher education market that worked better, FastTrain and Corinthian wouldn’t have existed. Yet they did.

Considering the scale of what went wrong for many students enrolled in ACICS-accredited colleges, it’s hard to see how to fix things without government action. If the government’s committee does intervene, it will need to establish standards for what constitutes “bad enough” in college accreditation — and, thus, in colleges themselves.

Many accreditors and colleges would probably prefer this didn’t happen. But given the severity of the problem, the committee may have no choice.


