


A federal judge on Tuesday approved an agreement between Ferguson, Mo., and the Justice Department that calls for sweeping changes in the city, where the fatal shooting of an 18-year-old black man by a white police officer set off racial unrest in 2014. Judge Catherine Perry of United States District Court ruled after a hearing in St. Louis, where more than two dozen people spoke and many others had submitted written comments. Judge Perry said the settlement avoided years of court battles. It calls for the hiring of a monitor; diversity training for the police; the purchasing of software and the hiring of staff to analyze records on arrests, use of force and other issues; and the outfitting of all officers and jail workers with body cameras. (AP)

A class-action lawsuit over the contaminated water in Flint, Mich., was dismissed Tuesday, with the judge saying constitutional claims by residents are banned by the federal Safe Drinking Water Act. Judge John Corbett O’Meara of United States District Court said he was not making a decision on the merits of the lawsuit, which is one of dozens filed over lead in Flint’s drinking water. But he said residents could not pursue a remedy for civil rights violations in the matter, because of federal law and rulings by higher courts. Residents accused Flint and state officials of violating their rights by providing contaminated water and requiring payment. (AP)

Gov. Robert Bentley’s former law enforcement secretary sued him Tuesday, saying Mr. Bentley wrongly fired him. The former official, Spencer Collier, who has accused the governor of having an affair with an adviser, says in the lawsuit that Mr. Bentley and the adviser, Rebekah Mason, lied to the news media to try to discredit him. “Their lies have hurt me financially, have severely damaged my reputation, and they have made it their mission to permanently end my career in law enforcement,” Mr. Collier said. Mr. Bentley has said that Mr. Collier was fired after a review found a misuse of funds at the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency. The lawsuit accuses the governor of firing him because the two disagreed over a request to file an affidavit saying investigators found no evidence of misconduct by prosecutors in the ethics case against Speaker Mike Hubbard of the State House. Mr. Collier said the governor did not want him to file the affidavit. He says the governor wanted him to lie to prosecutors. (AP)

The state on Tuesday declared pornography a public health hazard and mandated that computer technicians who find child pornography report it to the law authorities. A resolution declaring pornography an epidemic that normalizes violence against women and children and makes men less likely to want to marry was signed by Gov. Gary R. Herbert, a Republican. It was passed by the Republican-led Legislature with the support of the Utah Coalition Against Pornography, backed by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The resolution calls on the Legislature to research the effect of pornography and invest in education and efforts to prevent its production and use. The Free Speech Coalition, an industry association representing adult entertainment producers, called the public health hazard designation an “old-fashioned morals bill” that was not grounded in science. (REUTERS)

The Navy said Tuesday that it had scrapped a national recruiting mailer that promised women that they could enlist “while staying in touch with your feminine side” and pursue careers that “most girls aren’t even aware of.” Navy officials said they had made the decision amid criticism that the wording was condescending and perpetuated stereotypes. A Navy spokesman said officials were reviewing all their mailer templates after The Associated Press asked about the brochure, which had been sent to nearly 203,000 people in the last few years. (AP)


