


STOKENCHURCH, England — Tchaikovsky’s opera “Eugene Onegin” is a story of two lives haunted by youthful miscalculation and a third wiped out in the process. It’s no laughing matter. But the tragedy is lightly told, with Russo-French refinement rather than Italian sobs. And last weekend’s new staging to open the season at the Garsington Opera — one of Britain’s fashionable country-house opera fixtures — followed a general rule that the best way to do it is with simple, spare transparency.

The Garsington “Onegin,” which runs until July 7, was directed by Michael Boyd, who used to run the Royal Shakespeare Company but has only directed one previous opera. And if nothing else, it showed someone steeped in the naturalistic tradition of British theater carefully — very carefully — exploring the expressionist possibilities that opera brings.

The production was essentially straightforward, firmly placed in the imperial Russia that Tchaikovsky asks for — no inventive relocations to the gulag or St. Petersburg, Fla. — on an open, almost bare and frankly dull set by Tom Piper. The narrative was clear; the action crisp, unfussy, focused.

But where Tchaikovsky tells his story of rejected love, death and regret through the discrete snapshots of what he called “lyric scenes,” Mr. Boyd merged everything in a seamless continuity — filling the joints with background information that he thought the audience should know.

In the transition from the duel scene, in which Onegin fatally shoots his friend Vladimir Lensky, to the ball scene at St. Petersburg, we see what happens to Onegin in the intervening years (a piece of information that Tchaikovsky leaves us to imagine). And we learn that Onegin is haunted by his friend’s death in a way that possibly surpasses friendship.

The idea that Lensky and Onegin might be lovers has been floated in earlier productions, not least in an absurd 2007 staging by Krzysztof Warlikowski for the Bayerische Staatsoper that borrowed from the film “Brokeback Mountain” and turned the world of Russian aristocrats into that of gay cowboys. Asking the (legitimate) question of why a young colt like Onegin would turn down a cutie like Tatyana, it decided that Onegin wasn’t into women. It was Lensky that he dreamed of.

Mr. Boyd provided nothing so explicit. But he had Onegin dance with Lensky’s corpse, the corpse transgendered in a frock and wig (a moment where this otherwise restrained show lost its poise). And that the final curtain fell with Lensky and Onegin staring intently at each other presumably carried significance, though whether it was meant to be confronting or consoling was not obvious.

Either way, with Roderick Williams in the role, Onegin was more sympathetic than usual. A much-loved personality in British music, Mr. Williams is not easy to dislike; and here his charm, warmth and intelligence made the rejection of Tatyana’s love seem sensible rather than cruel. His is not a massive voice, but handsomely expressive. And he used it well, enhanced by acting that turned understatement into eloquence.

Natalya Romaniw, a Welsh soprano with a Russian name, was vocally impressive as Tatyana but with too much self-possession when she is meant to be a tender soul in turmoil. The excitement and abandon of the letter scene was too contained; and underpowered support from the conductor Douglas Boyd (no relation to Michael) did not help.

But more broadly, the orchestral playing was strong. The youthful chorus was magnificent, sounding twice its size in the resonance of bare sets. Oleksiy Palchykov’s Lensky held his top notes with exhilarating ardor. And as often in “Onegin,” Prince Gremin’s single aria stole the show, sung here by Brindley Sherratt with authentic Russian depth.

If only such Russian authenticity hadn’t extended to the temperature in Garsington’s pavilion auditorium. It is designed for summer, which was not in evidence that night. Somehow the glamour of the country-opera circuit fades when everybody’s wrapped in blankets, tablecloths and even trash bags to stave off hypothermia.


