


SOCHI, Russia — Just two years after introducing a radical new technical formula with downsized, hybrid engines, Grand Prix racing is planning another new set of regulations that will completely change the appearance and concept of its cars next season.

But as teams prepare for the Russian Grand Prix in Sochi this weekend, doubts are growing within the series as to whether the changes — designed to end the dominance of a single team, reduce costs and improve the show — will actually achieve any of those things.

Worse, they may give the Mercedes team — or another top team — another chance to dominate.

And yet not even this season’s leader of the series, the Mercedes driver Nico Rosberg, is happy about the new rules.

“Our opinion was that it’s not the right direction to go, and we were hoping that they would definitely re-look into it and just make sure from a technical point of view to double check,” Rosberg said on Thursday in Sochi. “This is the way it is, so now all we can do is accept it and make the most of it and hope that there are going to be some surprises.”

In fact, the series’ stakeholders have had such a difficult time agreeing on the new regulations that ratification was first delayed from the end of February to the end of April, and with Saturday as the final deadline, the team directors managed to make their final agreement on Friday in Sochi.

The new rules are intended to make the cars look more dynamic, with wider bodies, wider wings and wider tires. The wings will give them more aerodynamic downforce and the tires more grip, and the engines will provide more power. As a result, the cars will go up to five seconds faster per lap to provide more spectacular, closer racing.

Another part of the changes is supposed to be a rethinking of the philosophy behind the engines, making the power unit more affordable to give lower budget teams a better chance to compete.

But after the series embarrassingly failed to spice up the qualifying format with new sporting rules this year, there has been concern that the new rules will also fail to achieve their goal.

While he agreed with the changes to wider cars and tires to increase the mechanical grip of the cars, Esteban Gutiérrez, a driver for the Haas team expressed some doubts. “What I’m not fully convinced about is the increase in downforce, which will naturally make overtaking more difficult — or let’s say, following a car more difficult.”

Some have noted that any overhaul of the regulations gives an advantage to the bigger teams, since a big, rich team can spend more money and devote more resources to exploiting a new set of rules than a small, lower-budget team. Felipe Nasr, a driver at the financially struggling Sauber team, said on Thursday that a new batch of regulations only added to the problems for his team.

While the decision to change the formula came last year when Mercedes was untouchable, this season, the trailing teams have been catching up, and competition has been tight, with exciting racing in the first three races this year.

And while in early 2014 the new six-cylinder, 1.6-liter hybrid turbo engines — which entirely changed the way drivers and teams approached car design and racing — were several seconds slower than the cars propelled by the previous 2.4 liter engines, the cars have now not only caught up, but they have gotten faster. During qualifying on April 2 at the Bahrain Grand Prix, Lewis Hamilton, the reigning world champion driver at Mercedes, set the track’s lap record.

Even so, the cars remain less physically difficult to drive than cars in any previous period in the series’ history, and many people — including the drivers — are seeking more challenging, spectacular machines.

“I think that from a driver’s point of view, the mechanical grip will be such a good thing for us drivers to have it back,” Nasr said. “But I agree with the others, what they are saying about the downforce; is it exactly what is going to improve the show?”

And yet it was the engine part of the new rules that proved to be the most important sticking point in negotiations, as the series’ promoter, Bernie Ecclestone, and its rule-making body, the International Automobile Federation, pushed for the engine manufacturers to reduce costs (by nearly half, to 12 million euros, or about $13.7 million, for an engine), while bringing engine performance closer together from one manufacturer to another.

The F.I.A. and Ecclestone also negotiated to force the four engine manufacturers — Mercedes, Ferrari, Renault and Honda — to agree to provide any team that may be without an engine with one, to avoid the kind of crisis the Red Bull team found itself in at the Russian Grand Prix last year, when it had no deal yet for an engine provider this year.

Finally, Ecclestone also fought to ensure that something be done to make the engines louder. Since 2014 the hybrid cars reduced the ear-shattering scream of the V8 engines of the past to a purr not much louder than that of a road car.

Eric Bouillier, the sporting director of the McLaren team, whose Honda engine manufacturer has just started to come to grips with the new hybrid engine formula after a disastrous first year last year, fears that changing the formula so soon could hurt Honda’s ability to improve the engine rather than help it.

“As far as we are concerned on the engine, we are seeking some stability,” he said, referring to the regulations, “which would be the key to develop and have a better convergence in the future.”


