


Trees and Neighbors

I live in a brownstone with a backyard. A large branch from a tree in the rear neighbor’s yard came down in my yard in strong winds. The branch is too large for me to move, so it will have to be cut up and removed by a professional. Who is responsible for this expense — the owner of the house in whose yard the tree grows, or me? If I need to contact the owners, how do I determine who that is, short of knocking on their door and inquiring?

Prospect Heights, Brooklyn

Take a look at the tree. Does it seem in good condition? Does the branch in your yard look as if it was healthy before the wind felled it? Or does it come from a weak and sickly tree that looks like an accident waiting to happen?

“All you need to do is look up,” said Bruce F. Bronster, a lawyer who specializes in commercial disputes. If the tree looks visibly sick, then the owner “should have known that the tree was falling apart.” And if the owner knew about this problem, it should have been resolved before Mother Nature stepped in.

Tree owners are responsible for maintaining their trees, so the trees do not damage property or people. Bob Redman, an arborist, offered this advice to owners: “Use common sense; monitor the tree yourself. Get it looked at and pruned regularly to make sure there’s no hazardous condition a lay person might overlook.”

If the tree was in poor condition before the windstorm, the tree’s owner should pay to remove the fallen branch. But if the tree was healthy, then cleaning the debris from your property is your responsibility.

Regardless, determine who owns that tree. Despite your reluctance, the easiest way to accomplish that would be to knock on the neighbor’s door and ask to speak with the owner. (If rental tenants answer, ask for the landlord’s contact information.) You could also try to find information about the property through the Automated City Register Information System, or Google the address.

Once you make contact, tell the owner about the fallen branch. If the tree is unhealthy, ask the owner to pay to remove the branch from your property and properly treat what remains of the tree. This will also put the owner on notice about any ongoing safety risk, and it will protect you should another incident transpire and you need to involve your insurance provider.

“You don’t want your insurance company to say, ‘You knew it, but you didn’t notify us,’ ” said Mr. Bronster, who suggested notifying the insurance company about any ongoing hazards.

You should also alert the city about any sickly or dead trees. Call 311 to contact the Department of Housing Preservation and Development and the Buildings Department. It is also possible that the tree, depending on its location, belongs to the Parks Department, not the homeowner. Contact that department as well.

•

Parking at a Curb Cut

On the block where I live, a restaurant has an attached garage that it uses as an extra dining room. The owners painted the curb cut yellow and painted “No Parking” in large lettering on the sidewalk. They posted signs on the garage doors saying they will tow cars, yet they park their own delivery vehicle in that space. Can they claim exclusive right to park at their curb cut?

Park Slope, Brooklyn

Few New Yorkers are blessed with a driveway and garage in the city. The lucky few enjoy a suburban perk: free and convenient parking. Everyone else must park elsewhere.

Whether the restaurant uses the garage for its intended purpose, it can still restrict parking in the driveway and at the curb cut, and post signs on its property publicizing the rules. It can even block the curb cut with its own vehicles. If someone else blocks the curb cut, the owners can call the police and have that car towed.

“You get a curb cut to your driveway and nobody is allowed to park there to block access,” said Alexander Schnell, a spokesman for the Buildings Department.

The restaurant cannot, however, paint the curb yellow or paint a “No Parking” sign on the sidewalk (a lesson Madonna learned last summer when she gave her own Upper East Side curb cut the same color treatment).

Report the painted curb to 311, and the Department of Transportation could issue a violation. This would get the paint taken off the curb, but it would not improve your parking options.

•

Forgetful Shareholder

A shareholder in our co-op is a senior who lives alone and is increasingly frail and forgetful. This shareholder has lived here for many years and is well liked in the building. Recently, two small fires started in this person’s apartment. A relative hired live-in care, but the shareholder fired the caregiver. How do we protect the building while respecting our neighbor’s privacy and independence?

Gramercy, Manhattan

Your concern for your neighbor’s autonomy is admirable. But you must consider the risk: What if he or she leaves the gas on and falls asleep? For the sake of everyone living in your building, the board needs to intervene.

“This is never an easy situation, as our senior population ages and becomes frail,” said Ronald A. Sher, a real estate lawyer who represents condominium and co-op boards. Nevertheless, he added, “the board has a fiduciary duty to both protect the residents and safeguard the building.”

The board needs to send a notice to this shareholder — and, if possible, the family member — demanding that he or she stop causing an unsafe and dangerous condition, Mr. Sher said. The board should also insist that the resident stop using a stove with an open flame, if that was the source of the previous fires. A home care aide might be necessary, and such a stern notice could persuade your neighbor to keep the next one who is hired.

The board “cannot ignore the problem out of concern for the shareholder’s privacy or independence,” said Howard Schechter, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.

And eventually, the board could begin an eviction proceeding. As harsh as this step might sound, it would get the family member’s attention and possibly get an agency like Adult Protective Services involved.

“Sometimes the only way Adult Protective Services will step in is if there is a risk that the impaired shareholder will actually be evicted,” Mr. Schechter said.

These actions might seem insensitive, particularly given that the neighbor is well liked in the building. But the goal should be to compel your neighbor to make necessary changes so that he or she can safely continue to live at home for as long as possible.


