


James Phelan, a literary scholar at Ohio State, heard it on sports-talk radio on Tuesday, even if fans and hosts weren’t saying it outright. The nature of the discussion about LeBron James conveyed that no matter what happened next, after he led the Cavaliers to their first N.B.A. championship Sunday night, his legacy had been definitively chiseled.

There was “implicit recognition that narrative culmination has already occurred,” Phelan said. James’s career, as inadvertently reflected by the radio banter, was now the stuff of bildungsroman.

Right, sports fans? Bear with me.

The hero chafes at the comfort he knows, so he leaves home, believing adventure will give him both spiritual fulfillment and a livelihood. He gains knowledge but comes to realize something is missing. He stumbles back home, where he realizes the key to happiness was right under his nose all along.

It is the plot of the coming-of-age story, grist for dozens of classic 19th-century novels (and yet more middling 20th-century movies).

If even those without Cleveland connections found themselves feeling warm and glad when they watched James drop to the floor at Oracle Arena on Sunday night and weep with joy, it might have been because the arc of his endlessly scrutinized career resembles a tried-and-true story, and this was its completion.

The technical term for a novel of growth is “bildungsroman,” a German word (roughly, “novel of development”) for a genre that started with a German book. That book — “Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship,” by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe — describes a well-to-do young man who leaves home and falls in with a troupe of actors, has adventures and finally realizes his destiny lies with a society of the well-to-do that is intimately connected to his origins.

In other words: There’s no place like home.

Throughout his sentimental education, to borrow the title of one of those novels, James has satisfied each of its conventions as if he were checking items off a grocery list.

He grew up in Akron, Ohio, near Cleveland. In the early stage of his career with the Cavaliers, when a Nike billboard in downtown Cleveland declared, “We Are All Witnesses,” his incredible gifts and the opportunity to write a storybook ending left him feeling pressured and stifled.

In 2010, James beat a path for Miami — trailed by burning jerseys, a nasty letter by the owner Dan Gilbert of the Cavaliers, and a book labeling him “The Whore of Akron” — and won two N.B.A. titles with the Heat.

“Without the experiences I had there, I wouldn’t be able to do what I’m doing today,” James wrote in a Sports Illustrated essay upon his return to Cleveland in 2014, confirming the necessity of the Miami part of the tale.

But James clarified that merely returning did not close the loop. “What’s most important for me,” he wrote, “is bringing one trophy back to Northeast Ohio.”

As with every other stage of James’s career, this was achieved as dramatically as possible. On Sunday night, that vintage chase-down block was reminiscent of his still-present, scampering youth. His brilliant game control — a teammate, Kyrie Irving, compared him to Beethoven composing a symphony — was the signature of so much experience.

Like the hero at the close of every novel of growth, James completely fulfilled society’s expectations as well as his own. No matter what comes next, he will never again have a moment as charged with meaning. That part of his life is over.

It is sublime. It is also bittersweet.

“They’ve found their place in society,” Joseph Slaughter, an English professor at Columbia, said, referring to the heroes of such stories.

“It reaffirms natural ideas of home and society,” he added, “that everybody will find their place.”

The genre, Slaughter said, frequently featured a fatherless man (it was the 1800s, and an autonomous place in society was largely unavailable to women). In “Great Expectations,” Pip searches for the father figure who provided him with his inheritance. Huckleberry Finn flees his drunken father and heads for the Mississippi River. And the stories conclude, Slaughter said, when the hero accepts his lot in society. Wilhelm learns he has a son.

James, as those familiar with his story will recall, was raised by a single mother in Akron, finding father figures in basketball gyms and siblings in his teammates, to whom he always preferred to pass the ball and whom he always kept close. After Sunday night’s game, James reportedly insisted on three portraits: one with his mother, Gloria; one with his coterie of close friends, some of whom he has known since childhood; and one with his wife and their three children — on Father’s Day.

This is real life, of course, and there are complications to James’s neat narrative of bildung, or self-formation. In 2010, James saw that the Heat provided the quickest route to a then-elusive N.B.A. championship. Later, he saw promise in Irving and the Cavaliers.

But if we are at times guilty of projecting these narratives onto James’s career, this was the natural result of his unmatched collection of basketball talents — bullet speed, freight-train size and beautiful mind — and the knowledge that they would not all last.

James has demonstrated that perhaps no vocation lends itself to the coming-of-age yarn better than athlete. The stark lines of sports provide a clearer focus for the universal fact these stories dramatize: that physical ability unavoidably wanes, infinitely magnifying the pressure to achieve one’s goals in a relatively short window of time, which shuts while one is still young.

James could still win another championship or three. He could play for the Knicks, although he probably won’t. He could clinch an N.B.A. finals on Cleveland’s home court. He could lead the Cavaliers to a rubber-match series against the Warriors a year from now.

But what he cannot do again is play quite as poignant a role, in his life or in ours. Having won one for Northeast Ohio, he is now the fully formed person he will be for the rest of his life.

“If he wins more, it’s denouement; it’s not climax,” Phelan said. “It’s epilogue or sequel.”

The bildungsroman, Slaughter said, is “also about the beginnings of middle age — finding that place where you’re comfortable, not excited by the same youthful fantasies.”

For this reason, Slaughter said, with stunning frequency the bildungsroman ends with the hero between 30 and 33. James is 31.

For someone to find his place so completely, in such triumph, is a wonderful thing. And for the rest of us, it is no small consolation to be able to say that we were all witnesses.


