


I’ve written before that while consuming too much salt is bad, so is consuming too little. A new study is making news all over the world that adds to this discussion, and in the interest of being good Bayesians, we should update our prior assumptions based on these results.

This new study was a meta-analysis that examined how salt intake is associated with heart attacks, strokes and death, but it added to the discussion by including high blood pressure. It looked at how salt intake affected those people with high blood pressure versus those with normal blood pressure.

This is important because, as I’ve discussed before, we’ve gone from recommending that people with high blood pressure drastically restrict salt in their diets to advocating that all Americans get to very low levels.

There seems to be pretty good evidence that people with high blood pressure who consume an excessive amount of salt should cut back. That’s where doctors started back in the day, and that concept holds up. But the evidence doesn’t support the idea that increased salt consumption by people with normal blood pressure makes that much of a difference.

Researchers took data from four large studies that collectively compared more than 133,000 people from 49 countries, followed for a median period of more than four years. The people were about evenly split between those with and without hypertension.

Researchers found that people with high blood pressure seemed to have more of a sensitivity to sodium. Those with hypertension had an increase of 2.1 mm Hg in blood pressure for each additional gram of sodium versus only 1.2 mm Hg in people without hypertension. (Most people should be less than 120/80 mm Hg). They also found that people with high blood pressure who consumed more than seven grams of sodium a day had significantly greater rates of cardiac problems and death than those who consumed four to five grams of salt a day.

But for people with normal blood pressure, consuming more than seven grams a day had no increased risk compared with those who consumed four to five grams a day.

In other words, consuming too much salt appears to be a risk factor for people with hypertension. But that same concern is not seen in people with normal blood pressure.

There’s more. A growing body of evidence shows that the push for very low levels may be doing more harm than good. I first discussed this almost two years ago.

People with hypertension who consumed less than three grams of sodium a day had a higher risk of bad outcomes than those who consumed four to five grams. They even had worse outcomes than people who consumed more than seven grams.

An increased risk was also seen in those with normal blood pressure who consumed less than three grams a day. These results held even when the researchers excluded those with cardiovascular disease, so it seems unlikely that these results could be because unhealthy people were the ones consuming the lowest amounts of sodium.

Even as this new evidence comes to light, the Food and Drug Administration still recommends we consume less than 2.3 grams of sodium a day. The World Health Organization still says it should be less than 2 grams, and the American Heart Association still says it should be less than 1.5 grams for many people. In fact, the A.H.A. has already strongly rebutted this new study.

Bringing consumption down to such low levels won’t be easy. More than 95 percent of the people in the world who have been studied consume more than three grams of sodium a day.

People with hypertension who are consuming more than seven grams of salt a day should cut back. This new study continues to support that advice. But too often in medicine we take a recommendation that applies to a select group of high-risk people and then apply it too broadly and too strongly. That may do no good, and may even backfire.


