


NEWARK — The roads were still dark early Monday morning when Joseph Micalizzi, a junior at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, made his way from the library to his room in the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity house, friends said. Around 3:20 a.m., a pair of blasts punctuated the morning hush and Mr. Micalizzi, 23, was found shot in what the police and college officials believe was an attempted robbery at the fraternity house.

Mr. Micalizzi, an engineering student who was in his second year at N.J.I.T. after transferring from Brookdale Community College, was taken to University Hospital here, where he was pronounced dead at 5:02 a.m.

“He died senselessly, that’s all I can say,” Mr. Micalizzi’s father, John, said, his voice trembling as he spoke from the family’s home in Freehold, N.J., where relatives and friends had gathered to cope with the news. “He was a good kid, studying very hard for his engineering degree. I haven’t met a single person who didn’t love him.”

The police said no suspects had been identified, nor had any arrests been made. N.J.I.T. and the Essex County sheriff’s office are each offering $10,000 for information leading to an arrest in the case.

The shooting was the second time in less than a month that a college student was killed in the area. On April 10, a student at the Newark campus of Rutgers University, Shani Patel, was shot to death in his off-campus apartment on Central Avenue, and his roommate, a recent graduate of the school, was seriously wounded. Marcus Feliz of Newark was charged in the killing.

In a statement on Facebook, N.J.I.T.’s president, Joel S. Bloom, said, “This is a tragic time for Joe’s family, friends and the entire N.J.I.T. campus, and we extend our thoughts and prayers to all affected.” Mr. Bloom said a memorial was being planned.

Tens of thousands of students from N.J.I.T., Rutgers-Newark, New Jersey Medical School and Essex County Community College all intermingle in this area of Newark called University Heights, which has seen a wave of development in recent years. Still, crime has persisted, with 104 homicides in Newark in 2015 — an increase of 8 percent from 2014 — and 33 this year.

Frank Lino, a close friend of Mr. Micalizzi from high school and college, said he was always careful about the hazards of the neighborhood. A wrestler with taekwondo experience, Mr. Micalizzi slept with a baseball bat near his bed, Mr. Lino said. He even taught self-defense to some classmates.

“You always hear the rumors about crime,” said Mr. Lino, 22, a sophomore studying network security, who said he planned to transfer out of the college. “I figured it was overblown, but now after the shooting last month and this, I’m realizing it’s very real. “The city falsely propagates this idea that Newark is safe again, but they need to put their money where their mouth is. Why wouldn’t there be any security guards? It’s a busy intersection.”

Mr. Lino described Mr. Micalizzi as an ambitious young man with wide-ranging interests. He played trumpet and drew animations of characters from “Star Wars” and “Avatar.”

“He was always the first guy to bail and go do homework,” Mr. Lino said. Then he caught his wording and sighed. “I can’t believe I have to say ‘was.’”

On Monday afternoon, as gray clouds gathered overhead, a group of Tau Kappa Epsilon members embraced one another and shook their heads in disbelief outside their red brick fraternity house, with its large white Greek letters trimmed in red marking the front of the building. On the building’s side hung an enormous American flag. A front window was smashed open next to a sign saying, “Warning premises protected by 24-hour video surveillance.” A faded yellow emergency call box hung next to the front door.

John Micalizzi and Mr. Lino said the house had been broken into recently. They said a man came in and took some cellphones and wallets before fleeing at the sight of a fraternity member.

“With all these other problems,” John Micalizzi said, “I’m scratching my head why they didn’t ramp up security. The students all pay a hefty fee to study there. There’s no explanation for it.”


