


PHILADELPHIA — For most of Mitski Miyawaki’s childhood, she was on the move. Because of her father’s job, she lived in 13 countries — a constant carousel of arrivals and departures, attaching and detaching, trying to fit in, if only for the moment.

But even when she was still, she had ways of destabilizing herself. Her teenage years were defined by wild edges that she acknowledges but declines to detail. Music, she said, was the thing that grounded her, and convinced her she should press forward.

So if there is a life force pulsing through Mitski’s music — she performs under her first name — it’s not accidental.

“Not to be cheesy, but I do think music helped me not die,” Mitski, 25, said one afternoon last month in a crumbling alcove in the backyard of the quaint Random Tea Room & Curiosity Shop here, a train ride from her parents’ home in the suburbs. “Maybe this is a made-up belief to preserve myself, but I do believe that everyone has a purpose, and my purpose is to put out music that means something. Every time I would almost just not make it, I would be like, ‘But I have this thing that I can do, this thing that gives me a passport that allows me to be here.’”

“Puberty 2,” her fourth album, due out June 17, is purple like a new bruise, an impressive collection of D.I.Y. punk and indie rock that’s her most expansive work yet. There’s more variety in her singing, which moves from aggrieved to sultry to resigned. And there’s more ambition in the music, which doubles down on grit while also rounding things out with a buffer of soul.

It is an impressive follow-up to her 2014 breakout, the startlingly raw and vibrant “Bury Me at Makeout Creek.” That was her first lo-fi excursion after a pair of albums recorded with an orchestra when she was in college, and it established her as one of the most promising voices in indie music, as unafraid of tackling institutional sexism and racism as the fraught crevices of her own heart.

The emotional tenor of “Makeout Creek,” she said, “was like “I’m angryyyyy’ or ‘I’m saaaaaaad,’ and that was the world, but then I grew up a little.” The new album is somehow less pessimistic without being more optimistic. It contains some staggeringly beautiful, hopelessly pained imagery, the sort of moments that crisply convey a whole world of anxiety in a few words.

On the elegiac “I Bet on Losing Dogs,” she commiserates with the helpless and the hopeless:

And one of this album’s standouts is the controlledly tense “Fireworks,” an ode to stoic forgetting, to the need to remain implacable in the face of devastation:

When Mitski smarts, it sticks. “I have a very conveniently photographic memory of emotions — it’s overwhelming, because things don’t fade for me,” she said. Each year, she said, she gets less and less sleep, as more and more life keeps replaying in her mind.

“It’s very good for songwriting,” she conceded, “’cause something could happen three years ago, and I could be in that moment and write emotively about it. It’ll be there, for better or for worse.”

For years, because of her constant movement, memories and feelings were all Mitski could carry with her, fomenting an acceptance of impermanence and a reluctance to trust too deeply. “If I attached, it means I’d have to detach,” she said. “I just kind of floated above so that it wasn’t as hard to live.”

The constant moving also shaped her approach to music-making. “I’m not much of a gear person, not much of a production person,” she said. “I emphasize the composition because I grew up not having things or losing things. A lot of my music is still made that way — I make it so that there are as few musicians as possible.” (In the credits for “Puberty 2,” she acknowledges her producer, Patrick Hyland, “who I made this with, just him and me.”)

“What’s important to me,” she continued, “is that my songs can exist without any material anything. It’s very reflective of my ideology.”

In a sense, she also wants to ensure that the songs can exist even without her. For Mitski, the body is just a means to the art: “Me, myself, I actually have very little care about,” she said. That is in part a byproduct of a lifetime of itinerancy, constant reinvention and minimizing of the self. But Mitski’s music — scarred, vulnerable, immediate — often blurs the line between what’s private and what’s open for scrutiny. She feels acutely the tension of being a private person suddenly thrust under a microscope — even if she herself has done the thrusting.

“It’s like I’m sending out messages in bottles, but very picky and stubborn and selfish in that I only want the right person to receive it,” she said. “I want to connect, but I also want to be left alone.”

The result is a blend of radical transparency — as on her Twitter account, where she sprays thoughts fast and furious — and walled-off protection of her private life. And in person, she is selectively evasive, speaking with extreme ideological certainty but also clear emotional reluctance, deciding with each moment which one to prioritize. “I’m learning to be open in certain aspects of my life to almost create a red herring so that other stuff can remain private,” she said. “Sometimes I feel more like myself onstage as a performer than I do offstage.”

Her accessibility also causes her stress over her influence on others, an unease only exacerbated because of how race is lived and experienced in America. “Most public people who aren’t white feel this pressure and are asked to represent everybody,” she said. “I know for a fact that I’m problematic. I shouldn’t be looked to for any kind of guidance.”

“I have to go out and consciously say, ‘I’m a person, I can’t be a role model, I’m not a representative of anything,’” she continued. “I have to consciously go out and do that, or else it’s gonna be put upon me.”

Mitski said all this not with tension, but with a shrug: A lifetime of pinballing from place to place has taught her to retain power over things that one can control while ceding concern about the things one can’t. That said, she sometimes wonders about whether the most appropriate response to the increasingly unmanageable parts of her public life would be sabotage. “I think about it all the time,” she said. “Every day, I’m like: ‘What if I just destroy this? Then maybe that would save me.’”

She added: “If the music went away and I stopped being this way and I could just be a normal healthy person with a regular job, I would do that in a heartbeat. I really would. I would love to be just happy.”

A different answer, though, comes in learning how to settle down, how to say hello rather than goodbye, how to trust that people won’t leave when the chips are down. “I’m trying to break the cycle of thinking only fraught situations bring meaningful art,” she said.

To that end, she’s already written much of her next album. “There are songs on that record about just loving somebody,” she said. And it feels O.K.


