


A Brooklyn teenager was convicted of murder on Thursday for setting fire to a mattress in the hallway of his high-rise that led to the death of a police officer.

The teenager, Marcell Dockery, was arrested on a murder charge in April 2014 after Officer Dennis Guerra was killed while responding to the fire, set on the 13th floor of a building on Surf Avenue in Coney Island, Brooklyn. Officer Guerra’s partner, Officer Rosa Rodriguez, was critically injured.

At a two-week trial in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, prosecutors told the jury how Mr. Dockery, who was 16 at the time of his arrest, confessed to the police that he had lit the fire because he had been bored. Though his lawyer, Jesse A. Young, argued that the confession was coerced, the jury returned a guilty verdict after only a few hours of deliberation.

Prosecutors introduced surveillance video at the trial of the heavy smoke that filled the hallway during the fire, but the emotional heart of their case was testimony by Officer Rodriguez, who described in measured tones how she had been unable to breathe in the hot, chaotic scene. After being rescued by firefighters, Officer Rodriguez spent several months in burn units and eventually required a lung transplant.

When the officers arrived at the building on April 6, 2014, they saw no sign of fire and unwittingly took an elevator up to the blaze. After Officer Guerra’s death, the Police Department issued new directives for how its personnel should respond to fires, ruling that officers should take an elevator toward a fire only after inspecting it for smoke and should exit at least two floors below the blaze.

Though the prosecution acknowledged that Officer Guerra’s death had been an accident, Mr. Dockery was charged with what is known as felony murder, a provision of the law that permits a death to be legally considered a homicide if a defendant kills someone while committing another felony. Mr. Dockery was also found guilty of arson for setting fire to the mattress, as well as assault for the injuries to Officer Rodriguez.

After the conviction was returned, Patrick J. Lynch, the president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, praised the “just verdict” but added that it would not bring Officer Guerra back.

In a statement, Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, said one officer had died and another had been injured “all because the defendant was bored.”

Mr. Young, the lawyer, could not be reached for comment.

Mr. Dockery now faces 25 years to life in prison. He is scheduled to be sentenced on June 14.


