


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. One of the great lies of preparing food in a slow cooker is that you can just set the thing up in the morning before work and receive a great meal at night when you get home.

Maybe if you work at home, or part-time or at any rate not in big cities where the traffic home stalls at the precise moment when your meat turns from luscious to cardboard. Leave a slow cooker going for more than 8 or 9 hours, and your results will vary — most often from insipid to awful.

We’ve taken to using the slow cooker for overnight preparations: loading up the insert with ingredients right before bed, then taking it off in the morning before even the coffee has dripped. (No eight-hour snoozes for us!)

So maybe give that a try this evening with a Mississippi roast, or with Mark Bittman’s recipe for slow-cooker cassoulet, or mine for vaguely Vietnamese pulled pork? There’s some shopping to be done, for sure, in advance of the cooking. But the prep is simple and the morning scents ambrosial. You can order in a pizza tonight for dinner and slap a salad on top of it and all will be right with the world. Come Tuesday night you’ll be eating in clover.

And perhaps again later in the week. Did you know you can save recipes from websites other than our own to your Cooking recipe box? (Here’s how to do that.) We’re in love right now with Jonathan Miles’s riff on instant ramen in Field & Stream, itself a take on a recipe from the incomparable Cree LeFavour, which adds pulled pork and fillets of largemouth bass to the protean dish. We can use some of the shredded remains of the vaguely Vietnamese pork in ours, and pair it with fillets of black sea bass because that’s what’s around. So great.

Or go simple. If there are chanterelles in the market, we like Martha Rose Shulman’s recipe for cod with chanterelles and parsley sauce. Or Melissa Clark’s recipe for scaloppine with any meat. Kim Severson has a fine recipe for salt-baked shrimp that is a beautiful dinner at the top of the week with rice and a salad. And you can never go wrong with Ian Fisher’s recipe for spaghetti carbonara.

Then maybe later on in the week, you can bake. Everyone at work or school loves a home-baked cookie, after all, and sometimes it’s good just to make something sweet, if only to indicate your place in our community of cooks. Have you tried Julia Moskin’s recipe for salted tahini chocolate chip cookies yet? Or Melissa’s recipe for oatmeal sandwich cookies? Or Marian Burros’s take on Laura Bush’s cowboy cookies? I know it’s the top of the week. That’s no reason to deny sweets to yourself or your friends.

You can find many more recipes to cook in coming days on Cooking. Tell us what you think of them by affixing a rating or a note to the ones you’ve cooked — and of course share them with friends. (If you run into problems? Please reach out: We’re standing by at cookingcare@nytimes.com.)

Finally, have you read Eric Asimov on the wines of Beaujolais? That’ll get you buying and sipping. (We like a good Morgon with our “Better Call Saul.”) Have a great week.


