


SHIMA, Japan — President Obama said on Thursday that he was preparing to visit Hiroshima on Friday to emphasize that decades after the end of the Cold War, the world still faces the threat of nuclear war.

“I do think that part of the reason I’m going is because I want to once again underscore the very real risks that are out there and the sense of urgency that we all should have,” Mr. Obama said during a brief news conference at the Group of 7 meeting in this southern Japanese resort city.

Mr. Obama said that the city of Hiroshima was not just a reminder of the terrible toll of World War II, a conflict that ended 70 years ago. It is also a reminder “that the job’s not done in reducing conflict, building institutions of peace and reducing the prospect of nuclear war in the future.”

Mr. Obama cited some of the successes of his efforts to slow and even reverse the proliferation of nuclear weapons, including the nuclear deal with Iran, a weapons treaty with Russia and the Nuclear Security Summit meetings, which have eliminated nuclear material from some countries.

But he pointed to North Korea’s burgeoning nuclear program and the stationing of tactical nuclear weapons by Pakistan along its border with India as worrisome problems.

“North Korea is a big worry for all of us,” he said.

The president said his administration’s focus on degrading and eventually destroying the Islamic State was justified because it was an “immediate risk.” But he said that North Korea posed a different kind of risk.

“When you have such an unstable regime that is so isolated, that generally flouts international norms and rules more than perhaps any nation on earth, that is also devoting enormous national resources hellbent on getting nuclear weapons that they can fire long distances, that poses a kind of medium-term threat that we have to pay a lot of attention to,” he said.

Japan and South Korea, both close American allies, are deeply concerned about North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs. Mr. Obama said that other countries in the region, including China, have begun taking the risks emanating from North Korea more seriously.

But he acknowledged that no efforts undertaken by those countries had solved the conundrum that is Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s unpredictable leader.

“In the meantime, we’ve been working with the Pentagon for several years now on making sure we can develop the kind of defense architecture that can protect the United States and our allies from an unexpected escalation,” he said.

Mr. Obama arrived in Shima late Wednesday night and immediately held a meeting with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. During their talk, Mr. Abe scolded the president for doing little to prevent the brutal murder of a woman in Okinawa, a crime that the Japanese police have linked to an American worker at a United States military base.

“This case has shocked not only Okinawa, but also deeply shocked all of Japan,” Mr. Abe said at a news conference after the meeting, adding, “I also urged the United States to make sure to take effective and thorough means to prevent a recurrence, and vigorously and strictly address the situation.”

Mr. Obama responded by extending “my sincerest condolences and deepest regrets.”

On Thursday, the leaders of the Group of 7 nations, gathered at a resort here, spent the morning being shuttled to the Ise Shrine, considered the holiest place in Japan. Led by Shinto priests in white robes, they toured the immaculate grounds and at one point picked up shovels and tossed bits of dirt into piles in a ceremonial tree planting.

They then spent the day in and out of a series of meetings that Mr. Obama called “extremely productive.”

They discussed the global economy and efforts to accelerate growth, he said. They also talked about the various trade deals being negotiated among them, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership involving Japan and the United States, and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the United States and Europe.

Both pacts are politically troubled, and the Trans-Pacific deal has almost no chance of passing Congress before the elections in November.

Mr. Obama said the leaders discussed rising protectionism and how to counter it. They also talked about the American presidential election, he said.

Indeed, in one meeting where reporters were allowed to be present, Mr. Obama could be heard discussing the presumptive Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, with Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy. And at the news conference later, the president said he had discussed Mr. Trump with the leaders of all six of the other industrialized nations. Besides Italy and Japan, those countries are Britain, Canada, France and Germany.

“I think it’s fair to say they are surprised by the Republican nominee,” Mr. Obama said, referring to Mr. Trump.

“They are not sure how seriously to take some of his pronouncements, but they are rattled by him and for good reason,” he said, citing Mr. Trump’s “ignorance of world affairs, or a cavalier attitude, or an interest in getting tweets and headlines instead of actually thinking through what is required to keep America safe, secure and prosperous, and what’s required to keep the world on an even keel.”

Mr. Obama said he continued to have no interest in intervening to influence the Democratic primary despite concerns among many in the party that the race is showing signs of bitterness that could be difficult to overcome before the general election.

“During primaries, people get a little grumpy with each other,” he said. “It’s just the nature of the process.”

But he said that Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Hillary Clinton had largely agreed on the important issues.


