


LOUISVILLE, Ky. — Each May, up to 20 horses line up in the starting gate for the Kentucky Derby, each with a shot at capturing America’s most famous horse race and going on to sweep the Triple Crown.

It is one of the most enduring rituals in American sports, but first comes the draw that determines where in the gate each horse in this immensely crowded field will be placed. And so the connections of the 22 horses (two on the also-eligible list) that have been entered in Saturday’s $2 million race all filed into the Aristides Lounge at Churchill Downs on Wednesday evening waiting to find out, all of it happening in the glow that American Pharoah created in 2015 by becoming the first horse to win the Triple Crown in 37 years.

Nyquist, the undefeated 2-year-old champion, drew Post 13 and was made the 3-1 morning-line favorite by the Churchill Downs oddsmaker, Mike Battaglia.

Lured by a $1 million bonus from the auction company Fasig-Tipton as a graduate of its Florida 2-year-old in-training sale, Nyquist’s connections took him from his home base of California to face the previously undefeated Mohaymen last month in the $1 million Florida Derby — an almost unheard-of meeting ahead of the Kentucky Derby. Nyquist won with ease as Mohaymen, who drew the No. 14 post for the Kentucky Derby and was listed at odds of 10-1, was pushed wide throughout and never found his footing on the wet track at Gulfstream Park, finishing fourth.

“I feel very confident with the way he’s been training since then,” said Mohaymen’s trainer, Kiaran McLaughlin. “We had plenty of excuses in Florida.”

Nyquist’s trainer, Doug O’Neill, and owner, Paul Reddam, are familiar with the hubbub surrounding the Kentucky Derby, having won the race with I’ll Have Another in 2012. They are also familiar with the heartbreak that often strikes on the Triple Crown trail: I’ll Have Another, who also won the Preakness Stakes, was scratched a day ahead of the Belmont Stakes with a tendon injury. Still, that memory did not prevent them from feeling excited when Nyquist drew a favorable post. “I’m very happy,” O’Neill said.

Bob Baffert, the trainer of American Pharoah, will be trying for his fifth Derby victory. Although Baffert is here with Mor Spirit, it would be easy to think that American Pharoah was still in his barn. Wearing an American Pharoah jacket on Wednesday, Baffert autographed race programs and bourbon bottles commemorating last year’s sweep. He has been asked about American Pharoah far more often than he has been asked about Mor Spirit, and he has no problem with that.

“I’m all about photographs and autographs — that’s my life right now,” Baffert said. “People come up to me and say, ‘Thank you for American Pharoah.’ He was just a very rare horse. That’s why it was so hard for me at the Breeders’ Cup, because I knew that was it.”

Baffert visited American Pharoah this week at his new home in Versailles, Ky., at Coolmore’s Ashford Stud. He spent about an hour with the horse, walking him and even waiting for him to breed to a mare.

“I had a lump in my throat when I first saw him,” Baffert said. “I really think he recognized us.”

Baffert acknowledged that he feared American Pharoah would be a different, more aggressive horse now that he is a stallion. But that was not the case.

“He hasn’t changed at all,” Baffert said. “He’s just a real sweet horse, so intelligent and so kind.”

Mor Spirit drew the dreaded No. 17 hole, from which no horse has ever won. His odds are 12-1. Almost equally dreaded is the No. 1 hole, from which no horse has won since Ferdinand in 1986, and Nos. 18, 19 and 20, from each of which only one horse has won. Trojan Nation (50-1), Majesto (30-1), Brody’s Cause (12-1) and Danzing Candy (15-1) drew those spots.

Churchill Downs uses a points system to determine the Derby field, with points being earned by the top four finishers in designated prep races. The Louisiana Derby winner Gun Runner, who drew the No. 5 post at odds of 10-1, had the most points with 151.

Laoban, who would be ridden by Cornelio Velasquez, and Cherry Wine, who would be ridden by Robby Albarado, are on the also-eligible list and could draw into the field should any horses be scratched before Friday’s scratch time of 9 a.m. Eastern.

Another familiar face from the American Pharoah camp, the jockey Victor Espinoza, will be aboard Whitmore, the third-place finisher in the Arkansas Derby, who will leave from Post 10 at odds of 20-1. Espinoza, who also won the Kentucky Derby in 2014 with California Chrome, will try to win a record third straight Derby.


