


So the bear will be left to wander the athletic wilderness this August.

For years, haltingly at first and now with eloquence, some elite athletes have spoken of ridding their sports of doping and the accompanying clouds over grand accomplishment.

Last March in Oslo, I talked with the American biathlete Lowell Bailey. “Are we supposed to just accept that we’re not nearly as clean as we thought?” he said.

He answered his question with a shake of the head: “You want repercussions, some sort of retribution.”

Repercussion and retribution arrived Friday with a thud. The chiefs of international track and field barred the participation of Russia in the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. A global superpower, Russia had engaged in top-down and systematic doping of its elite athletes and covered it up, they said.

Rune Andersen, an antidoping specialist for the International Association of Athletics Federations, which governs track, took a seat in a room in Vienna and spoke in soothing Scandinavian-accented English. His message was unyielding.

“The system in Russia has been tainted by doping, from the top level and down,” he said.

In a system this broken and corrupted, he added, you cannot know who is clean and who is not.

That there was justice to be heard in Andersen’s every word was indisputable. Grigory Rodchenkov, the former director of the Moscow lab that tested thousands of Russian Olympians, has turned whistle-blower. He recently spoke to The New York Times of his handiwork. He described concocting exotic doping cocktails with the brio a top bartender brings to mixing a mean mojito.

Victories in the war on doping come encoded with risk, and worry. Olympic politics are inseparable from national and global politics, and President Vladimir Putin, a cobalt-eyed sort, has embraced sporting dominance as a symbol of Russia’s re-emergence as a global power.

“The whole doping scandal is a painful blow for the Kremlin, and humiliation for Russia,” Lilia Shevtsova, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, told me. “In a situation of gradual exhaustion of resources, Putin has been especially keen on making sport a building block of Russian greatness.”

Putin did not stamp his foot and rumble on Friday, as he is in a conciliatory phase of late. He did sound indignant as he made clear his displeasure.

“There was not and cannot be any support for violations in sport, or in doping on the state level in Russia,” he said in St. Petersburg, Russia. “This cannot be a foundation for building anti-Russia policy.”

Putin prides himself on strategic unpredictability and mixes the statesmanlike with the frankly intimidating. So long as the international sports chieftains hold strong, Russia could feel pressure to reform its laboratories, the better to get its runners and high-jumpers swiftly back on the world stage.

As ever, it’s worth noting that doping is a problem afflicting athletes in every nation, and that many Americans have been suspended over the years. Russia, however, remains among a relative handful of nations plausibly accused of having state-run doping programs. To compete as a clean Russian athlete is to risk the anger of your coach, and discipline from your federation.

Andersen and the I.A.A.F. president, Sebastian Coe, had no sooner finished talking than eyes turned to Thomas Bach, the president of the International Olympic Committee. Bach wears his imperial hauteur like a winter overcoat. During the Sochi Olympics in 2014, he shared a flute or five of champagne with Putin. Bach, who is German, was defensive of his Russian friend, and he pointedly warned the world to keep its nose out of Russia’s business.

“People have a very good understanding of what it really means to single out the Olympic Games to make an ostentatious gesture which allegedly costs nothing but produces international headlines,” Bach said.

Next week, Bach and his committee must ratify the decision of the I.A.A.F.

Perhaps with an eye toward uncertainty, Coe set down survey sticks on Friday that demarcated his power. “It’s entirely the decision of the I.A.A.F,” he declared of the decision to bar Russia. “It is a very clear proposition that the eligibility sits and lies with the I.A.A.F.”

Coe and Andersen were careful Friday to murmur encouragement, noting that the Russians had made progress in their rehabilitation. The reality is that they are at best surly reformers.

Yuriy Borzakovskiy, a former middle-distance runner and Olympian, coaches the Russian national team. To listen to Russian Ministry of Sport leaders, he is just the man to lead a new generation of clean athletes.

To embrace that notion requires a double dose of amnesia pills. As the I.A.A.F report released Friday noted, the same Borzakovskiy repeatedly insisted that no particular doping problems afflicted Russian athletes. He attributed an unfortunate spate of adverse findings to poor biometric analysis.

The coach and his fellow Olympian Yelena Isinbayeva dismissed a damning World Anti-Doping Agency report on Russia as “groundless.” Isinbayeva recently wrote an op-ed essay for The New York Times in which she argued that she and clean Russian athletes should be allowed to compete in the Olympics. How do we know that they are clean? They passed all their urine tests, she said. This elides the fact that investigators found that her nation’s laboratory had tinkered with many hundreds of urine tests, substituting the clean for the dirty.

“In interviews with the task force,” the I.A.A.F noted dryly, “it emerged that neither of them has ever actually read the report.”

The rehabilitation of the bear could prove a lengthy and imaginative process.


