


New York City Ballet has been renewing itself at all levels in its current six-week season, which is now in its fourth week. Dancers in the corps have shown exceptional talent in lead roles, notably that zephyr Joseph Gordon in “Symphony in Three Movements” (seen on May 5), the tall powerhouse Emily Kikta as the soloist in “Rubies,” the impishly ebullient Indiana Woodward in the pas de trois of “Emeralds” (both May 1). On Tuesday, its senior ballerina, Maria Kowroski, returned to the stage after childbirth, almost a year after her last performance. She’s the same tall and slender vision as ever, but with a newly free expansiveness.

And City Ballet has been renewing the ballets of its founder-choreographer George Balanchine. He made the three ballets I’ve mentioned; he also made all three ballets in the triple bill that entered repertory last week. The three — “Ballo della Regina,” “Kammermusik No. 2,” and “Vienna Waltzes”, utterly unalike — comprise the richest fare of the whole season. The program’s diversity and mastery astounds.

“Ballo” (“Ballet for the Queen”), set to ballet music from Giuseppe Verdi’s opera “Don Carlos,” is virtuoso classicism, in which outgoing allegro technique is taken to an exceptional peak of exuberance. Verdi’s ballet depicts the discovery of the celebrated pear-shaped white pearl La Peregrina (which Richard Burton later gave to Elizabeth Taylor). The twist in “Don Carlos” is that, although the dance is intended to honor Queen Elizabeth of Spain, she has absented herself from the celebrations. Instead, the woman who presides over the opera’s dance spectacle is her lady-in-waiting, Princess Eboli (wearing the queen’s mask), who sings with excitement of her chance to be queen for a single night.

Though Balanchine’s plotless blue-and-white ballet shows you no pearl and no princess, you can feel multiple layers of that drama evoked by the poetry of his steps: pearl-fishing through plashing waters, grand royal processions, exultance in the fleeting moment. Feet sparkle, arms stretch wide. We hardly know which element we’re in. A cavalier, immediately after promenading his ballerina, beats his legs in the air (a cabriole).

“Kammermusik,” set to Paul Hindemith’s Kammermusik No. 2 (1925), for piano and orchestra, is uncompromising modernism, intensely rhythmical and abounding in deliberate oddities. Unusually for Balanchine, the corps de ballet is all male and much of what Balanchine gives these eight men, often corresponding to the orchestra, is more unusual yet, consisting of crouches, tableaus and chains that become knots.

Dancers often step on alternating heels or turn in their knees. Sometimes they bring their wrists in beside their shoulders, with hands pointing out sideways like spiky epaulets.

Two leading male-female couples, often teamed with the solo piano, sometimes stationary while the corps moves, dance with intense musical intricacy. Rapid echo and canon effects abound. These four, too, plant their legs apart, prance on their heels, fold knees across each other, but at speed. The women wear their hair in ponytails, and the way those swish around their necks and faces is part of the texture of the piece.

“Vienna Waltzes” is a panoply — a vast, composite world of five different scenes, to music by Johann Strauss II, Franz Lehar and Richard Strauss. In only one of the five do women dance on point. The changes in Rouben Ter-Arutunian’s scenery alone make the ballet a spectacle like no other.

We begin in the Vienna woods, with tenderly romantic chivalry between male-female couples (“G’Schichten aus dem Wienerwald,” or “Tales From the Vienna Woods”). We then pass through ballet entertainment (“Frühlingstimmen”, or “Voices of Spring”) and joyful non-waltz vulgarity (Johann Strauss II’s “Explosions-Polka”) and the formal flirtations of “Gold und Silber Waltzer” (“Gold and Silver Waltzes”). And the “Rosenkavalier” finale, one of Balanchine’s most poetically psychological dramas, is a dream-ballroom fantasy, in which a woman, in a long dance soliloquy, is repeatedly partnered by a man who may be her fantasy or an increasingly real suitor in whom she can scarcely believe.

City Ballet has fielded two casts in all three ballets. No dancing has been poor; some has been outstanding. In “Ballo” (Sunday), Tiler Peck, that virtuoso, finds one of her very finest roles: while its bravura challenges her, its musicality releases her. In the Tuesday performance, Anthony Huxley was, as so often this season, dynamite in the male role. The four women soloists — notably Ashley Laracey in the first solo — beautifully caught the choreography’s shining marriage of rhythmic flow and brilliant allure.

Sara Mearns and Teresa Reichlen led “Kammermusik” on Tuesday with an uncompromising, thundering force. And yet the same two women were paragons of touchingly romantic old-world femininity in “Vienna Waltzes” on Sunday. — Ms. Reichlen in the Vienna Woods scene with Tyler Angle, Ms. Mearns in the “Rosenkavalier” ballroom with Jared Angle (Tyler’s brother). Ms. Kowroski graced the same scene with Amar Ramasar on Tuesday. Tiny nuances in these artists’ interpretations, such as the meeting of eyes, the touch of a hand, the turn of a head, became powerful.

But you come out thinking of Balanchine. Astonishingly, these three ballets had their premieres between June 1977 and January 1978, in his final period. City Ballet was almost 30 years old. He was in his 70s. Top-quality choreography of immense diversity was still pouring forth from him. The bewildering range of styles in these three works demonstrates why he merits the word “genius.”


