


Emma Straub wrote her best-selling novel “The Vacationers” when she was pregnant with her first child, and her new novel, “Modern Lovers,” which comes out May 31, while pregnant with her second. “It’s all part of this giant cycle of book-baby-book-baby,” Ms. Straub, 36, said. The process seems to work: Vogue selected “Modern Lovers” as one of its top books this month, saying that it “nails the Brooklyn mise-en-scène: $2 million Victorians, a kombucha-brewing enterprise gone awry.” She lives with her husband, Michael Fusco-Straub, 37, a graphic designer, and their sons, River, 2, and Miles, 4 months, in a house in Brooklyn’s Columbia Street Waterfront District. Soon, the family will go on book tour — in outfits that match the pattern on the book cover. “I am hoping they will be so amused by the fact that I’m wearing my book jacket that they won’t notice the bags under my eyes,” Ms. Straub said.

WAKING UP Ugh, God. On a really good day, one person, somebody, sleeps past 5 a.m. If the little one is up around 5 a.m., he will eat and go back to sleep. If the big one is up at 5 a.m., he is likely to get a book and climb back in bed. By 6:30 a.m., everyone is dressed and the party has started. The party is River telling us an elaborate story about some construction vehicle or a hardware store. Miles is squawking. Mike and I are trying to brush our teeth.

RHINOCEROUS FARE Since we have nothing to do — no classes, no appointments, no dates — we’ll make pancakes. We like to pancake. Lately we’ll make River pancakes in different colors, and in the shapes of animals. Luckily our son has a good imagination, so when we tell him a pancake looks like a rhinoceros, he’s likely to believe us.

JUST LIKE MOM River has always liked books. We’ve instilled in him this horrible habit of reading at the table. He’s unable to get through a meal without about four books. Then we’ll spend a few minutes or an hour trying to convince River we should leave the house, which he is not fond of doing, so that means suiting up in firefighter regalia.

MEET THE GRANDPARENTS I convinced my parents to move to Brooklyn from the Upper West Side, which is a gorgeous, gorgeous, dirty trick I played on them. Between us is Brooklyn Bridge Park. We’ll go to the Sandbox Village. We’ll take turns rocking the baby, and closing our eyes behind our sunglasses while my parents entertain River.

CULTURE CLUB We’ll come back home for lunch. The three of us, because Miles only eats my breast milk, are supporting the cheese industry. All we really eat is cheese.

HER STORIES If both of them are asleep, we might watch something on our DVR. Maybe a half an hour of “Nashville.” It’s gone full soap. I say that with full respect. I grew up watching soap operas. When I would go to summer camp, I would make my dad watch “All My Children” and write and tell me what happened.

BEEF, BOOKS This gets us to 2 o’clock. Once everyone is up, we’ll try to have another adventure. We might jump in the car and go to the Meat Hook, which is a butcher shop in Williamsburg run by our friends. No weekend passes without a walk to BookCourt, which is one of River’s favorite places.

MORE CHEESE We’ll come home and have a secret pizza party. That’s the name of one of River’s favorite books, so every time we have pizza it’s a “Secret Pizza Party.” We stick to the basics: your usual margherita, maybe a pepperoni. A good mozzarella is important, because that’s what you’re snacking on while you make the pizza.

LIMPING TO BED By 7 p.m. or 7:30 p.m., River’s in bed. Poor Miles is on no schedule whatsoever. That’s just the fate of the second child. We’ll watch something. If we’re feeling ambitious, a movie, but mostly we’ll watch three episodes of, like, “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.” We limp to bed at an astonishingly early hour. But listen, 8:57 p.m. is only early if you’re going to sleep all night.


