


This year’s Tonys talk focused heavily on a single show: “Hamilton.”

But the biggest immediate beneficiary of the Broadway awards ceremony appears to be a much-less-well-known production: “The Humans.”

The family drama by Stephen Karam, which has been chugging along at the Helen Hayes Theater since Jan. 24, won four Tony awards: best new play; best featured actor in a play (Reed Birney); best featured actress in a play (Jayne Houdyshell); and best scenic design in a play (David Zinn). And last week — the first since the Tonys were broadcast June 12 — was the best week at the box office to date for “The Humans,” which grossed $563,565, according to figures released Monday by the Broadway League.

“The Humans,” which had previous productions at the American Theater Company in Chicago and at the Roundabout Theater Company in New York, is not only grossing more money than any other play on Broadway, including the long-running hit “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” but it also has the highest average ticket price of any play, at $123.45, and advance sales have ticked up since the Tonys.

Last week “The Humans” grossed more than several musicals, including “Chicago,” “Jersey Boys,” “Fun Home” and this year’s Tony winner for best musical revival, “The Color Purple.” And “The Humans” is grossing more than all those shows while playing in the smallest theater on Broadway — the Hayes only has 576 seats.

The Tonys had less of an impact on the night’s other big winners. “Hamilton,” which won the prize for best new musical, was already sold out, so it had no capacity for short-term growth, and its grosses last week were relatively flat, at a whopping $2 million. “The Color Purple,” after having won the best musical revival award, was down significantly, to $560,484, as its Tony-winning star, Cynthia Erivo, was out most of the week. (She was in London for the opening of the British production of “Aladdin,” which stars her boyfriend, Dean John-Wilson, in the title role.)

Overall, the week ending June 19 was a decent one for Broadway: The 34 shows running grossed $28.2 million, down slightly from the $28.5 million the 35 shows running the week before brought in. Two plays closed on Sunday: “Eclipsed” (which will be presented at the Curran theater in San Francisco next spring) and “The Father.”


