


Every commission by the New York-based nonprofit Creative Time is, in some sense, fleeting. Since its inception in 1973, the organization has funded site-specific works for spaces around the city, often on a blockbuster scale — its much-talked-about projects have included Doug Aitken’s “sleepwalkers” projections at MoMA in 2007 and Kara Walker’s “A Subtlety...” at Domino Sugar Factory two summers ago — whose limited-time-only nature was part of their draw. But this spring, Duke Riley’s project “Fly By Night” is fleeting in a rather more literal sense. On weekend evenings from May 7 through June 12, Riley will release a giant flock of pigeons, numbering in the thousands and outfitted with tiny LED-lit leg bands, to circle the East River in graceful formation and create a kind of undulating constellation.

Riley, who’s been an enthusiast (or “fancier,” in pigeon parlance) since rescuing one as a child, has spent months working with the birds, who have been roosting in specially designed coops atop the Baylander, a historic, Vietnam-era naval vessel that’s now docked at the Brooklyn Navy Yards. Riley created the coops with Kristen Becker of the nature-minded Seattle-based design firm Olson Kundig — and the pair also collaborated on a limited-edition birdhouse that will be available for purchase starting at tonight’s Creative Time Spring Gala, which mimics the silhouette of the Baylander. “I wanted the coops to have the same naval feel as the Baylander does,” Riley explains, “and include both the nest box and aviary section as we have for the pigeons, so the birdhouses would feel the same way as the coops of ‘Fly By Night.’” More functional than the average art-gala souvenir, the birdhouses may also have the effect of encouraging partygoers to try their hand at pigeon keeping — a onetime widespread city practice to which Riley hopes to draw attention with the project. “I think people will also be struck with how delicate, beautiful and diverse these birds are,” he says. “We have so many different types of pigeons, and people are always struck by the variety.”


