


Listen to this week’s podcast | Subscribe: iTunes | RSS | Stitcher| Audioboom

On this week’s popcast, Caetano Veloso, the great Brazilian singer and songwriter, talks about 50 years of music, history and politics. He is currently on the United States leg of a world tour with Gilberto Gil, the musician with whom his career has been most entwined. (A recording from earlier in the tour, “Dois Amigos, Um Século de Música: Multishow Live,” has just been released in the United States by Nonesuch.)

Meanwhile, his country appears to be unraveling. We spoke on a Tuesday; three days earlier, the lower house of Congress in Brazil voted to impeach their president, Dilma Rousseff, in a move that Ms. Rousseff has described as a coup.

“We are living hard times in Brazil,” Mr. Veloso said. “I never saw Brazilians so split as different groups, you know? So divided.”

This may be difficult for non-Brazilians to understand. Mr. Veloso lived through a military takeover in Brazil in 1964, one supported by the United States, to suppress the perceived threat of Communism. During the next four years, he and Mr. Gil started their careers, joining with poets and artists and playwrights to create the Tropicalismo (or Tropicalia) movement in an uneasy, semi-suppressive atmosphere. In 1968, after a decree that suspended constitutional guarantees, both of them were arrested, jailed and eventually sent out of the country. (They lived in London for two and a half years before returning to Brazil.)

In this interview, Mr. Veloso discusses, among other subjects, whether or not he understands Sunday’s events as a coup; the visible differences in Brazilian society between this time and 1964; what happened on Mr. Gil’s trip to Pernambuco in 1966 that helped generate the Tropicalismo movement; the relationship between the sound of the Portuguese language and samba; the idea of a “second abolition”; and his frank estimation of Mr. Gil’s talent in relation to his own.

Related article

Review: Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil, Harmonic and Political Still


