


Vallejo Gantner, the artistic director of Performance Space 122, a center for adventurous performance events in the East Village, will step down from his post as soon as a replacement can be found — and before the space reopens after a long-in-the-works renovation.

“You want to leave when the going’s good,” said Mr. Gantner, 42, who has held the top job at PS122 since 2005. “You want to leave before you screw it up.”

PS122, which was founded in 1980 in a former schoolhouse turned community center, has long been a locus for experimental dance, theater and performance. It has hosted work by vanguard figures like Spalding Gray, John Leguizamo, Meredith Monk and Blue Man Group.

Under Mr. Gantner’s tenure, it has helped to introduce a new generation of artists, such as Young Jean Lee, Radiohole and Julie Atlas Muz. In 2006, he started the Coil festival, which has helped make January in New York an international hub for avant-garde performance.

In 2011, PS122 moved out of its longtime home on First Avenue to make way for renovations designed to update and enlarge the building. The renovation also includes two new theaters, built without the support columns that defined and bedeviled PS122’s previous performance spaces.

Construction on the city-funded project, originally budgeted at $34 million, started later than planned and has not yet been completed, as the condition of the 1894 building proved worse than had been expected.

Chet Kerr, the vice chairman of PS122’s board, said this week that he expected it to reopen in 2017. He described Mr. Gantner’s departure, which has been in discussion since last year, as amicable. “I can’t tell you how much I appreciate what Vallejo has done for the organization and what he’s doing for the organization right now,” Mr. Kerr said.

Mr. Gantner said he believes someone else should lead the ribbon cutting. “I’ve made my mind up to go before I get tired, before I get calcified,” he said. He is aiding the board in a search “for someone to come in with all the fire and the energy and the mojo to really take us forward,” adding that he expected a new leader to be named by the end of the year.


