


WESTHAMPTON BEACH, N.Y. — There are almost as many territorial disputes in the Hamptons as there are fish in the Peconic Bay: local versus weekender, weekender versus weekender, surfer versus fisherman versus environmentalist, those for dunes and breakwaters and those against.

But one of the most intense and longstanding disputes involves a few dozen plastic strips that would be attached to utility poles in this East End village of 2,000 to 20,000 (depending on the season).

Since 2008, members of the Hampton Synagogue on Sunset Avenue have been trying to erect an eruv in Westhampton Beach and neighboring Quogue, both villages within the town of Southampton. Observant Jews, particularly those belonging to Orthodox sects, cannot carry or push anything outside the home on the Sabbath. An eruv, typically composed of natural barriers and hanging wires, symbolically extends the home, and thus makes it easier to travel to services or to visit friends and relatives on Friday nights and Saturdays.

The East End Eruv Association, as the group promoting the plan is known, approached Verizon and the Long Island Power Authority for permission to use roughly 30 utility poles to demarcate the eruv, but the administrators of the town and two villages objected. After years of court battles and even a mocking segment in 2011 on Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show,” Southampton settled with the association last fall, followed by Quogue this spring, and Westhampton Beach is likely to do the same after a public hearing on Thursday.

Part of the eruv is already in place, though few people outside the synagogue’s community seem to have noticed.

“I’m overwhelmed since last summer, when I see these young families who can now come to services with their children, or their parents, when they didn’t in the past,” Marc Schneier, the rabbi at Hampton Synagogue for 26 years, said in a phone interview.

Part of what has attracted so much attention to the dispute is that opponents of the eruv have included other, more secular Jews. They have made comparisons with communities like Lawrence, on the border of Nassau County and Queens, and East Ramapo, in Rockland County. As the populations of Orthodox Jews grew, stores closed on Saturdays and conflicts over public schools arose.

Arnold Sheiffer, one of the leaders of a group known both as Jewish People for the Betterment of Westhampton Beach and Jewish People Opposed to the Eruv, argues that the eruv will simply “create another ghetto” in the Hamptons.

“As a reform Jew, I find it extremely offensive to create a distinction that this is a Jewish area,” Mr. Sheiffer said in a phone interview from Vero Beach, Fla., where he also has a home. “The courts have been wrong before. Black people couldn’t sit at lunch counters, and women couldn’t vote and abortions were illegal. Case law isn’t always right.”

Indeed, it took three separate court case to see the eruv through.

In 2011, the eruv association sued the municipalities after they threatened to fine the utilities if they allowed the eruv to be installed. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York found in 2014 that the utilities had not violated their franchise agreements with Westhampton Beach and installation of part of the eruv could proceed (the rest will rise in Quogue within the next week or two).

Jewish People Opposed to the Eruv tried to intervene in that case in 2013. Its suit was dismissed twice, with the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit rejecting the argument that placing an eruv on ostensibly public property violated the First Amendment. The final case, decided last fall by the State Supreme Court in Riverhead, found that Southampton had erred when the town’s zoning board rejected the eruv.

Because some of the cases involved civil rights claims, when the municipalities lost in court, the town and villages became liable to pay the eruv association’s legal fees, which total in the millions of dollars. The group’s law firm, Weil, Gotshal & Manges, agreed to waive those fees if the municipalities settled.

“They claim it’s a wonderful, diverse village, and we agree, and we don’t want to see that change either, and an eruv isn’t going to change that,” Yehudah Buchweitz, a partner at the firm, said.

Peter Sartorius, the mayor of Quogue, said that the village decided to settle because it had little choice, and he also argued that the litigation resulted from the neighboring communities more than his own. “Our decision was really based on the decisions that came down around us, and not really against us,” he said.

The Southampton town supervisor, Jay Schneiderman, took office in January, after the community reached its settlement — a fact he said he was grateful for.

“This barrier created a lot of barriers, and now that it’s behind us, I hope people can start to come together again,” he said.

The mayor and village board in Westhampton Beach declined to comment before the meeting on Thursday, but their lawyer, Brian S. Sokoloff, expressed resignation.

“I’m not satisfied with the Second Circuit’s ruling that a religious symbol can be placed on public property,” he said. “But I recognize, and my clients recognize, that this is now the law until it is overturned in another case.”

Some in Westhampton Beach remain bothered by the eruv’s possible effect.

Kevin Mathews, who was working in his mother’s boutique on Main Street on a recent weekday afternoon, worried that business might fall off on Saturdays. “We’ve only got 10 weeks a year to make a living, so every day counts,” he said.

Among those who led the push for an eruv was Marvin Tenzer, who also happened to live in Tenafly, N.J., where a similar fight was waged a decade ago, ultimately coming down in favor of that eruv association, as well.

“What amazes me is, everyone complained the eruv would be ugly and ruin the town, and now everyone is complaining that they can’t even find it,” Mr. Tenzer said.


