


MADRID — After an uncharacteristic skid last year, Rafael Nadal has regained his traction on the slippery clay that he had once dominated, adding intrigue to this week’s Madrid Open.

Novak Djokovic, who has won the past three Grand Slam events, remains the favorite to win his first French Open this month. But Nadal, a nine-time champion at Roland Garros who last year had his least successful clay season in more than a decade, has led the pack in the early part of the clay season, winning the Monte Carlo Masters and the Barcelona Open.

Though he was hoisting the trophy for the ninth time at each event, the victories were nonetheless reaffirming. Nadal did not win a title as last year’s French Open approached, his first such drought in 10 years, and then lost decisively to Djokovic in the quarterfinals in Paris, his first loss at the tournament since 2009.

Djokovic has remained the tour’s top player, and he has beaten Nadal four other times since, including twice this year. But after Djokovic lost his first match in Monte Carlo last month, Nadal capitalized by running through a difficult draw of Stan Wawrinka, Andy Murray and Gael Monfils to claim his first Masters title in nearly two years.

In his pretournament news conference Sunday at the Madrid Open, Djokovic said Nadal would prove the toughest competition on clay, and not only for himself.

“I think Rafa is everybody’s main rival on clay courts,” Djokovic said, “because of his history on this surface and the results that he had throughout his career that deservedly put him, as always I think, one of the top, or probably the top, favorites on any clay-court event, as a matter of fact.”

He continued: “Of course, he did not have a 2015 clay-court season the way we used to see him play on a very high level. It was not up to his standard. This year, he’s showing already a much higher quality of tennis and performance. He really played terrific, both in Monte Carlo and Barcelona. I’m sure he’s very motivated to do well here in Madrid and continue to do well on his favorite surface.”

Nadal, rarely one to boast — even when at his most dominating — expressed satisfaction with his recent play.

“I’m happy, I’m good and I’m competing every single week with what I have,” Nadal said Sunday. “Sometimes what I have is a lot, and other times I don’t have so much. During the last weeks, I think I have a lot. I’ve been competing against the players and won matches against some of the best players of the world and competed pretty well against all of them.”

Murray, who beat Nadal in last year’s Madrid final, traveled to Majorca, Nadal’s base, to train with him last week. He said he had jumped at the opportunity to practice with Nadal, whom he called “probably the best clay-court player of all time.”

“He’s obviously feeling much better about his game,” Murray said Sunday. “I think it makes things more interesting — for you guys — over this period when he’s playing at the level he’s been playing the last few weeks.”

Nadal has also asserted himself off the court, following through on his earlier vow to sue Roselyne Bachelot, the former French minister of sport, for defamation. Nadal, who filed the lawsuit in a Paris court last Monday, had been angered by comments Bachelot made on a French television program in March. In those remarks, Bachelot confidently declared that Nadal had served a secret ban as a result of a doping violation during the seven months he missed on the tour in 2012 and 2013. Nadal and the International Tennis Federation have denied that any ban or positive drug test occurred.

Nadal, who has asked the I.T.F. to release documentation of his testing history, has said that he would donate to an unspecified French foundation any damages won in the lawsuit.

“I feel happy that I don’t need money,” Nadal said of the lawsuit. “So it’s something that is about image, is something about that people are not free to say any stupid thing anytime, what they think in any moment, without knowledge about the things.”

Djokovic expressed support for how Nadal had handled a “very tricky position.”

“I think he has done the right thing to protect himself and the integrity of his own brand and the achievements he had in all these years of work and the results that he put in,” Djokovic said. “And the sport itself, because Rafa is definitely one of the best players in the history of the game, one of the most important players we have.”


