


PARIS — Take comfort amid the fatigue, Andy Murray. The French Open can still be won after playing back-to-back five-setters in the first two rounds.

Gaston Gaudio, an unpredictable and unseeded Argentine, did it as recently as 2004.

But it is certainly not the recommended method of winning the French Open. Considering how much clay-court tennis Murray has already played this spring in Europe, his early-round tussles at Roland Garros could make the homestretch even more of an endurance test. Unless, of course, the week of intermittent rain in the forecast gives him and everyone else extra time to recover (or washes all the red clay away).

Murray, the No. 2 seed, arrived in Paris on a high after upsetting Novak Djokovic in the Italian Open final, but his performance here so far has been a matter of quantity over quality.

After requiring two days and five sets to solve the unconventional riddle posed by the 37-year-old Radek Stepanek in the first round, Murray needed five more sets and 3 hours 34 minutes Wednesday to escape the clutches of the 164th-ranked Mathias Bourgue.

Leading by 6-2, 2-0, Murray appeared to be on his way, but Bourgue, a 22-year-old French wild card with a whipping forehand and a wicked way with a drop shot, refused to take the hint. He won eight straight games on his way to taking the second and third sets. Bourgue showed signs of refusal again in the final set, breaking Murray when he served for the match at 5-1.

But Murray, the moody man from Dunblane, who can find clouds on a sunny day, was too fit and too experienced in the end. This was the first five-set match of Bourgue’s career, and Murray prevailed, 6-2, 2-6, 4-6, 6-2, 6-3.

“You can’t continue playing matches like that and expect to win the tournament,” Murray said. “If I can get through the next one, it would be nice to win it a bit quicker.”

The points should certainly be shorter, considering that he will face Ivo Karlovic, the 6-foot-11 Croatian with one of the game’s longest reaches and most devastating serves. Karlovic, 37, is the oldest man in the third round of a Grand Slam tournament in singles since Jimmy Connors reached the semifinals at the 1991 United States Open at 39.

Defuse Karlovic, and the chances are good that Murray will face a player of similar stature and strengths: the American John Isner, who will be the favorite against Teymuraz Gabashvili in his third-round match.

“If he gets through Dr. Ivo and Isner back to back, he should be O.K.,” said Brad Gilbert, a coach and analyst.

But to truly recover his momentum, Murray needs to lift his level of play considerably, with men like Kei Nishikori and the defending champion Stan Wawrinka in his half of the draw — and with Djokovic or the nine-time champion Rafael Nadal potentially headed for the final.

“I don’t want to play five sets every round and don’t want to have big drop-offs in matches,” Murray said. “But I was trying, trying to find a way. It wasn’t like I was not there mentally. I just couldn’t find the court. I was missing balls.”

It has been a distracting week for Murray, and not just because of the five-setters. He and his French coach, Amélie Mauresmo, announced a split this month, and Mauresmo, a former No. 1, suggested in an interview with the French sports magazine L’Equipe that there had been more behind the change than her desire to spend more time with her infant son.

“Andy is complex,” she told the magazine. “On court, he can be the opposite of what he is in regular life. That can be unsettling. I was there to help. I had the feeling that I couldn’t make things progress anymore.”

But Mauresmo also praised Murray in the interview: “He has a great capacity to listen and analyze. He is very curious, and always searching. And that’s what makes for great champions.”

After beating Stepanek, Murray denied that his on-court behavior, which can often be negative, was the reason for the split with Mauresmo and explained that, based on his conversations with her, the stumbling block had been her lack of availability before major tournaments.

The tennis world is an insular world, one in which the principal figures often wear multiple hats. So it should come as no great surprise that Mauresmo, working here as an analyst for French television, interviewed Murray on air after Wednesday’s match.

Her first query: “How did you turn things around?”

Murray’s answer was that the conditions had changed. The sunshine that had favored Bourgue’s topspin forehand gave way to overcast skies that made for lower bounces. Murray also pushed closer to the baseline and began taking more chances.

There was also the mental battle. An emotional player prone to outbursts, Bourgue has been working with a sports psychologist to better channel his on-court energies.

Nonetheless, he cramped from the stress of it all during his first-round victory against Jordi Samper-Montana. Before Wednesday’s match, Bourgue’s coach, Olivier Malcor, showed him Muhammad Ali footage for inspiration, as well as a video about, in Malcor’s words, “how to handle suffering.”

“I think for a first match against Andy Murray on center court in front of 15,000 people, he really handled his emotions well today,” Malcor said. “That’s my biggest victory as a coach.”

Next challenge: nutrition. (Bourgue asked for a soda and a candy bar during the match, not exactly Djokovic staples.) Clay is Bourgue’s best and favorite surface, which was easy to understand as he skidded into wide forehands and repeatedly produced something special. But threatening a top player in a Grand Slam is one challenge; finishing him off is quite another.

The pivotal game turned out to be the first game of the fourth set, in which Murray saved three break points, one with a sparkling backhand half-volley drop-shot winner that gave Bourgue plenty of pause.

“That’s when I said to myself, There’s a super long way to go,” Bourgue said. “And that’s what happened. He raised his level.”

Murray will need to keep doing so, and though he has a historical precedent in Gaudio, the Argentine’s French Open success story is not entirely reassuring.

After winning in five sets in the first and second rounds in 2004, Gaudio had to rally from even bigger trouble against Guillermo Coria in the final. Coming back from a two-set deficit, Gaudio saved two match points before finally lifting the trophy.

For Murray, too, the roughest weather appears to lie ahead.


