


This weekend, London Collections: Men kicks off across the pond, beginning a month of men’s fashion shows. T and the casting director Arianna Pradarelli highlight a handful of the most intriguing new faces.

20, Jamaica

Martin claims his most memorable fashion moment is having dinner with Raf Simons (the “biggest O.G. ever”), although we’re pretty sure it’s that time he posed for T. He’s also walked for labels like Louis Vuitton and Maison Margiela, and whiles away the backstage hours listening to rap, specifically Future. Speaking of, he says he’s planning on launching a clothing brand called T-O.

Represented by Select Model Management.

18, France

The natural blond (“it’s made me stand out since I was young,” he says) turned up on a handful of fall/winter 2016 runways, including J.W. Anderson, Off-White, Acne Studios, AMI by Alexandre Mattiussi and Rag & Bone’s combined men’s and women’s wear show in February. He’s poised to add more names to that list as he continues to travel around the world and help out his family.

Represented by Re:Quest Model Management.

16, Sweden

Sydfors’s first-ever job, a Steven Meisel shoot for Vogue Italia, debuted in January, and the chameleon continued on to the men’s wear collections, booking shows from Ermenegildo Zegna and Prada to MSGM and Kolor. Born and raised in Stockholm, he started playing “football” at age 4 and idolizes the Swedish footballer Zlatan Ibrahimovic.

Represented by Diva Models.

22, China

Paras Talent Management in Shanghai picked up the Guangdong province native after a modeling contest in 2014. For the fall/winter 2016 shows, he caught the eye of the avant-garde set, walking for Damir Doma, Walter Van Beirendonck, Rick Owens and Kenzo, where he passed the time backstage taking pictures and studying the entire process. We’ll be seeing more of him this season — and hopefully soon, some of his photography, too.

Represented by Elite Model Management Paris.

18, Germany

Within weeks of signing a modeling contract, Bulang booked his first gig — a Prada exclusive for spring/summer 2016 — and the following men’s wear season, he appeared on all of the big-name runways (such as Prada, Raf Simons and Dior Homme). He’s also posed for spreads in i-D and L’Officiel Hommes Germany and in ads for Topman, A.P.C. and MSGM. Despite his ascent, he calls himself a “normal 18-year-old guy” and says, “If I wouldn’t have been scouted, I would maybe still work as a waiter.” (And then be scooped up by a different scout.)

Represented by Tomorrow Is Another Day.

22, the Netherlands

Hart has booked shows like Alexander McQueen, Prada, Raf Simons, Dries Van Noten and Dior Homme; he says, “The relationship between the designer and models is really cool — for example, when I did looks for Neil Barrett, he was super interested in my life and what I’m doing, not just how I look.” However, Hart lists music as his top priority. The piano player and Hammond organist tours with his band, the Funky Organizers. “We play all over Holland, France, Belgium and Germany.”

Represented by Wilhelmina London.

17, France

The Paris-based Drame walked in plenty of fall/winter 2016 shows (among them: Burberry, J.W. Anderson, Fendi, Prada, Louis Vuitton, Dries Van Noten, Dior Homme and at Off-White as the opener), though his favorite way to pass the time backstage is “running away from the hairdresser.” He must be hard to catch, too; if he weren’t modeling, he “would be a professional football player,” he says, and is a devoted Paris Saint-Germain fan.

Represented by 16Men Model Management.

17, Germany

The Berlin-based student (and saxophonist) had a packed fall/winter 2016 men’s wear season, walking for Topman, Craig Green, J.W. Anderson, Alexander McQueen, Burberry, Jil Sander, Gucci, MSGM, Valentino, Hermès, Y-3 and a slew of other brands; but the designer Peter Dundas seems particularly taken with Dame, casting the model on his Roberto Cavalli and Just Cavalli runways during the women’s wear shows. However, Dame says, “I get nervous really easily, especially at castings and before jobs.” Seems to be working for him.

Represented by Tomorrow Is Another Day.


