


PENTNEY, England — When Dita Lee and Howard Barber first visited Pentney in the county of Norfolk to view a rural barn, they had no idea they would leave having decided to buy the ruins of a medieval stone gatehouse as well.

Mr. Barber, a former British Airways pilot, and Ms. Lee, head of a British Airways cabin crew team, had been considering starting a small Internet sales business in the east of England after he took early retirement in 2009 and she began to work part time.

“We decided it would be nice to have a family home, with some outbuildings to use for the business and thought a barn would be ideal,” Ms. Lee said. “We saw this one advertised and came to look on a hot day back in July 2010.

“As we pulled up, we saw this amazing castlelike ruin. We later discovered that it was a medieval gatehouse and it was for sale, too,” she continued. “In addition to the barn and the outbuildings, there was an 18th-century farmhouse and 35 acres of land going right down to the River Nar. We fell in love with it instantly.”

The couple were on their way to France at the time, and before they had even arrived at the port of Dover to catch the ferry across the Channel they had made up their minds to buy everything at Pentney Abbey.

“It was such an extraordinary and magical place,” Ms. Lee said. “The gatehouse itself was beautiful — a truly unique building, with an incredible ambience — and we could see the farmhouse would be a wonderful place to live. But in many ways it was the location that really appealed to us: We have 360-degree views of the incredible landscape around us — beautiful countryside where we can walk or just wander down to the river with a picnic on a warm summer’s evening.”

The history of Pentney Abbey reaches back through the centuries at least as far as the 1100s. A priory was founded at the site by Robert De Vaux, the sheriff of Cumberland and governor of Carlisle, for an Augustinian order of monks. The foundations of the entire medieval complex are still present under the fields at the property.

“After the dissolution of the monasteries by Henry VIII, the main abbey building was demolished,” Ms. Lee said. “But the gatehouse, which itself dates back to the 1300s, was not considered to be a religious building and was taken over by the Earl of Rutland. He used the ruins of the priory as a quarry, taking stone from it for his outbuildings and selling it to other people in the area. For many years it was used as accommodation, but in the 18th century it started to fall into disrepair.”

Upon moving to Pentney Abbey from Norwich, also in Norfolk, Mr. Barber and Ms. Lee decided to renovate the 3,170-square-foot farmhouse for themselves and convert nearby outbuildings into guest accommodations.

Today, the main house, which has conservation protection from Historic England — a public body that looks after the country’s historic environment — has been renovated, with a 185-square-foot kitchen, as well as a 280-square-foot drawing room and a 300-square-foot dining room on the first floor. Also on this level is a cloakroom and a utility space, together with a 185-square-foot office and an extra 345-square-foot reception room.

“The house originally had four bedrooms, but we decided to turn one into a spectacular bathroom, with a luxurious Jacuzzi bath, a huge walk-in shower and a fabulous dressing area,” Ms. Lee said.

Among other notable features is a great stone archway that can be seen on the landing. It once formed part of an ecclesiastical building, but in the 1700s it was incorporated into the farmhouse.

The couple then turned their attentions to the gatehouse. Working with the support of English Heritage, they made the decision to save the 2,535-square-foot building before really knowing how they would end up using it.

“After arriving here, our whole focus changed —we realized we wanted to do something with the gatehouse. It was such a significant building and we felt it deserved to be restored,” Ms. Lee said. “It was daunting, as we knew nothing about the mammoth task ahead of us but we were determined to overcome the obstacles, and as we got deeper into it we just became more and more obsessed.”

The gatehouse, which is deemed by Historic England to be of “exceptional interest,” was so derelict that it was deemed to be at risk of collapse. To assess its stability and the extent of the work required to rebuild it, magnetic resonance imaging was carried out.

Next, about 300 tons of masonry debris and vegetation had to be cleared from the inside of the old building. The main restoration project then took place in 2012 and 2013, costing hundreds of thousands of pounds. Funding and support for the work came from a variety of sources, including Ms. Lee and Mr. Barber themselves and a grant of 200,000 pounds, or about $288,000, from Historic England.

In December 2013, the gatehouse was completed. It remains three stories high, with dramatic chambers on either side of its arched gateway and three rooms bridging the top, including the central 427-square-foot ceremony hall. Today it is largely a wedding venue, but the building has been “future-proofed” with drainage, plumbing and additional electrical wiring to allow other possible uses in the future.

“Some of the conditions of the grant were that we had to give the building a future,” Ms. Lee explained. “We discussed transforming it into a boutique hotel or a private residence, but while we were in the middle of work, a local 21-year-old came and asked if she could get married there.”

Soon the historic site was being booked for ceremonies every weekend between May and October, and sometimes at Christmas, too. The large 1,507-square-foot barn was transformed into a banquet hall, chapel and leisure room, complete with kitchen and bar facilities, and a grand vaulted reception space; areas close to the house were landscaped to create a courtyard, with a central fire pit and area with decking, as well as rose gardens.

Today, there is also a generous lawn, which is suitable for a marquee, and an area that can be used for camping. In total, the formal gardens extend to approximately seven acres, while the remainder of the land has meadows and areas set aside for grazing.

Throughout the building work and the hosting of weddings, Mr. Barber and Ms. Lee have taken a hands-on approach. Where they have been able to carry out work themselves, they have, and during wedding weekends they remain on site to oversee and coordinate events.

“The weddings began to take on a life of their own very quickly,” Mr. Barber said. “It reached the stage where we realized we would either have to take the business up to the next level and employ staff or step away from Pentney Abbey so someone else could take it further.”

As a result, the property went on the market in January with the real estate agents Sowerbys and Chewton Rose for £1.95 million. The couple have received an offer and expect to be moving soon.

“However the next owners choose to enjoy the place, we just feel very privileged to have lived here ourselves,” Ms. Lee said. “We feel very proud to have saved Pentney Abbey for future generations and to have accomplished something like this.”


