


LONDON — Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain warned on Monday that isolationism has historically led to war in Europe and urged his country to stay in the European Union, saying it has helped keep the Continent at peace.

His argument, by focusing on security and not just economics, brought his campaign to persuade his country to remain in the 28-nation bloc into a new phase.

The European Union “has helped reconcile countries which were at each other’s throats for decades,” Mr. Cameron said, and Britain “has a fundamental national interest in maintaining common purpose in Europe to avoid future conflict between European countries.”

While he said he recognized that some Britons’ “heads and hearts are torn,” Mr. Cameron said that threats from a “newly belligerent Russia” and from the Islamic State meant that cooperation and “unity of purpose” with allies were vital to the nation’s security interests.

The referendum on a British withdrawal from the European Union, known as “Brexit,” is scheduled for June 23, and Mr. Cameron’s speech, which was widely previewed in the British news media and delivered at the British Museum, was timed to precede a competing address from Boris Johnson, the former London mayor who is a leader of the campaign to leave the bloc.

Mr. Johnson, free of mayoral duties, said that Mr. Cameron had failed to bring home significant overhauls of the European Union, which is “ratchet-hauling us ever further into a federal structure” that is more centralized and unitary. He charged that European leaders were using “subterfuge” for their integrationist plans to create a country called “Europe,” and that Britain, as a trading nation, would have no trouble replicating trade deals with the world, including with the nations of the Commonwealth.

In a Johnsonian flourish, he concluded, “We will win for exactly the same reason that the Greeks beat the Persians at Marathon — because they are fighting for an outdated absolutist ideology and we are fighting for freedom.”

The government also seized on the admission on Sunday by Michael Gove, the intellectual leader of the campaign to leave, that a British exit from the bloc would also mean leaving the single market of the European Union. Mr. Gove, who is also the justice minister, ruled out a deal like the one that Norway has, which gives the country duty-free access to the 500 million consumers of the European Union in return for financial contributions to the bloc’s budget and agreements to allow European Union citizens freedom of travel and labor.

One of the strongest arguments of the campaign to leave centers on immigration: Only if Britain is free of the Brussels bureaucracy, the argument goes, can it truly control its borders. That is why Mr. Gove ruled out the Norway model, although the campaign to leave has not been consistent on this issue. Mr. Gove asserts that Britain could retain duty-free access to the bloc, which some European Union member states have said would not be possible.

George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer and the most powerful government official after the prime minister, said that Mr. Gove’s plan “would be catastrophic for people’s jobs, their incomes and their livelihoods.” Mr. Osborne said that “some people think wrecking the economy is a price worth paying — I absolutely reject that.” On Monday, Mr. Cameron called Mr. Gove’s plan “reckless and irresponsible.”

The Gove-Osborne clash dominated coverage in The Financial Times, which editorialized that “Brexit is too high a price to pay over migration.”

Most other newspapers, like The Times of London, focused on early excerpts from the Cameron speech. That newspaper published its story under the headline: “Brexit will raise risk of world war, PM claims.”

Paul Waugh, in the British edition of The Huffington Post, wrote that Mr. Cameron’s speech was more subtle, but that he “won’t be upset with the bloodcurdling headlines.”

Proponents of leaving the bloc have argued that the campaign to remain has been resorting to a “Project Fear” to scare voters into staying.

Daniel Hannan, a British member of the European Parliament who favors leaving the bloc, said on Twitter: “Remainers like to think of themselves as sensible moderates. But this hysterical language is coming from their side.”

In another bit of political symbolism, Mr. Cameron was introduced on Monday by David Miliband, a former foreign secretary who in 2010 lost a Labour Party leadership contest to his brother, Ed. Ed Miliband then lost last May’s general election and quit, replaced by a left-wing activist, Jeremy Corbyn.

David Miliband, who now runs the International Rescue Committee, a humanitarian group based in New York, returned to Britain to urge voters to remain in the European Union. He called leaving “political suicide.” On Sunday, he gave a speech in Sunderland, in northeastern England, saying that the manufacturing jobs of the region would suffer if Britain were to leave the bloc.

He called the campaign to leave the bloc “Project Fantasy,” saying that the argument that Britain could renegotiate its own trade deals with large countries is “risible.”

He said his “temporary political alliance” with Mr. Cameron stemmed from their agreement on the importance of the issue.


