


VILLENEUVE-D’ASCQ, France — The Russian soccer federation was fined about $170,000 and given a suspended disqualification from the European Championships on Tuesday as punishment for in-stadium fan violence. The sanction essentially leaves the Russian team on the verge of being kicked out of the continent’s most prestigious tournament two years before Russia hosts the World Cup.

The penalties were issued by the disciplinary committee of UEFA, which oversees European soccer, and put Russia one further incident away from the extraordinary possibility of being sent home in the midst of a major competition. Russia’s next game is Wednesday, in a group-stage match here, just outside Lille, against Slovakia.

In a statement, the disciplinary committee said that Russia’s disqualification from the tournament was currently suspended — in other words, not being enforced — but that “such suspension will be lifted if incidents of a similar nature (crowd disturbances) happen inside the stadium at any of the remaining matches of the Russian team during the tournament.”

The statement did not specify what would constitute a violation, though other UEFA documentation defines crowd disturbances broadly, including actions ranging from fighting to throwing objects to disrupting national anthems to “the use of gestures, words, objects or any other means to transmit any message that is not fit for a sports event.”

Tuesday’s punishment was the result of ugly incidents at the end of Russia’s first match in the tournament, a 1-1 tie with England on Saturday in Marseille. Just after the final whistle, video showed a mass of Russian fans — many of them wearing gloves more common in mixed martial arts fighting and with shirts or scarves covering their faces — streaming into a nearby section full of English fans and attacking them. Fireworks and flares were also set off inside the stadium during the match.

The two groups of fans had clashed with each other, local residents and the police in the streets of Marseille in the days before the match — resulting in a slew of arrests — but the in-stadium violence was unexpected, both for its scale and its coordination. The Russian soccer federation said it would accept the punishment announced Tuesday but that it considered it “extremely severe.”

A spokesman for Vladimir V. Putin, Russia’s president, denounced the “rampages in Marseille.” The spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, added, “It’s absolutely unacceptable, and we certainly expect our citizens to respect the country’s laws.”

Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s sports minister and a senior official with FIFA, which governs world soccer, said he supported the deportations from France of any fans who were seeking to cause trouble. But the violence flared anew in Lille on Tuesday. Videos posted online showed England and Wales fans in a confrontation with Russian supporters outside a sidewalk bar, though helmeted riot police officers quickly moved between the groups.

A bus containing 29 Russian fans on their way to Lille for Russia’s next match was stopped by local law enforcement officials earlier Tuesday, and it was expected that French authorities would deport the fans.

“We know that 29 people will be deported as they have arrived not to watch football,” Mr. Mutko said, according to TASS, a Russian news agency.

Russia’s problems with fan violence and hooliganism have been a recurrent issue for many years, but the issue has received greater scrutiny because the country is set to host the next World Cup. Russian officials frequently play down the problem, often citing bias by the Western news media, but governing bodies like UEFA and FIFA are concerned. In official statements noteworthy for their strong language, UEFA expressed “utter disgust” at the stadium violence, and FIFA blamed “idiotic troublemakers.”

The reaction in Russia to the fan violence has been ambiguous, with some officials cheering on the violence in their comments and on social media. The Kremlin on Tuesday sought to clarify that the more bellicose comments by officials did not represent official policy. “I can’t agree with these statements from my colleagues,” Mr. Peskov said. “In any case, they cannot reflect the official points of view.”

UEFA’s disciplinary committee did not sanction England on Tuesday — only Russia was charged, for the in-stadium incidents — but UEFA’s powerful executive committee warned both Russia and England that they faced expulsion after Saturday’s incident. The executive committee can issue punishments for incidents that take place away from stadiums if it determines it appropriate.

Roy Hodgson, England’s manager, and Wayne Rooney, its captain, recorded a video asking English fans to behave appropriately for the rest of the tournament. The message was pointed, as England and Russia fans will cross paths again this week.

Russia will play here on Wednesday afternoon, a day before England faces Wales in Lens, about 20 miles away. Many English fans are staying in hotels in Lille, a larger city, while they are in the region.

Fabienne Buccio, who manages the police and security in the region, said at a briefing Tuesday that more than 2,400 security officers would be assigned to the England match in Lens. Enhanced procedures are also expected at Russia’s match near Lille, and restrictions on alcohol sales have been put in place throughout the region.

At a news conference here Tuesday afternoon, Russia’s manager, Leonid Slutsky, and one of its top players, Artem Dzyuba, struck variable tones. Initially, both men noted that Russia’s fans had given them strong support during the team’s first game and urged them to behave this week. “We have to follow the rules,” Mr. Slutsky said, addressing the fans. “We do need your support, but we have to focus on the support of our team and do it in a legal framework.”

As the news conference went on, however, the sentiments from Mr. Slutsky and Mr. Dzyuba seemed to shift. A high-ranking official with Russia’s soccer federation, Igor Lebedev, had previously praised Russian fans for fighting in the stadium — he told a Russian news agency the fans were defending “the honor of their country” — and while neither Mr. Slutsky nor Mr. Dzyuba echoed Mr. Lebedev’s sentiments, Mr. Dzyuba did criticize the British news media for portraying English fans “like angels.” He also questioned reports from the French police that Russian fans were the aggressors in the stadium disturbances.

“You have your information from the French; I have other information,” he said, without elaborating. Mr. Dzyuba then speculated that Russia was being targeted because of lingering controversy over its being awarded the hosting rights for the World Cup, a bid it won over a group of competitors that included England.

Mr. Slutsky said that Russian fans were incited by English fans being disrespectful during the Russian national anthem before the game, as well as for “gestures” the Russian team received while on its bus to the stadium. “When the Russian anthem was played, people were shouting,” Mr. Slutsky said. “It was unethical.”

After the news conference, Mr. Slutsky led the Russian players through a short training session at the Stade Pierre-Mauroy. The players seemed in good spirits and, during the portion of the practice open to the news media, bounced around and laughed with one another, particularly as they participated in a small-sided game of rugby.

Russia won the Euros in 1960 (as the Soviet Union) and finished third at the 2008 tournament. It qualified for this year’s tournament by finishing second in its group and, after salvaging a tie against England in its opening game, is in good position to advance to the knockout rounds in France.

“We are not at a street fighting championship over here,” Mr. Dzyuba said. “We are talking about the Euro 2016 football championship.”


