


BAKU, Azerbaijan — Judged by location alone, the setting for this weekend’s inaugural European Grand Prix in Baku, Azerbaijan, would be considered a bright new venue for Formula One as it expands around the world.

In some ways, it would feel like the short-lived Turkish Grand Prix. But while that race, run between 2005 and 2011, was too far from downtown Istanbul on a circuit on the Asian side of the Bosporus, the Baku City Circuit has a dream setting through the streets of this scenic city on the Caspian Sea.

It courses along ancient city streets near the old city walls and the beachfront promenade among the colorful towers of the oil-built metropolis. There has never been a circuit quite like it. It is also designed to be the fastest city circuit in the world, with a two-kilometer straight, the maximum allowable length by the standards of the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., motor racing’s governing body.

“All the circuits have their own unique features, and this one will be the longest straight in the calendar, the longest straight on any circuit in the world,” Fernando Alonso, a driver with the McLaren Honda team, said last week.

Jan Magnussen, a driver with the Renault team, placed the circuit somewhere between the series’ slowest track and its fastest.

“It’s kind of a mix between Monaco and Monza,” he said. “With these really long straights and these twisty narrow bits as well.”

Many drivers expressed concern that the narrow parts of the track may just be too narrow, and that there are insufficient runoff areas in some parts, making it potentially dangerous.

But as Jenson Button, the other McLaren Honda driver, said: “Nothing you can do about it. You can’t move the buildings.”

Charlie Whiting, the F.I.A. technical delegate, said after visiting the track before last weekend’s Canadian Grand Prix, “In general, I must say that the standards of the circuit built so far are absolutely superb, and personally I am getting quite excited about the idea of coming here to race.”

If it were only a matter of the outward beauty of the location and the circuit’s extraordinary features, the view before the race would be one of a major success in the making. But there is controversy, given Azerbaijan’s poor human rights record and the fact that its disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh — also claimed by Armenia — is a war zone.

Azerbaijan, a country of more than nine million at the crossroads of Europe and Asia that shares borders with Armenia, Georgia, Russia, Iran and a small sliver of Turkey, sees itself as a part of Europe. For that reason the country bid for the race, and requested the title of European Grand Prix — rather than Azerbaijan Grand Prix. The name had been free since the last race in Valencia, Spain, in 2012, according to Arif Rahimov, the chief executive of Baku City Circuit Operations Company, the promoter of the event.

Azerbaijan also hosted the Eurovision Song Contest in 2012 and the inaugural European Games last June, and Baku is one of 12 cities scheduled to host soccer games in the UEFA European Championships in 2020.

But despite the professed European outlook, the nation’s president, Ilham Aliyev, who succeeded his father, Heydar Aliyev, in 2003, has long suppressed political opposition and, according to Freedom House, has pursued a harsh campaign to silence his critics in the media.

Amnesty International called on Thursday for Formula One to raise awareness of the human rights problems in Azerbaijan.

“The arrival of Formula One in Baku must not steer attention away from the Azerbaijani authorities’ human rights crackdown,” said Kerry Moscogiuri, director of campaigns at Amnesty International UK. “Behind the glitz, the authorities are locking up their critics, have shut down N.G.O.s and arrested or harassed their leaders. The recent release of some of those jailed on trumped-up charges should not fool anyone into thinking that the wind in Baku is blowing in a different direction.”

But the Formula One event is part of a larger trend of major sporting events being hosted in rich countries with poor human rights records, like Sochi, Russia, hosting the Winter Olympics in 2014, Qatar organizing the 2022 World Cup and Almaty, Kazakhstan, and Beijing being the final bidders for the 2022 Winter Olympics.

“We ended up in Azerbaijan purely because Europe went into an economic downfall, and they were the only country viable that could run it at that time,” said Patrick Hickey, president of the European Olympic Committees, who was instrumental in bringing the European Games to Baku, in an interview with The New York Times last year.

And the thinking, of course, was the same for Formula One, whose promoter, Bernie Ecclestone, said in Baku on Thursday that his conscience was clear about racing in Baku.

“As far as we are concerned, not having any races where there is corruption in the country, can you tell me where we are going to be racing?” he said.

As has been the case previously when Formula One has been criticized for selecting a given location, most drivers seem reluctant to address the issue of human rights concerns in Azerbaijan, deferring to the authority of the F.I.A., which sanctions the event.

“We completely rely on the F.I.A. in terms of the places and the venues we race,” said Alonso, of the McLaren Honda team. “On that aspect — at least in my case — I think we never think any further than that. I totally put all my trust and my confidence on the federation and on the decisions that they make.”

He added, “We are promoting the sport around the world and we are promoting the values of the sport around the world, and that will always be welcome in any country.”


