


Robert Kirkman, the man behind AMC’s “The Walking Dead” — TV’s highest-rated drama among 18- to 49-year-olds — and its successful spinoff, “Fear the Walking Dead,” has a new comic-book-based horror show, “Outcast,” coming to TV. How will it be different? Here’s Mr. Kirkman’s take.

“‘Walking Dead’ is a survival show, first and foremost,” he said by phone from Los Angeles recently. “‘Outcast’ is an exorcism show.”

Pretty simple.

O.K., there’s more.

“There’s a different kind of struggle going on beneath the surface,” he said of the show, which is focused on Kyle Barnes, a damaged young man with a family history of demonic possession, and his wary ally, a hard-living evangelist known as Reverend Anderson. “It’s a struggle that some people can see and some people just can’t see. I think that makes it more terrifying.”

Fans will judge, probably with a ruthlessness reminiscent of the zombie-apocalypse survivors of “The Walking Dead,” whether “Outcast” (whose 10-episode first season begins Friday, June 3, on Cinemax) is indeed more terrifying. The exorcism subgenre and its trappings — priests screaming at levitating victims, crazy-devil voices, the vomiting of evil colored substances — haven’t much changed since “The Exorcist” in 1973. (A TV remake of which, naturally, will be on Fox this fall.)

The immediate popularity of “The Walking Dead,” which was a comic book years before it became a series, gave “Outcast” a very different route to television. Mr. Kirkman conceived of the “Outcast” comic, which he would eventually collaborate on with the artist Paul Azaceta, during the first season of “The Walking Dead,” and mentioned it to an executive who handled international rights for that show. “Calls were made the next day, people started getting interested and by accident, we sold a TV show.” The “Outcast” comic and show were then developed simultaneously.

For the show, the story’s setting, the fictional town of Rome, W.Va., was built on sound stages and shot on locations in and around Chester, S.C. (pop. 5,500). During a break in filming there last fall, Patrick Fugit, still best known for playing a naïve young journalist in “Almost Famous” (2000) talked about portraying Kyle, a hero who’s angry, defensive and paranoid.

“There’s something about playing Southern men, where they have a very quiet expression,” he said. “They emote and express quite a lot, and they also try not to. It’s like a battle within them, how much they’re letting crack through the surface. I saw an opportunity for Kyle to be very bright inside but sort of shrouded by darkness. Wanting to break through that, but also trying to contain it for everybody’s safety.”

Mr. Kirkman said Kyle would become a very different character as the show progressed (Cinemax has already commissioned a second season), and that Mr. Fugit was cast with those changes in mind.

“Kyle Barnes is somebody who starts out not very engaging, and very distant,” he said. “He’s hiding away from the world because he feels like this phenomenon of demonic possession that he keeps encountering is caused by him. We needed an actor who could play that insular role, could kind of live inside himself in an interesting way, but who could also come out of that shell over time and play the character that Kyle Barnes is eventually going to become. I think the evolution of Kyle is going to be much more dramatic and startling than anything we’ve seen in ‘The Walking Dead.’”

One challenge to Kyle’s likability as a character is a startling scene in the first episode (which has been available since May 20 online) in which he hits a child, albeit one possessed of demonic strength and fully capable of hitting back. (It’s another reminder of “The Exorcist,” in which the 12-year-old victim is struck and choked by a priest.) Philip Glenister, the British actor and star of “Life on Mars” who plays Reverend Anderson, laughed as he recalled telling the crew that he would have to wear a disguise once the scene was made public.

“No children were harmed in the making of this scene!” he said during lunch in a community hall in Chester. “Adults were, but no children.” An adult female stunt double actually took Mr. Fugit’s stage punch.

“It’s very technical, and for actors it’s really boring,” Mr. Glenister said. “You spend most of your time setting stuff up and then you’re told, ‘React to this, Joshua will be levitating, but he’s not levitating today because he’s in school, so just pretend he’s levitating.’ People go, ‘Oh, that poor child!’ I can assure you he didn’t do anything.”

For Mr. Kirkman, working on the different versions of the story at the same time came naturally, and even had one advantage. When he wrote the “Walking Dead” comic book, he would have ideas for scenes that didn’t fit the comics format, but by the time he was writing the TV show nearly a decade later, he had forgotten them. “With ‘Outcast’ I’m able to go, ‘Oh, it’s really great if I can expand this scene by eight pages and do this, too, but I don’t have room, so I guess we can just put that in the show.’”

“The Walking Dead,” with its millions of demographically desirable viewers, casts a formidable shadow. But Mr. Kirkman is confident that the new show will have its own impact.

“I think that ‘Outcast’ does this thing where you’re relaxed and you’re watching these people and they’re living their lives, and then they go into this room and there’s this boy that’s levitating and it’s insane and it’s intense and it’s terrifying,” he said. “And then they step outside for a break and they’re in this picturesque West Virginia landscape that looks like it’s a painting, and it’s bright and it’s sunshine and everything’s perfect. Just right next door is hell on earth, but you’d never know it if you didn’t go into that room.”


