


The world’s largest landfill is slowly becoming a park — very slowly. The conversion of Freshkills on the western shore of Staten Island into a verdant expanse of green is now in its second decade, with two more to go before it is finished.

Yet largely out of the public eye, a site that once received 29,000 tons of trash a day is undergoing a more rapid and remarkable transformation. Fifteen years since the landfill closed, the regeneration of Freshkills, which at 2,200 acres encompasses a site two and a half times larger than Central Park, is altering New York City’s ecological landscape: Mountains of garbage have become a vast grassland, a habitat that has been in decline across eastern North America.

“It’s done a complete 180,” said Mike Shanley, a naturalist and president of the Friends of Blue Heron Park, a group dedicated to the nearby park. “It looks like a prairie you’d see in the Midwest somewhere.”

The amount of new habitat and its relative remoteness — the site is closed to the public most of the year — has attracted nearly a dozen animal species that are considered rare in the city. The site was always known for its bird life: Tens of thousands of scavenging gulls lived happily at the landfill. But now Freshkills hosts an array of at-risk species, many of which need grasslands to thrive.

Researchers at the site have found three bird species considered endangered in New York State, nine classified as threatened and seven more the state deems “of special concern.” Several others are breeding within the city limits for the first time in decades.

“Up until 1928 there were no bridges connecting Staten Island, and open grassland species were common,” said Ed Johnson, a former director of science at the Staten Island Museum. “If you look back at the records, we have more breeding species now than we did back then.’’

On a recent day, during a public tour of Freshkills, bald eagles soared over the wetlands while bobolinks sang from electrical wires.

“It was like a complete escape into somewhere that seemed like nowhere close to Staten Island,” said Ian Gutch, a Staten Island resident who also spotted hawks and falcons on the tour. “It felt more like Jurassic Park with the number of raptors flying so low.”

The star of the ecological revival might well be the grasshopper sparrow, a species whose population in the state has plummeted significantly. Dick Veit, a researcher with the College of Staten Island, discovered a colony of 60 adult grasshopper sparrows, named for their insectile song, at Freshkills last summer.

“That’s basically unheard-of in New York City,” Debra Kriensky, a biologist with New York City Audubon, said. The group produced about 40 juveniles, making it the largest colony in the state. They returned this year to much excitement among bird enthusiasts.

“Before this, most were up in farmland in the Adirondacks or the Catskills,” said Cait Field, manager of science and research development for the Freshkills Park Alliance, a nonprofit working with the city on the transition. “They need at least 350 acres of grass. They are one of the reasons why we’re able to explain now why these grasslands are so important.”

Other new breeding species include the eastern meadowlark, known for its sharp call; the blue grosbeak, a striking blue relative of the cardinal; and the bobolink, a bumblebee-colored blackbird that migrates 12,500 miles annually.

On the mammal side, coyotes, red foxes and hundreds of white-tailed deer — which many Staten Islanders consider a nuisance — can be found. A site next to Freshkills features the city’s only pair of resident beavers.

This spring, environmentalists have been buzzing about the discovery of a pair of upland sandpipers, potbellied shorebirds that are extremely rare in this part of the state.

“It’s like being transported back into the 19th century again,” said Howard Fischer, a leading bird expert on Staten Island. “These are birds that have actually come out of extinction, in a sense. They are that rare on the East Coast.”

As Freshkills undergoes its prolonged metamorphosis into a public park, the Freshkills Park Alliance provides several tours a month, offering visitors a tantalizing look at this wild sprawl within view of the Manhattan skyline.

“We’re trying to remain alive in the public’s imagination, so the perception is this is a park, not a landfill,” Eloise Hirsh, the park administrator, said.

Still, aside from the tours, the park remains largely off limits, which is frustrating to many eager to witness the site’s evolution.

“I don’t think they need to be so protective of allowing people in,” Mr. Shanley, the naturalist, said. “My concern is, people have a lot of excitement around the park right now. If they don’t allow access, it’ll wear off.”


