


What in the World offers you glimpses of what our journalists are observing around the globe. Let us know what you think:whatintheworld@nytimes.com

With everybody emailing, texting and messaging these days, instead of buying stamps and sending letters, what’s a poor postal service to do to make up the lost revenue?

Here’s an out-of-the-envelope idea: mow lawns.

Starting May 17, if you live in Finland, you can have a mail carrier cut your grass for a fee.

The postal workers themselves came up with the idea, according to Anu Punola, the director of Posti, Finland’s postal service. “We believe many customers will be happy to outsource lawn mowing when we make it convenient for them to do so,” Ms. Punola said in a recent statement announcing the program.

The mail carriers will do the job each Tuesday — a light day for mail in Finland, Posti says, with fewer ads and periodicals to deliver — and the customers must provide the lawn mower. The fee will range from 65 euros to €130 ($75 to $149) a month, depending on the size of the lawn, and it is tax deductible.

Posti was already considered pretty enterprising. Employees deliver meals to many customers, for example, and the postal service plans to have a health care company teach its mail carriers to help people with disabilities do their cooking and household chores.

Why stop there? How about shoveling snow in the winter? Or, though it may require a truce between traditional rivals, what about walking the dog? Picking up a quart of milk at the corner store? Watching the kids for an hour? Helping with their homework?

(What would you suggest? What unusual services does your local letter carrier already perform, officially or unofficially? Let us know at whatintheworld@nytimes.com.)

Other countries also have innovative postal services. Japan Post and others provide banking and insurance. At some offices in rural areas, Korea Post workers will make rail and airline bookings for customers. India’s postal service helps farmers sell goods online and then delivers them.

And while mail carriers, like the rest of us, are still waiting for personal jet packs, Australia is testing the use of drones for mail delivery. Impressive — but can the drone mow the lawn?


