


In the days since Prince died at Paisley Park, many of his collaborators have reflected on his remarkable talents onstage and in the studio, and come to the same conclusion: The artist’s legacy is much greater than the public realizes.

Beyond Prince’s own powers as a live performer (his flair, stagecraft and stamina) and a studio artist (his curiosity, productivity and virtuosic command over nearly every instrument), few artists have championed and mentored other musicians so consistently. He assembled groups like the Time and Vanity 6 and remained engaged with up-and-comers — particularly groups featuring women songwriters — asking acts including Janelle Monáe and King to open at his shows. We talked to several collaborators from across his career about what they learned from working with Prince.

Sheila E. first played with Prince when both musicians were barely 20, jamming next to the water bed in her parents’ Oakland basement. She soon joined him in the studio and had to adjust to a loose process unlike anything she had previously encountered. When she began to engineer some of their sessions, Prince forced her to rethink the conventional way of recording.

Three years later, keyboardist Morris Hayes arrived at Paisley Park as a production assistant. Under Prince’s tutelage, he eventually became not just a member of the New Power Generation but the band’s most senior member.

Mr. Hayes’s bandmate Cassandra O’Neal said that Prince helped her grow into a more daring player.

In 2011, Prince became so enamored with the R&B trio King that he invited them to open one of his concerts at the Forum in Los Angeles — their first ever show. Singer Paris Strothers recalled that when they expressed their doubts, he refused to listen.

Jazz vocalist Cassandra Wilson, who also opened for Prince at the Forum, said that “freedom” was a word he used often when discussing the exploitation of musicians. For her, Prince’s challenge to the labels was nearly as important as his music.


