


Compared with the rest of the Mets in the middle of the lineup, Michael Conforto is a physical anomaly. The fourth and fifth hitters, Yoenis Cespedes and Lucas Duda, are enormous, disruptive presences in the batter’s box. Pure power.

Conforto, who two weeks ago was moved into the third slot, is not a traditional slugger. Instead of loud cracks, his bat produces smooth, innovative jazz notes.

On Saturday, Conforto continued to display his talent, going 3 for 4 with three R.B.I., as the Mets won their eighth game in a row, topping the San Francisco Giants, 6-5, at Citi Field. The Mets have won 13 of their last 15 games.

“There’s not much we’re not doing,” Manager Terry Collins said of the streak. “We’re playing good baseball.”

In the second inning, after scoring one of two first-inning runs, Conforto exhibited the kind of plate discipline that Collins has praised. Giants starter Matt Cain lacked command, already hitting two batters in the inning. With two outs, Conforto worked the count full, then waited for his pitch. When Cain delivered a two-seam fastball, Conforto pushed the ball the other way, to left field, for a double that bounced off the top of the wall and drove in two runs.

With Rene Rivera in scoring position on second base, Conforto wasn’t thinking about the long ball.

“I think the pitch was off the plate, but a spot where I could extend my hands and put the barrel on it,” Conforto said. “Getting the pitches that I know I can hit and not missing them is how all this has been going down.”

Conforto, the Mets’ first-round draft pick in 2014, has doubled in six straight games, tying a franchise record set by Joe Christopher in 1964.

For an encore, Conforto took the first pitch he saw in the fifth inning, a hanging changeup by Cain, and golfed it high toward the right-field stands, where it dropped in for a solo home run, stirring the announced capacity crowd of 44,466, the largest for a regular-season game in Citi Field history.

Conforto, who turned 23 in March, finished April with 10 multihit games. He is hitting .365 with 18 R.B.I.

On April 15, Collins gambled by moving Conforto higher in the lineup. Conforto was not intimidated.

“There are some guys who are just outstanding players and I don’t care what level you put them at — they adjust and they adjust fast,” Collins said of Conforto, who was called up last July directly from Class AA Binghamton. “This kid has done that.”

To complement Conforto’s production, Mets pitcher Jacob deGrom, who was making his first start at Citi Field since the home opener on April 8, lasted six innings, striking out five. The Giants scored three unearned runs during a two-out rally in the third that was prolonged by Wilmer Flores’s throwing error at third base.

DeGrom walked four after walking none in his first two starts. After the three-run third, he regrouped and retired the Giants in order in the fourth, fifth and sixth innings.

“The thing I was most disappointed about today was not being able to pick up Flo,” deGrom said of Flores, who was starting at third to give David Wright a rest. “Errors happen in the game. Those are times when you’ve got to make the pitches and pick your teammate up.”

Flores responded in his own way, with a solo home run in the sixth, his first of the season, for a 6-3 lead.

“It felt great,” said Flores, whose homer was the team’s 33rd in April, tying a franchise record. “I ran the bases like it was a walk-off.”

Flores, the starting shortstop for much of 2015, has struggled this season in a reserve role.

“The home run was very, very big for him,” Collins said. “He’s really scuffling and it’s tearing him up.”

The home run, the Mets’ sixth run, proved necessary. With deGrom out of the game, the Giants began to chip away at the deficit. After leaving two runners on in the seventh inning, they loaded the bases to begin the eighth. Hansel Robles relieved Addison Reed and was able to limit the damage to two runs, on sacrifice flies by Hunter Pence and Brandon Crawford that came perilously close to going over the fence. With runners on first and second, Jerry Blevins entered the game and got Gregor Blanco to ground out to end the inning.

Last season, the Mets also tore through April, putting together an 11-game winning streak. But they became truly dominant only later, after Conforto and Yoenis Cespedes joined the lineup and led them to the World Series.

“I was only there for a couple months last year, but it does feel similar,” Conforto said. “This is where we want to be and want to be playing like the rest of the year.”


