


When Kim Moffitt uses most eye creams, they sting. If she tries to layer sunscreen and moisturizer, she breaks out. Traditional exfoliators like fruit enzymes or glycolic acid leave her looking as if she had sandpapered her face.

The one time she tried an eyebrow wax, “it looked like I had rug burns around my eyebrows,” said Ms. Moffitt, an illustrator in Portland, Ore., who has hunted over the years for products for her sensitive skin.

Lately, though, the search has been easier. Companies large and small are racing to serve the growing number of adults in the United States with skin like Ms. Moffitt’s — anywhere from 25 percent to 80 percent of the population, depending on which survey you read. (People generally self-diagnose sensitive skin; it’s a marketing term, not a medical one.)

Roughly a quarter of product debuts in 2014 and 2015 were for sensitive skin, according to the market research company Mintel.

Why is the incidence of sensitive skin rising? It may be because of pollution or a rise in allergies or too many samples. (One doctor called this “the age of Birchbox.”)

But one reason is that, like a complicated food intolerance, a comparison a lot of dermatologists make, sensitive skin is trendy, even if for sufferers it’s no joke.

“People want to feel special,” said Zoe Diana Draelos, a dermatologist and the founder of Dermatology Consulting Services, a company working in association with the skin products industry, which has tested dozens of products for sensitive skin.

To screen potential volunteers, all of whom said they had sensitive skin, she applies water to one nasolabial skin fold (a.k.a. a smile line) and lactic acid to the other and asks if anything stings. Only about half identify correctly, meaning they truly have what scientists call heightened neurosensory awareness.

To make products suitable for so-called reactive skin, a lot of companies just mix in the anti-inflammatories allantoin (a comfrey plant extract) or bisabolol (a chamomile extract) and call it a day. These ingredients may help, but it depends on what else is in the formulation, Dr. Draelos said.

Other companies are pouring millions of dollars into new ingredients. The Restorsea line is based on an ingredient derived from an enzyme young salmon release at birth to break down their eggshells.

The company’s founder, Patti Pao, a sensitive skin sufferer, paid $25 million for 20 years of exclusive rights to the hydrolyzed salmon roe protein, which she discovered in Norway when she insisted on visiting a hatchery while trying to avoid a corporate-bonding hike. Ms. Pao, who has worked in product management at Avon and Guerlain, immediately noticed how smooth and even-textured the workers’ hands were compared with their weather-beaten faces, and set out to investigate.

The enzyme, she says, can exfoliate sensitive skin without causing redness, itchiness or flakiness because unlike traditional exfoliators, it dissolves only dead skin cells: It stops working when it encounters living tissue. Because the enzyme itself is living (“not to gross you out,” Ms. Pao said), it’s constantly working, “as if your aesthetician were constantly following you around sloughing off dead skin,” she said.

A Restorsea-funded double-blind study published in the Journal of Drugs in Dermatology found that the line of products, of which Gwyneth Paltrow is a fan, worked as well as those containing either 4 percent glycolic acid or 8 percent glycolic acid plus 2 percent citric acid, but with no stinging and burning.

“I was kind of skeptical, so it was a big surprise to see this natural substance hold its own against glycolic acid, something that’s a gold standard of the cosmetic dermatology,” said Anne Chapas, a dermatologist in Manhattan, one of four authors of the study.

Like Ms. Pao, Amy Wechsler, a Manhattan dermatologist, has reactive skin — in her case, so much so that she travels with her own soap. When Chanel skin care brought her on as a consultant five years ago, she tentatively broached the subject of a product without fragrance, a major source of irritation, figuring that a house that makes some of the world’s best-known perfumes wouldn’t go for it.

Instead, Chanel spent four years testing 117 formulations of its fragrance-free La Solution 10 de Chanel Sensitive Skin Cream, which was introduced last fall. It features silver needle white tea, which is especially high in antioxidants and can be harvested only one week a year in Fujian Province in China.

“If anyone in our test got so much as a pimple, we started over,” Dr. Wechsler said. Chanel also tested the cream in Beijing to see if it would help skin handle the so-called oxidative stress of pollution. Eighty percent of subjects felt soothed instantly, according to company figures.

The cream, as its name suggests, has just 10 ingredients, compared with the usual 20 or 30, which plays to the myth that minimalism makes for gentler products.

“You can have just one ingredient, and if it’s sodium lauryl sulfate, that’s an irritant,” said Randy Schueller, a cosmetic chemist and a founder of thebeautybrains.com, a website and podcast where scientists examine skin-care ingredients and industry claims. (Sodium lauryl sulfate, a cleansing agent, binds to the skin proteins and doesn’t rinse off cleanly, he said.)

A third company, London-based Pai, also has a product developer with sensitive skin: its founder, Sarah Brown. Over the years, Ms. Brown spent thousands of dollars on hypoallergenic and natural creams and serums to treat her skin, without success. “I felt quite duped,” she said of promises most of them made. (“Hypoallergenic” and “natural” are marketing terms, not regulatory ones.)

Her company, which makes products exclusively for sensitive skin, is certified organic by the British nonprofit Soil Association. Pai struggled for several years to formulate its Perfect Balance Blemish Serum, which debuted last year.

What made it tricky was that salicylic acid and most other spot-treaters are harsh and drying, and Ms. Brown wanted a serum without alcohol, which damages the skin’s barrier but is a skin-care m.v.p. for its ability to keep formulas stable and to thin out heavy products, making them feel weightless.

After rejecting dozens of plant-based ingredients because it turned out they had been preserved using alcohol, she found copaiba essential oil, which is made from resin tapped from trees in the Amazon jungle in the manner of maple syrup, and has molecules that fight both infection and inflammation. A company-funded study showed a “statistically significant” reduction in blemishes over a nearly two-month period.

You don’t have to believe the study. In a nod to her history as a frustrated consumer, Ms. Brown allows buyers to return products within 30 days, however much they’ve used.

“I don’t mean to be dramatic, but you feel quite powerless when you have to keep buying more products to try,” Ms. Brown said. “It’s liberating to take at least a bit of the control back.”

Convinced you have sensitive skin? You may be scrubbing too hard.

“Remember that Irish Spring commercial ‘clean as a whistle?’ You actually don’t want that,” Dr. Wechsler said. “If your skin is squeaky clean, you’ve removed the bad oils, but you’ve also removed the good ones.” She recommends washing your face for no longer than 30 seconds, using only your (clean) hands, not a cloth or device.

Some other tips:

You don’t need to feel a tingle for a product to work. “People think that’s a sign, but I don’t agree,” Dr. Wechsler said.

Two mild products can sometimes make an irritant. “It can happen where you’re using an exfoliant or something that by itself doesn’t bother your skin, but you strip off enough dead skin that the second product causes irritation,” said Mr. Schueller.

“Unscented” isn’t a synonym for “fragrance free.” Products that are the former can have fragrances to mask the smell. “Having fragrance isn’t the kiss of death,” Mr. Schueller said. “But for people who have sensitive skin, fragrances are the smoking gun.”


