


CHANHASSEN, MINN.

WHAT: A lakefront modern with two bedrooms and one and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $750,000

SIZE: 1,976 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $380

SETTING: Chanhassen is a city of about 25,000, about 20 miles from downtown Minneapolis. Paisley Park, the home and studio compound of the musician Prince, who died last month, is about three miles from this house. With its 12 small lakes, the area has long been a place for second homes, with large new houses replacing older construction in recent years. The city owns the lakeshore downhill from this house; there’s a community dock at the end of the street. Shops, restaurants and cafes are in nearby Excelsior, on Lake Minnetonka.

INDOORS: The single-story modern house was built in 1958 and updated in 2006. It was designed by Ralph Rapson, whose myriad achievements included designing a chair, the Rapson Rapid Rocker, which is still sold today. Mr. Rapson was among the architects who contributed to the Case Study House program, along with Richard Neutra, Charles and Ray Eames, Eero Saarinen and others. Mr. Rapson was the dean of the architecture school of the University of Minnesota for 30 years.

The house is entered through a small recessed courtyard shaded by a large oak. Designed for broad views of Lotus Lake, the interior has walls of glass in nearly every room. Much of the original interior is intact, including the white brick walls and speckled gray terrazzo floors.

The house is roughly I-shaped. Steel beams frame a double-sided glass fireplace separating the living and dining areas; two sets of sliding glass doors open to a patio overlooking the lake. The kitchen retains its original streamlined wood cabinetry and design.

Bedrooms are at opposite ends of the house. The master has an en-suite bathroom finished in the original blue tile, with a sunken tub. At one end of the house, there’s a library; at the other, off the kitchen, there’s a small sitting room. The property also has a two-car garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is 0.58 acre, simply landscaped, with gray crushed granite and flagstone around the house

TAXES: $3,846 a year

CONTACT: Todd Shipman, Lakes Sotheby’s International Realty, (612) 382-4550; sothebysrealty.com

•

RICHMOND, VA.

WHAT: A 1913 brick house with four bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $759,990

SIZE: 3,746 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $203

SETTING: This house is at the edge of the Fan, a neighborhood and historic district in western Richmond characterized by broad boulevards lined with 19th-century townhouses. It is around the corner from Cary Street, the anchor of a low-key shopping district filled with boutiques, cafes and restaurants. Maymont, a Gilded Age estate and public park on 100 acres on the James River, is three miles away. The Fan is bordered by the museum district, which contains the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, the subject of a 165,000-square-foot expansion in 2010.

INDOORS: The three-story semidetached brick house has a tiled mansard roof. It was updated over the past year, inside and out. The exterior retains its cornice, modillions and gabled dormers, as well as a portico with ornate columns. Much of the interior is original, too, including molding, heart pine floors, mantels and some pocket doors. Ceilings are 12 feet tall throughout the first floor.

The design is side-hall plan, with common rooms in a line from front to back: two parlors, separated by a large archway and classical columns, then the formal dining room and the kitchen. Architectural ornaments include the leaded glass framing the front door and an original stained-glass panel in the dining room, which has a gently rounded wall. The kitchen has KitchenAid stainless-steel appliances and a Broan range hood. Custom cabinets here and throughout the house are by Kitchen Design of Newport News, Va. Countertops are granite.

Three bedrooms are upstairs. The master has another rounded wall with large windows, and is part of a suite with a walk-in closet and a bathroom finished in gray Carrara marble. The closet connects to a laundry area, which also opens onto the hall. Another upstairs bedroom has a bay window overlooking the street. The fourth bedroom, in the former attic, is reached by a spiral staircase. The basement is unfinished and used for storage. Parking is off-street.

OUTDOOR SPACE: A front porch and a back patio, off the kitchen.

TAXES: $5,436 a year

CONTACT: Brad Ruckart and Tommy Waterworth, Brad Ruckart Real Estate Group, Keller Williams Richmond West, (804) 909-2346 / (804) 517-9093; bradruckartrealestategroup.com

•

GALVESTON, TEX.

WHAT: A waterfront house with three bedrooms and three bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $749,000

SIZE: 2,092 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $358

SETTING: Galveston is an island city off the coast of Houston, in the Gulf of Mexico. A narrow strip of land running about 25 miles end to end, the island has four historic districts, both residential and commercial, with some architecture that dates to antebellum times. This house has 100 feet of frontage on the bay side near the island’s western end, in a subdivision of mostly second homes. Beaches are a short walk away.

INDOORS: The house was built in 1990 and updated over the last couple of years. It has a single story elevated one story up from the ground. A gently contemporary spin on a beachfront cottage, the house has an exterior of HardiePlank siding, while the interior has white board-and-batten paneling on the ceilings and walls, and tiled floors designed to resemble wood.

The design is open plan, with a great room overlooking the bay. Glass doors open to a porch running the bayside length of the house and wrapping around one side. The living area has built-in entertainment storage; the kitchen has granite and marble surfaces, as well as stainless-steel appliances, including a pot filler over the stove. Spiral stairs lead to a small sitting room. Plantation shutters are used throughout.

All bedrooms are off the great room. The master is part of a suite with a walk-in shower. It opens to the side section of the porch.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about a quarter of an acre. A catwalk leads from the porch to a sun deck that doubles as shelter for a boat underneath. Under the porch at ground level are a bamboo tiki bar and an outdoor kitchen. There’s also a fire pit by the water’s edge, and a little putting green.

TAXES: $9,796 a year

CONTACT: Susanna Mayberry, Re/Max Leading Edge, (409) 234-6618; susannamayberry.com


