


Earlier this month, chef Corey Lee strolled through the ground floor of the newly reopened SFMOMA, past one of Richard Serra’s swirling, imposing sculptures, and said: “Whether we like it or not, food has started to occupy a new role as art.” It’s a statement that underlies every aspect of Lee’s new restaurant in the museum, where he will serve not only as chef, but also curator: When it opens tomorrow, In Situ will be a first-of-its kind gallery where diners can order faithfully replicated dishes from restaurants the world over, past and present.

There might not be a better person for the job than Lee. He is one of the greatest chefs to have come out of Thomas Keller’s kitchens and has earned three Michelin stars at his own restaurant Benu, just across the street from the museum. In the foreword to the Benu cookbook, the Momofuku chef and Lucky Peach editor David Chang expresses awe at his peer: “There’s no better cook technician on the planet … Rarely do you come across the super-talented person who is matched with a superior work ethic. When you do, you get a supernova.”

Since getting the green light for the idea, Lee has had to tap into that work ethic and technique perhaps more than ever, traveling the world and learning how to cook a range of dishes, from Chang’s spicy pork sausage rice cakes (served at Momofuku Ssam Bar, in New York) to a braised octopus and seaweed by chef Virgilio Martinez (served at the restaurant Central, in Lima). As curator, Lee’s also had to count on the trust of each person lending their dish to the menu: “You put together an exhibition based on relationships,” he said. “These are not interpretations. My cooks and I are shepherds of these chefs’ works.” Befitting an exhibition, the menu lists the chef and restaurant responsible for each dish, as well as the year it was produced. It also includes descriptions — cogent as the finest museum labels — of each chef’s contribution to gastronomy.

The opening menu will feature 25 dishes, but Lee has amassed a repertoire of 90, with the intention of changing things up often. He envisions an accessible environment, where museumgoers can stumble upon the restaurant and order from the snack menu in the front of the space, or sit down for a full dinner in the main dining room. “Imagine someone who had no idea they would discover this place coming in, and ordering something,” Lee said. “You can help them reimagine something about the world, or evoke an emotion they didn’t plan on experiencing. There’s an amazing opportunity to surprise people.”


