


Charlotte Beth Delaney and Caleb Thurston Whelden were married May 7 at the Heritage Hotel in Southbury, Conn. Scott R. Cobban, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated.

Dr. Delaney, 32, who will be keeping her name, is a fourth-year medical student at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx. In July, she is to begin a combined residency in internal medicine and pediatrics at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester. Until September she was the musical director and the president of the Lymph Notes, an 18-member a cappella group at the college of medicine; she is still a member. She graduated magna cum laude from Williams College and received a Master of Music in vocal performance from N.Y.U.

She is a daughter of Muriel J. Reynard and Dr. Brian P. Delaney of Pelham, N.Y. The bride’s father is a geriatrician and family doctor in the Bronx, and an assistant professor in the department of family and social medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Her mother, who is retired, worked in Long Island City, Queens, as a managing director and a general counsel for Citigroup.

Mr. Whelden, 34, is a plumber in Boston and sings with two professional Boston-based touring a cappella groups, Five O'Clock Shadow and Overboard. He graduated summa cum laude from Ithaca College.

He is a son of Cheryl M. Perelman and S. Norris Whelden, both of Nantucket, Mass. The groom’s mother is a yoga instructor there and is on the board of the Family & Children’s Service of Nantucket, a nonprofit mental health agency. His father also has a plumbing business on Nantucket.

The groom is a stepson of Suzanne Horne Whelden and of James A. Perelman, who is the sheriff of Nantucket.

The couple met in 2011 in Manhattan at a mutual friend’s birthday party, and Mr. Whelden proposed two years later at a New Year’s Eve concert in Rockport, Mass., during which he sang a song he wrote, “Fall in Love,” with backup by members of both of his a cappella groups.


