


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

It might sound creepy for a 45-year-old mother of two to follow a 22-year-old on Instagram, but as a woman of a certain age, I need to keep up with the youth. I first read about Tallulah Willis, the youngest daughter of Demi Moore and Bruce Willis, in an April 2014 People magazine article about her new fashion blog (which no longer exists). Four months later, Tallulah, only 20, entered rehab for substance abuse, depression and an eating disorder. Her struggle with sobriety seemed familial; just two years earlier, Moore had gone through a very public breakup and stint in rehab. After her divorce from Ashton Kutcher, Moore pulled back from social media all together.

When I started following Willis, I wasn’t looking for signs of Moore so much as a sign of the pair’s relationship. Mother-daughter relations can be fraught with complication and vulnerability — I love you! I hate you! I love you again! — and of course, I’m aware that mothers make some remarkable mistakes. Mothers like me, for instance, will sometimes go to bed at night wondering, Will my daughter judge me? Will she hate me for my weaknesses? For my honesty? I was curious if Willis was closer to her mother because of their shared struggle with addiction. I’ve felt defeated in parenting, like a failure for much lesser reasons than rehab, so I empathized with Moore about the kind of blame she might have attached to herself. But in following Willis on Instagram, I find some relief.

For all of the trauma she has faced thus far, Willis refuses to let you take her seriously on Instagram: her profile description reads “Youthful slimelord.” Willis’s feed is a collection of clownish, oddball imagery. She likes to post unflattering selfies: She’ll purposefully bloat her face or eat an Oscar or snap a close-up of a bubble erupting from her nose. She takes endless pictures of her dog’s tongue sticking out. She calls herself Buuski, a boyish family nickname that’s as far as you can get from her given name, suited for a southern belle or a hysterical Tennessee Williams character, which she is not.

Much of Willis’s Instagram is reflective of her family loyalty: She compares her face to that of her famous father and allows her little sisters (from Bruce’s second marriage) to draw all over her body. When her older sister Rumer competed on “Dancing With the Stars” last year, Willis pushed fans to vote for her. She often models dresses from Scout’s General, her sister Scout’s fashion collection. (Scout also has her own Instagram feed. Tallulah has occasionally featured it since the network temporarily banned her sister in 2014 for breaking its no-nipple policy.)

But for all of my displaced worry about Willis, the most unmistakable theme of her Instagram feed is her decidedly healthy relationship with her mother. Willis wraps her gold-panted leg around Moore’s waist in a sort of fetal position and writes, “Thanks for holding me in your body for 9 months.” She and Moore pose for a picture in the trunk of a hatchback. Willis teases her mother about her relationship with fellow Brat Packer Emilio Estevez. And because she’s a modern-day daughter who can summon horror and sentimentality all in one breath, she shows off a D.I.Y. tattoo on her arm that reads “Mom.”

Willis’s feed is generally gawky and awkward, a striking contrast to her mother’s decades-long public persona. Willis swoons over Moore like her No. 1 fangirl, comparing her mom to an “earth angel” when Moore shows up in a Zac Posen dress at a Hollywood event. Mother and daughter have switched social-media roles: As Willis’s feed increases in readership, Moore, who had a colorful Twitter account while married to Kutcher — their marriage was made in Twitter heaven, and they often tweeted to each other while in the same room — has become something of a social-media recluse, except for popping up on her daughter’s Instagram feed. (Moore’s Instagram is a private account and she has only tweeted twice in the past year, both times to promote Willis’s Buuski clothing line.)

Of all the mother-daughter posts, my favorite one is rife with mushy sentimentality: Willis drapes her arms over Moore’s shoulders while Moore speaks to a friend. In the caption, Willis writes that she’s part of the “codependent daughters club,” but their relationship doesn’t seem so pathologically one-sided. As one follower commented, “If my daughter stands behind me with her arms around me at your age, I will be the happiest mom on earth!”

It’s heartwarming that as a 22-year-old, Willis publicly describes her mom as a member of her “squad.” Society tells young adults to stand apart from their parents — not on top of them, or with arms draped around them as they carry on a conversation — in order to establish their individuality. But Willis rejects this, emphasizing her admiration and appreciation for her mother. It’s what makes her and Moore a sweet mother-daughter duo: the two of them against the gossip blogs, the critics and the TMZs of the world, shielding each other with their glittering couture wardrobes and silly poses. Willis probably gains strength from her mother, the two learning from each other in their addiction struggles, propping each other up.

Though my 7-year-old daughter is much too young for Instagram, I don’t need a crystal ball to tell me that soon enough, a social-media platform will creep up on both of us and eventually control her life. So much of teenagers’ social-media existence is spent hiding their life from their parents — but I’ve shared so much on the Internet. I’ve written about my divorce. About my remarriage. About having two kids with two different dads. About using marijuana. About my failures. My fears. It’s all out there. Sometimes I fear I’ll be my daughter’s scary fun-house mirror — that I’ll be a reflection of her that she’s repulsed by. She certainly doesn’t have to follow in my footsteps, or even see herself in them, but I hope she can find a middle ground where she echoes her parents and still cultivates her own identity. Mothers can be imperfect and still have their daughters’ love, even their public admiration and allegiance, as when Willis wore a pink bikini with a fur coat draped over her shoulders, intending to channel her mother’s “Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle” character, Madison Lee. Willis’s Instagram proves you can be a fan of your mom even if that’s not the coolest thing, and even if your mom, like all moms, comes with baggage. Hopefully my daughter will be my fan, too.


