


The theater and visual artist Robert Wilson, fondly regarded as a master of light and shadow, strikes again this week in New York — in an unexpected location. Hermès tapped him to create a surreal universe for its 2016 Maison furniture and housewares collection, which over the next two days will be installed at Cedar Lake’s space in the Chelsea arts district of New York. Titled “Here Elsewhere,” the immersive installation eschews any of the expected notions of a “dream house,” evoking instead the emotional, dizzying, heady visions of a dream itself. “It is an abstract time/space construction. What we hear, see and smell can counterpoint and complement one another,” Wilson says. “Without light, there is no space. Einstein said, ‘Light is the measure of all things.’”

In “Here Elsewhere,” five themed rooms become sites of live performance and video, interspersing tangible objects and imagined fantasy. “I’ve never experienced anything like this,” Wilson says of being commissioned by Hermès, which represents a distinct departure for an artist who typically operates in a noncommercial high-art realm. “I felt an affinity with Hermès, seeing the work still today being manufactured by hand. I felt an identification with their attention to detail.” Wilson’s own Watermill Center touts a collection of some 8,000 art objects, many of which are in the decorative arts. “To me, the most beautiful things in our lives are drawings, textiles, glass and pottery,” Wilson says. “A pot is made by hand. A glass is blown. A drawing by hand. A textile is woven. They are handcrafted, which comes from the soul.”

But he also is an avid collector of chairs, and readily cites an ethos, borrowed from Marcel Breuer, that describes his intimate fondness for them: “In the detail of this chair that I designed are all my aesthetics, the same aesthetics that go into designing a building, the same that go into designing a city.” Wilson shares a touching tale in the intro text to “Here Elsewhere”: “This fascination goes back to my childhood. When I was eight years old, I went to New Mexico to the White Sands Desert, to visit one of my uncles who lived there as a recluse. His adobe house was very minimal, with very little furniture. In one room, there was just a chair, and nothing else. So I said to my uncle: ‘That’s a very beautiful chair.’ At Christmas, he sent me the chair as a present! It became very important to me.” In the above video, T gets the exclusive inside look at the world Wilson created with Hermès (complete with a chair or two).


