


BERLIN — President Joachim Gauck of Germany announced on Monday that he would not seek a second five-year term for the largely ceremonial office, a declaration that could create more problems for Chancellor Angela Merkel.

The announcement is likely to intensify feuding in Ms. Merkel’s so-called grand coalition government of center-right and center-left parties, which is suffering from falling popularity ratings and has been particularly divided on the response to the more than one million migrants who arrived in Germany during the past year.

An opinion poll conducted last week for the Bild newspaper showed that the coalition’s approval rating had fallen below 50 percent for the first time.

Ms. Merkel is expected to seek a fourth term next year, and the survey found that her conservative bloc would command just 30 percent of the votes if an election were held now, and her Social Democrat partners just 19 percent.

Many centrist parties across Europe have been losing support, and although the German survey of 2,053 voters had a margin of error of plus or minus three percentage points, it highlighted the discord in the governing coalition, and any prolonged wrangling over Mr. Gauck’s successor could exacerbate the divisions.

Mr. Gauck, a 76-year-old former pastor in East Germany who is widely respected as a moral authority, cited health concerns in a five-minute statement. He said it was an honor and joy to serve “our country, which day by day is getting stronger and better.”

Although he is healthy now, he said, his fitness might not measure up to the demands of a second five-year term, which would run until he was 82. His term expires in March, roughly six months before the next federal elections.

Mr. Gauck’s partner, Daniela Schadt, a 56-year-old journalist, was said by many observers in Berlin to have opposed a second term.

Ms. Merkel, who is 61 and has been in power for 10 and a half years, is widely believed to be planning to seek a fourth term in 2017.

The presidency has been a troublesome post for Ms. Merkel. Conservatives she had backed stepped down midterm in 2010 and 2012, before the election of Mr. Gauck.

The president is chosen by a special federal convention made of the 631 members of the federal Parliament and the 31 members of legislatures in Germany’s 16 states.

Neither Ms. Merkel’s conservative bloc nor the center-left Social Democrats command an absolute majority in the convention, opening the path for a bitter fight.

Among the possible successors are Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, 73; Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, 60, a Social Democrat; and the president of Parliament, Norbert Lammert, 67, a conservative known for having a conciliatory touch.

Mr. Gauck’s background as a pastor and as the man who oversaw the highly delicate files of East Germany’s former secret police contributed to his popularity and to his ability to bridge political gaps with high-profile speeches.

On the refugee question, he has been careful to welcome outsiders and their absorption into “a more varied country,” while also showing sympathy for Ms. Merkel’s critics, who have argued for limiting the number of migrants Germany takes in.


