


Orlando Boquete would have been easy to miss in the swarm of people waiting on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn to start a half-marathon race last month. He was one runner among 27,000, older than most, but just another guy in sneakers, shorts and a T-shirt with a number pinned to the chest.

No one, however, had gotten to the starting line the way he had.

Mr. Boquete broke out of Florida prisons twice.

The first time, he climbed a fence, hid in the waters of a snake-infested irrigation ditch, then lived underground for 10 years: a real-world incarnation of the innocent man in the television series and film “The Fugitive.” Recaptured and sent back to complete a 55-year sentence, Mr. Boquete got out yet again, walking through the front door with a DNA test in hand that proved him innocent of the sexual assault he had been convicted of.

Of the 341 people exonerated by DNA testing since 1989, Mr. Boquete is the only one to have escaped from prison. (In his cell, he had a Spanish-language copy of “Papillon,” an account of a man who claimed to have escaped multiple times from French penal colonies.)

When Mr. Boquete was cleared, a prosecutor and a judge apologized. So far, that is all he has gotten from the State of Florida for his ordeal of 23 years, about 10 of them on the run.

“I haven’t gotten a dime,” Mr. Boquete said.

He has long dreamed of opening a boxing gymnasium, to offer discipline and structure for young people who might otherwise be flailing in the world. There is a son he would like to visit in Cuba, but he cannot afford the journey.

A decade after his release, Mr. Boquete, 61, lives alone in a trailer in a rickety area of Fort Myers, Fla. He washes cars and does any other odd jobs he can pick up. His income is under $1,000 a month, he says.

Depending on the state, an innocent person may not get any restitution, or may have to spend years fighting for it. Florida passed a law in 2008 that provides wrongly convicted people with $50,000 per year of imprisonment, but only if they had never been previously convicted of a felony. One innocent man who served nearly 28 years for murder was ineligible under the statute because he had pleaded guilty to felony possession of a single quaalude pill in the 1970s, said Seth Miller, the executive director of the Innocence Project of Florida.

“It’s called the ‘clean hands provision,’” Mr. Miller said. “If you have a felony conviction prior to the wrongful conviction, you can’t get compensated under the statute.”

Mr. Boquete’s survival as a fugitive for a decade rested on his ability to hide in plain sight — to take the identities of dead people, to work under aliases, to stay calm when stopped by the police. While he was on the run, he committed two felonies. He broke into a clothing store and got caught. At the time, he was using an alias and was not recognized as a fugitive. He simply walked away from a jail work crew. Later, he was staying in the home of a drug dealer, and when the authorities raided it, he was charged with possession of a gun they found in the house. That time he was spotted as a fugitive.

Ultimately, with representation by Nina Morrison of the Innocence Project, Mr. Boquete was cleared of the sexual assault. A Cuban refugee, he was held for deportation, but was able to obtain United States citizenship. The official residue of his years in prison: two nonviolent felonies.

“If they hadn’t wrongfully convicted him, he wouldn’t have escaped,” said Jeffrey Deskovic, who served 16 years in New York State prisons for a rape and murder committed by someone else. “Most of us wouldn’t have the wherewithal to do it.”

Mr. Deskovic, who used some of the proceeds he won in a lawsuit to create a foundation that supports other exonerated people, had met Mr. Boquete at gatherings of innocence networks. He brought Mr. Boquete to New York for a social visit last month.

A few days after arriving, Mr. Boquete heard about the Brooklyn half-marathon. Preparing for his escape, he had run endless laps in the prison yard, but recently he had not trained for a race. Still, he tried it. And about two hours after the start, he ran the last yards at Coney Island. Spotting friends, Mr. Boquete dropped into a boxer’s crouch and threw left jabs into the air. Then he laughed and kept going.


