


Elizabeth and Philip Jennings have sported a lot of great disguises over the course of “The Americans,” but in the Season 4 finale, “Persona Non Grata,” Philip wears one of my favorites: hair brushed back, wire-rim glasses, saggy mustache, the beaten visage of a J.C. Penney men’s outerwear model who’s just been laid off. I think of this disguise as “Sad Walter White.”

The parallels between the Jenningses’ story and Walter’s in “Breaking Bad” have been on my mind this season. When FX announced that “The Americans” would end after two more seasons, I thought that setting an end date was a good idea, partly because, much like “Breaking Bad,” it involves an intimate cat-and-mouse game and has a sense of compounding dread that can’t be spun out endlessly.

There is, however, a core difference between the two dramas. “Breaking Bad” explored the idea that Walter’s crimes, however costly and evil, brought him for better or worse to his authentic self. “I liked it,” Walter confessed to Skyler in the finale. “I was good at it.”

“I liked it” describes pretty much no one’s relationship to his or her job on “The Americans,” no matter how good he or she is at it. American or Soviet, they are weighed down by their work, tired of the compromises, resentful of systems that use them in the name of a larger cause.

“The Americans,” the masterly, melancholy fourth season proved, is more like “Breaking Sad.”

Certainly William (Dylan Baker) doesn’t feel self-actualized, not as he lies alone, disillusioned, dying in an isolation chamber as he is literally eaten from the inside by the product of a mission he didn’t believe in: The biological agent he was smuggling for a government he doesn’t trust to use it.

His F.B.I. captors, watching him from behind protective glass, may be on the winning side of history. But they haven’t felt especially victorious either, as they’ve been humiliated by the discovery of a bug in their offices and haunted by the sense that whatever cases they win are symbolic at best. A plot is discovered, a diplomat is banished and the process grinds on.

Season 4 finds the Cold War at a point when, as on a serial cable drama, the end is in sight but it still promises plenty of heartbreak before we get there. (The season spanned from just after Ronald Reagan’s “Evil Empire” speech to the 1984 Super Bowl, whose broadcast included the Apple Macintosh ad in which a young woman hurled a sledgehammer through a video image of Big Brother.)

All this adds a note of gloom even to the tensest moments in this drama: Pursuer or pursued, no one’s heart is entirely in this spy game. Philip, always ambivalent, finally says this to himself flat-out through the coded message of his EST session, where he vents about work at the “travel agency”: “You don’t want to make arrangements for people you don’t know and don’t give a [expletive] about.”

The EST meetings, which seemed like a quirky period detail at the beginning of Season 3, have grown into a kind of “Americans” equivalent to Tony Soprano’s sessions with Dr. Melfi. But there’s a sense that, while it may make Philip feel better to talk, Western self-help doesn’t have any concrete answer for him. Like Dennis’s offer of a Coke to the dying William, it’s a palliative better suited to first-world problems.

Philip has been on this track for a while, though Martha’s ruination and Paige’s entanglement in the family secret hasn’t helped. Elizabeth, as Gabriel described her earlier, has always been the stalwart, certain in the rightness of their cause if not that of every individual objective. She’s been the more classically Walter White-esque figure, in that she embraces her work — “likes” would be the wrong word — and seems invigorated rather than sapped by it.

But Season 4 finds her less certain. Her long con involving Young-hee shook her in a way few missions have. (Plot-wise, that plan — involving both a faked affair and a faked suicide — seemed a rather elaborate bank shot simply to get people alone in a secure office, but it was emotionally devastating.)

Elizabeth is still a different person from Philip, still more dedicated to her ideals. But she seems less certain that those ideals live in her homeland anymore. When she wonders whether her hometown, Smolensk, is anything like she remembers it, you get the sense she’s not talking about the architecture.

The finale’s soundtrack highlight was Leonard Cohen’s “Who by Fire,” a soulful litany of ways to die. It fits this season, which has been a catalog of loss: Nina, summarily shot after a last act of conscience; Martha, mercifully and horribly shuttled to a chilly life of loneliness; even Agent Gaad, killed for nothing in a botched K.G.B. operation in his Thai hotel.

Add to the casualty list Paige’s innocence, though the upside is that the season brought out a striking performance from Holly Taylor. Through her, “The Americans” has become a kind of heightened version of a familiar teenage coming-of-age story: Her so-called spy life.

Like many teenage protagonists, Paige discovers disillusioning secrets about her parents. She becomes socially conscious and questions the faith (or rather, lack of faith) she was raised in. She rebels against her parents, is surveilled by them, carries the weight of their mistakes. (Parenting tip: If your minor daughter has a hard time dealing with learning that her entire identity is a lie, that’s on you, not her.) Eventually, through her surprising affinity for small-scale spycraft, she finds that she’s more like her folks than she might admit.

After months of lying and worrying and seeing her mother stab a guy in the neck, she finally gets the chance to be a teenage girl, hooking up with the boy down the street. Alas, their romance is star-crossed — or hammer-and-sickle-crossed — and her dad forbids it as one more too dangerous intimacy in a series full of them.

On the plus side, she has a brother — no, not the one playing 8-bit games on the home computer, but Philip’s Russian son. We first heard of him in Season 1, but his introduction, confirming that he exists, is the closest thing to a bombshell in the finale.

But the manner in which “Persona Non Grata” brings him in shows that the series, guaranteed two more seasons to end on its own terms, feels no more obligation to gin up excitement with cliffhangers. It would have been easy to structure the episode so that revealing his plan to find Philip was the final scene: “I need to know” — boom! — closing credits.

Instead, it ends in the dark of a January night, with a front door closing and a light turning off, a tableau not of international espionage but domestic drama. Maybe “The Americans,” finally, is neither “Breaking Bad” nor a traditional spy story. Maybe it’s a teenage horror movie, the kind where the biggest danger, in the end, is already inside your own house.


