


Larry Bird, the president of the Indiana Pacers, said Thursday that the team would not renew Frank Vogel’s contract for next season, cutting ties with a respected name in the coaching ranks. Bird said he believed it was time for a new voice to lead the Pacers, keeping with his long-held philosophy on short shelf lives for coaches.

“I know it’s not going to be a 100 percent popular move,” Bird said at a news conference. “But my responsibility is do what’s best for the franchise.”

Vogel was 250-181 in five and a half seasons with the Pacers. He led the team to the playoffs five times, including a first-round loss to the Toronto Raptors this season. The Pacers became known as one of the better defensive teams in the N.B.A. under Vogel’s leadership, but Bird said that around the All-Star break, he had started thinking it might be time for a change to bring in a coach to breathe life into a sometimes stagnant offense.

He called the decision to part ways with Vogel one of the toughest he had had to make in basketball. But Bird has long maintained that players start to tune out a coach after three seasons, and Vogel lasted longer than that.

Vogel led Indiana to the Eastern Conference finals in 2012-13 and 2013-14. The only season Vogel in which did not lead Indiana to the playoffs was last year, when the star forward Paul George missed most of the season after breaking his leg in a scrimmage with USA Basketball.

With George back fully healthy this season, the Pacers pushed the second-seeded Raptors to seven games in the first round before losing.

“I think he did fine, but it’s all about motivating players and getting them to play at a higher level,” Bird said.

Vogel could be in demand immediately. He interviewed with Houston in 2011 and has ties to Rockets General Manager Daryl Morey.

Bird said that with George and the promising rookie Myles Turner as part of the team’s nucleus, the Pacers job should be an attractive one. Among the names that have been linked to the job are the former N.B.A. coach Nate McMillan, one of Vogel’s assistants, and the former Pacers player and Golden State coach Mark Jackson.

Bird said he would not hire his former Boston Celtics teammate Kevin McHale.

“I would not do that to Kevin, to have him work for me,” Bird said. “That’s not fair. I respect him too much.”


