


BALTIMORE — A judge here on Thursday peppered prosecutors with detailed questions about the charges against a police officer involved in the arrest of Freddie Gray, the 25-year-old black man who died after sustaining a spinal cord injury while in custody.

As Judge Barry G. Williams listened to prosecutors’ closing arguments, he interrupted to ask when, exactly, they believed that an assault occurred, and why some of their allegations, if true, were crimes and not civil violations — a contention that, if proved, could have broad implications for policing in the city.

“You’re saying any time there’s an arrest without probable cause, it’s a crime?” Judge Williams asked.

“I think it depends on the circumstances,” Janice Bledsoe, a deputy state’s attorney, said.

“No, no, no, no,” Judge Williams responded, pressing Ms. Bledsoe for a definitive answer, which she eventually gave, saying it was misconduct. Later, the chief deputy state’s attorney, Michael Schatzow, clarified that an arrest without probable cause would be a crime only if the officer was not being “objectively reasonable.”

The trial of Officer Edward M. Nero has shifted the focus in the police encounter with Mr. Gray from the injury that eventually killed him to the opening moments of his detention last year on a sunny April morning in the blighted Sandtown neighborhood of West Baltimore.

Officer Nero has been charged with second-degree assault for reportedly touching Mr. Gray during an apprehension that prosecutors said exceeded the officer’s authority; two counts of misconduct; and reckless endangerment, for failing to fasten Mr. Gray’s seatbelt when he put him in the van.

Judge Williams is the sole decider in the case, and legal experts said the tone of his questions could suggest that prosecutors might face steep odds. From early on, experts have questioned whether the charges against the officers were too ambitious to weather a trial.

“He appeared troubled with the state’s theory that the facts as alleged by the state amounted to a crime,” said Warren Alperstein, a defense lawyer who has been watching the trial. And by asking when an assault may have occurred, “implicitly, the judge is saying, I don’t understand your theory.’” he said.

But Douglas Colbert, a law professor at the University of Maryland, who has been supportive of the prosecution, said Judge Williams might simply have been trying to be thorough in an unusual case. “I believe that he was doing as much for clarification as he was in challenging,” he said.

With Judge Williams expected to announce a decision Monday morning — delaying a ruling until the crowds coming to the city for the Preakness Stakes horse race on Saturday leave — Baltimore is set to get its first verdict in the case of an officer charged in the encounter with Mr. Gray, whose death touched off riots and days of unrest.

The legal reckoning has been a long time coming: Judge Williams granted each of the six officers charged a separate trial, but the first one, of Officer William G. Porter, ended in a hung jury and a mistrial in December, leading to months of legal skirmishes that have delayed the other trials.

During their closing argument and rebuttal, prosecutors said Thursday that Officer Nero and another officer, Garrett E. Miller, elevated a legal stop to an unlawful arrest by failing to question Mr. Gray or to frisk him, as the law requires. Thus, they said, the physical contact they made with Mr. Gray amounted to assault.

And, Mr. Schatzow said, Officer Nero had a duty to restrain Mr. Gray in the van with a seatbelt, and failed to do so.

A lawyer for Officer Nero, Marc Zayon, said the apprehension of Mr. Gray — which involved handcuffing him and putting him on the ground — was legal. “Being handcuffed is a horrible thing,” Mr. Zayon said, “but the law allows it.”

And he said it was the responsibility of the van’s driver, not Officer Nero, to put Mr. Gray’s seatbelt on, and he denied that his client had knowingly violated police procedure or the law.

Closing arguments came after a weeklong trial that focused on rules about detaining, arresting and transporting prisoners, with some officers testifying that it was rare to use seatbelts on prisoners in police wagons.

One issue at trial has been the extent to which Officer Nero participated in the initial search and restraint of Mr. Gray. Prosecutors played a statement that Officer Nero gave to investigators, in which he said, “Miller and I, we got him in custody,” referring to Officer Garrett E. Miller.

But Officer Miller testified that he, not Officer Nero, had made physical contact with Mr. Gray during the first moments of his arrest.

The trial has led to courtroom scrutiny of rules about when an officer can conduct an investigative stop — they can, for example, when someone flees in a high-crime area — and what, exactly, is allowed without probable cause.

But in pursuing their strategy, prosecutors have been counterintuitive. Normally, it is defense lawyers, not prosecutors, who tell judges that the police have overstepped their authority by subjecting their clients to illegal searches or seizures.

“They sound like defense attorneys in there,” Warren Brown, a defense lawyer who is not involved in the case, said. “Really, it was amazing.”


