


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning, fellow travelers on the road to the delicious. It is the 115th day of this year, and the anniversary of the birth of the Cajun chef and storyteller Justin Wilson, who died in 2001. You may recall him for his catchphrase, “I gar-on-tee.” Perhaps you could celebrate his legacy this evening with a big platter of Cajun broiled shrimp, along with a bowl of no-fuss grits and another of slow-cooked collard greens dressed in vinegar and red-pepper flakes? That would make a nice Sunday night meal.

Then, for the rest of the week, you can take it easy. We’ve put together a collection of practically magical three-ingredient recipes designed to make your cooking life simpler and less stressful.

Try our recipe for creamy lemon pasta on Monday night, say. And Mark Bittman’s recipe for the simplest roast chicken on Tuesday; it pairs beautifully with Melissa Clark’s recipe for simple roasted vegetables. With Marcella Hazan’s recipe for tomato sauce, you could return to pasta on Wednesday night (we like it paired with some good store-bought ravioli), then ramp up on Thursday night to Julia Moskin’s recipe for a cast-iron steak, which goes very well indeed with the great Jacques Pépin’s recipe for a warm zucchini salad.

Friday night? How about you cook some lettuce in accordance with Tamar Adler’s column in The New York Times Magazine Sunday, and make her recipe for braised lettuce on anchovy toast. (Perhaps follow it up with a mess of pork chops. We don’t want you to go hungry.)

Simple fare, simply made! And the ambitious can use the time saved in dinner preparation to bake some sweets. Jonathan Reynolds’s recipe for pineapple upside-down cake is classic project fare. So is Melissa’s recipe for a lemon angel food cake with (get this!) preserved lemon curd. And some chocolate pecan cookies might go well after the roast chicken – so take a look at that, too.

You can other recipes to cook this week on Cooking. Please save them to your recipe box so you can find them later. (If you get jammed up, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.)

Now, check out this nice little Vine, which encapsulates a lot of our life at home these days. Take a look at Boston magazine’s profile of the guy who brought us Craisins, now trying once again to save the cranberry industry.

Watch the official video for “Wonderful,” the singer and songwriter Cate Le Bon’s forthcoming album, “Crab Day,” which Ben Ratliff recently called “charming and somewhat startling.” That’s about right. And if you’ve never toured your way through the Lucky Peach website, start with Sean Brock’s recipe for fried chicken and gravy, and move out from there.

See you tomorrow!


