


Terrorists don’t set out only to kill.

They also aim to intimidate civilians, as the F.B.I.’s definition of terrorism states. Law enforcement officers have labeled the Orlando shooting Sunday, which left 49 victims dead, domestic terrorism. The same label was affixed to the murder of 14 people in San Bernardino, Calif., in December. In both cases, the attackers pledged allegiance to the Islamic State.

The deaths, and the pain inflicted on families and friends, are clear enough. But has terrorism achieved its other goal, of intimidating Americans?

The question itself is not simple. Americans have their individual answers. A sampling of data shows that by many measures, people say they are very concerned. But they are not acting like it.

Polls suggest Americans are more concerned about terrorism than they have been in years. Soon after the San Bernardino attack, a Gallup survey found that 16 percent of respondents said terrorism was the most important problem facing the country.

No other problem scored higher — and it was the highest such number for terrorism in 10 years. Gallup also found in December that 51 percent of people polled said they were “very worried” or “somewhat worried” that they or someone in their family would become a victim of terrorism, the highest reading since right after the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001.

The chances that an American will become a victim of terrorism are tiny, about the same odds that a heavy piece of furniture will crush them to death. People may implicitly recognize this because they are not leading crimped, fearful lives. The vigils after the Orlando massacre are an immediate example of this.

Nor do traditional economic indicators, like consumer spending, show evidence of a cowering population. In April, inflation-adjusted personal consumption expenditures rose 3 percent compared with a year earlier, which is considerably higher than the 2.2 percent average for the previous five years. This makes sense. Economists from the University of Southern California and the University of Alabama found that large, diverse economies can absorb and adapt to terrorist attacks. Fears that companies and consumers would freeze spending for a long time did not come to pass after Sept. 11.

Today, Americans are still traveling abroad in large numbers. Last year, 12.6 million Americans traveled to Europe, up 13.5 percent from 11.1 million in 2010, according to data from the Commerce Department. Just over two million people traveled to the Middle East in 2015, a big jump from 1.3 million in 2010. And in January and February this year, the most recent numbers available, travel to Europe was up 7 percent compared with the year-earlier figures, and up 11 percent to the Middle East.

Large sporting events, potential targets for terrorists, as the attacks in Paris in November showed, are still hugely popular. Attendance at National Football League games totaled 34.9 million people last year, an increase from 33.1 million in 2010.

Admissions to movie theaters were also up last year, even with the competition of streaming services like Netflix. Box office revenues are up 4 percent so far this year, according to Box Office Mojo.

Attendance at live concerts sends a mixed message, at least going by figures from the Live Nation Entertainment, a large concert organizer. In 2015, 43.8 million fans attended Live Nation’s North American events, a big jump from 31 million in 2011, according to the company’s financial filings. Estimated attendance was down in the first quarter by 11 percent.

But fear of terrorism may have prompted a darker reaction: an increase in hate crimes against Muslim-Americans and mosques. According to Brian Levin, a professor and director of the Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism at California State University, San Bernardino, there was a spike in such attacks after the terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino. A line of demarcation seems to be the Sept. 11 attacks: There were 154 anti-Muslim hate crimes in 2014, according to Mr. Levin. In 2000, there were 28.

And Donald Trump’s proposed temporary ban on Muslim immigration has attracted supporters, especially Republicans. Half the respondents in a March poll said they would support such a ban.

Terrorism may have eroded the quality of life in certain ways: The wait times in security lines at airports are an obvious example, along with ubiquitous warnings of “See something, say something.” A lot more video cameras are watching citizens. Spending on security and defense has made the deficit bigger. Terrorist attacks allowed the federal government to gain new powers that have eroded legal rights. So-called national security letters, for example, give federal investigators the power to seek certain customer records without court approval or oversight. In 2015, the investigators issued 12,870 such letters, containing 48,642 information requests.

Still, at a gay pride event in Los Angeles after Sunday’s shootings, Eric Garcetti, the city’s mayor, said: “This march goes on. We go on.” And despite their fears about terrorism, Americans have pretty much done that since the Sept. 11 attacks.


