


When the Lower East Side was teeming with garment shops, even a decade ago, New Era Factory Outlet had plenty of foot traffic. The neighborhood today, however, is hardly recognizable; Orchard Street has just as many art galleries, restaurants and bars as clothes sellers, and New Era now does most of its business online. But a few years ago, Robert Zaiger, New Era’s owner, noticed a new kind of customer at the shop: The young man looking for a tuxedo, often for his first formal occasion, and usually a procrastinator. It wasn’t the bubble-gum pink suit in the window that caught his eye, but a couple of dozen impassioned Yelp reviewers who raved about Mr. Zaiger’s service and low, low prices.

Mr. Zaiger’s customers range from doo-wop groups to costume designers from shows like “Saturday Night Live” and all kinds of special-event goers — a few Tony Awards attendees were in recently to buy tuxedos. The store sells hats, dress shirts and suits in nearly every color imaginable, and some — red, burgundy, lime green — unadvisable. But this time of year, tuxedos are the most popular item, and prom and wedding shoppers the most frequent visitors.

On a recent weekday morning, Isaac Bernstein came in for a tuxedo for a wedding at the St. Regis the next day. Mr. Bernstein explained his predicament and was promptly handed a Size 36 short black tuxedo jacket. It fit, of course. After more than three decades in the business, Mr. Zaiger has developed an uncanny ability to guess anyone’s size. “We always joke that I should be at Coney Island,” he said.

Mr. Bernstein climbed around cardboard boxes and brushed against rows of plastic-wrapped suits to make his way to a fitting room. His pants fit too, and after a brief debate about a notch collar versus a shawl collar, Mr. Bernstein paid for his tuxedo (he went with the notch). Mr. Zaiger’s wife, Vivian, even threw in two bow ties — a pre-tied one and one he would have to tie himself. “In case I learn to tie a bow tie in the next day,” Mr. Bernstein said.

The only issue Mr. Bernstein saw was with the price: The whole outfit was $99. It wasn’t too much, but perhaps too little. “A tuxedo shouldn’t cost this little, so for me I have to blow off a lot of questions I might have,” Mr. Bernstein said. Mr. Zaiger, 60, said he finds bargains at closeout sales and through importers whom he has known for ages.

The whole process took no more than 15 minutes — and that was actually a long visit for a New Era customer. Many patrons come here shopping for tuxedos they plan to wear that evening, so they are on even tighter schedules. Later that day, a young man came in two hours before his prom was scheduled to start, Mr. Zaiger said.

Sharjil Akhter, 17, had a bit more time, when he came in with his mother, Nasima, on a recent Sunday morning. The prom for his school, Bronx High School of Science, was in six days.

Mr. Zaiger fit him in a classic black tuxedo jacket and sent him to the dressing room to try on the full suit: $99 for the tuxedo and $39 for the shoes.

A few moments later, Mr. Akhter called his mother over to the dressing room to approve the fit. She returned to the front of the store more than a little sentimental.

“He looks like a man,” she said.


