


Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in the Playlist. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like this format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.

A new five-song EP by the Olympia, Wash., hardcore punk band G.L.O.S.S., titled “Trans Day of Revenge,” came out last Monday, the day after the shooting in Orlando, Fla. It’s not a specific response — it had already been set to be released then — but can certainly be understood as a general one, from a band speaking directly to L.G.B.T. issues, and pointedly clear in its lyrics about violent aggressors and systems that might abet them: “Your calls for peace are ignorant and basic,” goes one of the more diplomatic lyric lines. Some of these songs are calling, in an unapologetically punk way, for retribution. “We Live” calls, among other things, for safe spaces: “We live for nights like this/basements packed with burning kids.” Stream the songs at the group’s Bandcamp page or buy the seven-inch EP either from Total Negativity Records or Nervous Nelly Records. BEN RATLIFF

Maybe you have been paying attention to the N.B.A. Finals. Maybe you are an enthusiast of the game, or even a newbie. Maybe you have found ways to introduce basketball into various facets of your life — office conversations, wardrobe, dream themes.

So if you want commentary on your N.B.A. Finals rivalries, you can turn to Jeff Van Gundy or Craig Sager, but isn’t it more fun to hear from Nicki Minaj? “Even if you was Curry, bitch, there’s still a LeBron/Let’s face it, I’m Curry, with rings like LeBron/Added my rings up, that’s Mike Jordan.”

That’s Ms. Minaj on “Don’t Hurt Me,” the new Tidal-exclusive single from DJ Mustard, titan of the springy, bleepy warm-weather track, which also features the misty R&B singer Jeremih. The beat is bulbous and joyous, in that 2014-era DJ Mustard way, and Jeremih floats above it smoothly. But it’s Ms. Minaj, who shows up second, who takes control. At first, she’s somewhere between gum-snapping-singing and rapping, then she’s singing with sultry force, then she returns with a choice verse, casually dismantling copycats, and bringing her love of the game into her work, just like the rest of us. JON CARAMANICA

Shawn Mendes got his start on Vine, posting short clips of cover songs, often playing an acoustic guitar. It was a familiar gambit — endless numbers of young singers do the same — but an effective one; it scored him a major label deal.

Since then, he’s succeeded by preserving some of that same immediacy in more polished environs, as on “Stitches,” one of last year’s slyest and most effective pop songs. “Treat You Better” is Mr. Mendes’s lovely new single, and like “Stitches,” it’s a song that highlights his maturity while constantly showing off signifiers of his youth.

The object of the song is his crush, his antagonist is the guy she inexplicably craves: “I won’t lie to you/I know he’s just not right for you.” It’s a slick, refined pop production — the drums are authoritative and agenda-setting, the guitars thickened to approximate something like rock. And Mr. Mendes, who still has a slightly wobbly voice, is often amplified with technological assistance to sound more intense. But on the most effective parts of the song, he’s largely left alone — his voice sounds thin and vulnerable, and you can hear the guitar strings plucked loud and sharp, as if they’re coming right out of your phone. J.C.

A lone electric guitar playing two arpeggiated chords, a bass drum and a shuddering trap beat introduce “Hendrix,” Wyclef Jean’s grim song about surviving the limited options of poverty: drug dealing, sports, pop fame. “We all are from the danger zone/The devil pulled a card and he said choose one/I chose music,” he intones. It’s autobiography as archetype, a paean to the electric guitar as both a tool and a rescuer. JON PARELES

“Warning: Contains Modified Content” reads the cover of “Earth,” Neil Young’s new live album from his 2015 tour, a concert recording that isn’t entirely documentary. It’s a collection of his songs about the environment, as far back as “After the Gold Rush” and as recent as “Seed Justice,” a song he introduced on the tour. Mr. Young is backed by Promise of the Real, the band led by the guitarist Lukas Nelson, Willie’s son. Meanwhile, per the album concept, nature sits in, with sounds of birds, insects and tumultuous weather sometimes overdubbed into the foreground for some wacky moments. The finale, introduced by cawing crows, is a doozy: 28 minutes of “Love and Only Love,” remade from Mr. Young’s 1990 album with Crazy Horse, “Ragged Glory.” It bristles with distortion like the old Crazy Horse version but delves much further: into lead-guitar duels with Mr. Nelson, into mudpits of noise, and, midway through, into a rhythmless, echoey realm of drone, feedback, blues licks, seismic buildups and sustained reflections, as eerie as it is noisy. (Listen on Tidal.) J.P.

The Cuban percussionist Pedrito Martinez has been a major contributor to New York’s live music scene for so long now — nearly 20 years, with regular residencies at Guantanamera and Sub Rosa for half that time — that it’s odd to be singling him out as any kind of new thing. But for his new record “Habana Dreams” he was able to return to Cuba and make a record entirely legally: That’s a new thing. The result is excellent — not just because of the opportunity to record in Areíto/EGREM studios with his band and family, but because of the participation of others: Rubén Blades, Wynton Marsalis, Angélique Kidjo. The guaguancó “Compa Galletano,” with Mr. Martinez singing hard against Mr. Blades, one of the great voices in Latin music of the last half century, is one of the record’s strongest tracks, rearranging a favorite tune of drums-and-vocals rumba groups into complex, shifting-harmony, full-band style. It’s a glimpse of what’s going on in Mr. Martinez’s world, and indicative of what you might hear when he and his band play on Tuesday night at the McKittrick Hotel. B.R.

“Cuba Isla Bella” is the single that announces the reunion, after six years, of Orishas, a trio of Cuban rappers and singers based in France who have frequently returned to their birthplace. On the four albums they released from 2000-2008, they merged acoustic Cuban traditions with rapping, rock, scratching and loops. “Cuba Isla Bella,” which Yotuel of the Orishas originally wrote for Ricky Martin (who’s from Puerto Rico), is more traditionalist than much of the Orishas’ catalog — more sung than rapped, paced by hand-played instruments, declaring blood-deep ties to Cuba: “You always return to your roots.” As a measure of the respect Orishas earned in its first decade, it gathers all-star Cuban guests to sing a round-robin, among them Descemer Bueno, Isaac Delgado, the vocal group Buena Fe and — in the torchiest verse — Laritza Bacallao. J.P.


