


I am a single 76-year-old woman. Years ago, I was diagnosed with cancer and did not expect to live long. I began giving away my possessions, including my most valuable one: a set of silver flatware that I inherited from my mother. I was offered $8,000 for it, but gave it to my best friend’s daughter instead. Since then, five years have passed, and I have not seen the daughter or met her new baby. Needless to say, I am hurt. I also need money. (I live on Social Security.) Would it be acceptable to ask for the silver back?

ANNE-MARIE, NEW YORK

No clawing back gifts. Once given, consider them gone. Still — and there’s often a “still,” isn’t there? — if my mother’s best friend told me she was strapped for cash and asked me to consider returning some silverware she had given me years earlier, I would return it in a heartbeat (or offer to buy it, if I were smitten with the silver). Stuff happens, and my mother’s BFF falls inside the circle of people I want to look out for.

But the way you posed the question makes this more complicated. You didn’t open with need; you opened with hurt at the daughter’s neglect of you. I sympathize with your feelings. But gifts do not entitle us to mandatory visits. That would be a contract for services, not a present.

Before deciding what to do, try to untangle the strands. Do you really need the cash, or are you motivated by hurt? If the issues are inextricably linked, but the need is real, say nothing about your feelings when you ask for the silver back. Your request seems acceptable (to me, anyway) if it springs from financial difficulties, not from the daughter’s behavior. (And keep in mind: She may say no.)

My girlfriend and I agreed not to see other people. I didn’t force this on her; we discussed it after dating for three months. But I just learned that she still uses her online dating account. She didn’t deny it; she said she looks at guys online occasionally, but would never actually meet anyone. I believe her, but I feel as if she tore up the spirit of our agreement. Should we try to tape it together again?

JIM G.

Speaking of office products, better to think of your relationship as a rubber band than a taped-up sheet of paper. As the excellent duo Everything but the Girl once sang: “Now you can pull a little bit. There’s a little give and take. And love will stretch a little bit, but finally it’s going to break.”

You and your girlfriend will have a jumbo-pack of issues to decide over the course of your relationship. Glancing at men on dating sites will probably be one of the easier ones. So, buckle in for lots of talking. It’s good to know, early on, that you interpret rules broadly, while your girlfriend takes a more literal reading. As long as you trust each other and keep communicating, I’d say there’s plenty of stretch left in the old rubber band. But more important, how do you two feel?

We live in a small town in New Hampshire. Last week, I heard that our neighbor’s college-age son had developed a problem with heroin, had gone to rehab and has been doing well since he came home. No one in the neighbor’s family said anything to us, but you know how small towns are. My husband and I see the boy, and our lives have been touched by addiction. Would it be O.K. if we told him we’re impressed by his hard work?

LYNNE

I come from a small town, too. It’s nice to look out for our neighbors and know that they’re looking out for us. But when you’re the person being stared at by lots (and lots) of folks — particularly as a late adolescent and for behavior that may include streaks of shame as well as redemption — small-town living can feel like residency under a microscope. Be friendly and solicitous to the young man without mentioning heroin or rehab. Let him make that opening move. Your everyday kindness is plenty for now.

I am a college student and keep up with friends from home by social media. Many of them have been posting about a book exchange promising that if you buy and send one book, you will receive 36 in return. I did some research and discovered that it’s a pyramid scheme. I don’t want them to be tricked, but I don’t want to embarrass them or sound condescending, either. Thoughts?

ANONYMOUS

Who wants 36 books chosen by strangers? Post that you were tempted by this offer, too (putting yourself in the same boat as them), but after some research, you learned that it’s a Ponzi scheme. Some pals may feel gullible, but that’s not on you. And you’ll be saving others from falling into a disappointing trap.


