


RIO DE JANEIRO — One recent poll found that only 2 percent of Brazilians would vote for him. He is under scrutiny over testimony linking him to a colossal graft scandal. And a high court justice ruled that Congress should consider impeachment proceedings against him.

Michel Temer, Brazil’s vice president, is preparing to take the helm of Brazil next month if the Senate decides to put President Dilma Rousseff on trial. A simple majority would suspend her for six months while she battles claims that she illegally covered budget shortfalls with money from state banks.

That would leave Mr. Temer in charge of Latin America’s biggest country as it grapples with its worst economic crisis in decades, a Zika epidemic, seething political discord and the 2016 Summer Olympics — all at the same time.

“I don’t want it to seem like I’m conspiring to take over,” Mr. Temer said in an interview on Thursday, insisting that he was not plotting a coup, as Ms. Rousseff has called the campaign to oust her.

Until recently, Mr. Temer, 75, strayed so rarely into the national spotlight that many Brazilians knew him best for his 32-year-old wife, Marcela, a former beauty pageant contestant with his name tattooed on the nape of her neck.

But Brazilians are getting to know Mr. Temer better as the impeachment battle shifts to the Senate. Compared by rivals to a “butler in a horror movie” because of his formal bearing and cryptic demeanor, Mr. Temer is trying to make his case to the nation much more forcefully now.

He seems particularly worried that Ms. Rousseff, who has been denouncing the campaign to oust her as illegal, will be heading to the United Nations on Friday, where she will be able to broadcast her claims to the world.

Ms. Rousseff has condemned her vice president as a traitor. But Mr. Temer, whose political party was part of her governing coalition, said he was treated terribly by the president during his time in her cabinet.

They were never friends, merely greeting each other ceremoniously, he said. The last time they even spoke was in late January, he said.

“I spent four years being absolutely ostracized,” said Mr. Temer, a former lecturer on constitutional law. “We were not friends because she did not consider herself my friend.”

Scrambling to assemble a cabinet in the event he takes over, Mr. Temer is facing an array of challenges, including testimony implicating him and top allies in a graft scandal around Petrobras, the national oil company; surging unemployment during a grinding economic crisis; and growing criticism that the campaign to impeach Ms. Rousseff — which is being led by legislators under the cloud of their own corruption scandals — is illegitimate.

“I’m very worried about the president’s intention to say that Brazil is some minor republic where coups are carried out,” said Mr. Temer, expressing concern about Ms. Rousseff’s trip to the United Nations on Friday.

Rejecting calls to resign, Ms. Rousseff faces claims in the impeachment proceedings of budgetary manipulation. While she is also battling separate accusations that her campaigns received illegal financing and that she tried to obstruct the Petrobras investigation, Ms. Rousseff contends that her impeachment is the equivalent of “political fraud.”

In the 30-minute telephone interview from his office in São Paulo, Mr. Temer rebutted such claims, arguing that “impeachment is allowed under Brazil’s Constitution.” He also said he would not seek to quash corruption inquiries into the Petrobras scandal unsettling his own centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement Party if he takes office.

Mr. Temer defended himself and top allies who are under a cloud of accusations in the scheme. He expressed support for Eduardo Cunha, the scandal-plagued speaker of the lower house who is leading the impeachment effort in Congress, saying he would not ask Mr. Cunha to resign. Mr. Cunha will be the next in line for the presidency if Mr. Temer takes over.

“That’s a matter for the Supreme Federal Tribunal to decide,” Mr. Temer said, referring to Mr. Cunha’s trial at Brazil’s highest court on charges of pocketing as much as $40 million in bribes in the scheme around Petrobras.

Mr. Temer also acknowledged that he faced his own legal challenges. Delcídio do Amaral, a senator whose plea bargaining testimony has rattled Brazil’s political elite, recently testified that Mr. Temer had been instrumental in obtaining executive posts at Petrobras for business figures who had since been sentenced to prison on charges including bribery, money laundering and fraud.

One of these executives, João Augusto Henriques, oversaw an ethanol-purchasing scheme that investigators claim benefited legislators from Mr. Temer’s party.

In the interview, the vice president said he was innocent of any wrongdoing, contending that his connections to the disgraced former Petrobras executives involved his bureaucratic responsibilities as the head of the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party. The party served as an anchor for the coalition that enabled Ms. Rousseff’s Workers’ Party to govern for more than a decade.

Tainted as he and his party are by the Petrobras scandal, Mr. Temer is struggling with the seething resentment many Brazilians express about their country’s politicians. While 61 percent of Brazilians express support for Ms. Rousseff’s impeachment, 58 percent also want Mr. Temer impeached, according to a public opinion survey this month by Datafolha.

Making matters worse for Mr. Temer, only 2 percent of Brazilians would vote for him in the 2018 election, Datafolha said, placing him well behind potential candidates like Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president who backed Ms. Rousseff’s rise, and Jair Bolsonaro, an ultraconservative congressman from Rio de Janeiro.

The Datafolha poll, conducted on April 7 and 8 in interviews with 2,779 people, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus two percentage points. In addition to the vice president’s low approval ratings, a justice on the Supreme Federal Tribunal ruled that Congress must consider a request for Mr. Temer’s own impeachment.

Putting together a government has been challenging for Mr. Temer. Armínio Fraga, a respected former central bank president, has made it clear that he does not want a cabinet post in Mr. Temer’s government. The opposition Social Democrats have also held back from forging a coalition, even as they hope to oust Ms. Rousseff.

“Pessimistic views of Michel Temer and his possible government among the winners are growing with surprising velocity,” wrote Jânio de Freitas, a columnist for the newspaper Folha de S. Paulo.

Mr. Temer, the youngest of eight children in a family of Maronite Christians who immigrated from Lebanon to São Paulo in the 1920s, said he remained hopeful that he could promote a catharsis of sorts by assembling “a government of national unity.”

Citing as inspiration Juscelino Kubitschek, the president who ordered the construction of the futuristic capital, Brasília, in the late 1950s, Mr. Temer said he wanted to create a “government of optimism.” He also mentioned his admiration for American presidents like Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin D. Roosevelt, emphasizing that he planned to improve ties with the United States.

“It’s necessary to give birth to hope again,” he said, adding that Brazil’s most urgent problem is unemployment, which is above 10 percent, up from 6.5 percent at the end of 2014. Then Mr. Temer listed corruption, which he said “is being fought as it should.”


