


FRONT PAGE

A headline last Tuesday with a capsule summary about the jail sentence for a former Stanford University swimmer, Brock Turner, misidentified the crimes for which he was convicted. As the article correctly noted, the three felony counts were sexual assault of an unconscious person, sexual assault of an intoxicated person and sexual assault with intent to commit rape; the case did not involve a “rape sentence.”

NATIONAL

An article on Thursday about a bill to create a federal control board to oversee a reboot of Puerto Rico’s economy referred incorrectly to the sovereign status of Puerto Rico. It is a commonwealth, not a country.

NEW YORK

A picture in some editions on Saturday with an article about the Environmental Protection Agency’s plan to install a sewage tank near a Brooklyn warehouse studio owned by Eastern Effects was published in error. The photograph was of one of the buildings for sale near Eastern Effects’s studio, not of the warehouse.

THE ARTS

A Critic’s Notebook article on Thursday about the Human Rights Watch Film Festival in Manhattan, which includes the documentary “Sonita,” misidentified the school where the subject of the film is studying. It is Wasatch Academy in Mount Pleasant, Utah — not Utah Valley University. The article also misidentified the site of the university. The main campus is in Orem, Utah, not “Wasatch.” (While the university also has a Wasatch Campus, it is in Heber City, Utah; there is a Wasatch County in the state but no town of that name.)

•

An article on Saturday about symbols used online by white extremists misspelled the surname of one who reverses a symbol used to designate Jewish heritage in order to signal that she is not Jewish. She is Lana Lokteff, not Lotkeff.

WEEKEND

A classical music entry in the Listings pages on Friday about two concerts by the New York Philharmonic in Central Park this week misstated the date of the program featuring Mozart’s Clarinet Concerto and Richard Strauss’s “Ein Heldenleben.” It is scheduled for Wednesday, not Thursday.

INSIDE THE TIMES

Because of an editing error, the Quotation of the Day on Saturday, taken from an article about a wildfire that broke out last week in Yarnell, Ariz., and the memories it prompted of a devastating 2013 wildfire there, misidentified the person who said: “I was, like, a fire? We’re still recovering from a fire.” As the article correctly noted, the comment was by Chuck Tidey, president of the Yarnell-Peeples Valley Chamber of Commerce — not by Ben Palm, chief of the Yarnell Fire Department.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Friday about the venture capitalist Thomas J. Perkins misstated part of the name of a company in which he invested. It was Tandem Computers, not Tandem Computer. The obituary also misstated, in some editions, the year that Hewlett-Packard, on whose board Mr. Perkins served, bought the computer company Compaq. It was 2002, not 2001.

OPINION

An Op-Ed article on May 31, about the far right in Europe, misstated an element of Germany’s economic collapse during the Great Depression. It was deflation, not inflation.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


