


Since launching her eponymous line in 2012, the designer Shaina Mote has won die-hard fans, who rely on the Los Angeles-based label for its versatile, elevated basics. Those fans, however, have had to fend for themselves in the swimwear category — until now. Today, Mote launches a capsule line of swimwear that stays true to the distinctive, functional aesthetic she’s perfected in her main line. The expansion was borne out of Mote’s struggle to find a suit that fit into her own life: “I felt there was a little bit of a void for a type of swimwear that can be used in an active environment as well as one that’s leisurely,” she says. To fulfill that mandate, Mote created a six-piece collection, which was inspired by the clean lines found in the work of the Mexican architect Luis Barragán. One innovation she struck upon: She eliminated the top stitch typically found on swimsuits, so that each style would “mesh into the body, and lie more flush with the skin.” With so much attention paid to the fit and cut, it’s no wonder Mote decided to keep the color palette as simple as possible. Every piece in the line, which has been crafted from dead-stock Italian fabric, is black. “I wanted to make sure I was presenting the customer with something that was really accessible and travels well,” she says. “Since this is my first swimwear collection, I really wanted to nail down those basics and core styles.”

As a lifelong swimmer and former ocean lifeguard, the designer Gina Esposito always had an inkling she would one day combine her aquatic passion with her design training. But it wasn’t until she started panicking about her upcoming 30th birthday that the FIT grad decided to finally turn her dream into a reality. The result of her quarter-life crisis: NU, a pared-down swimwear label that — as the name, which means “nude” in French, suggests — acts as a second skin for active and leisure swimmers alike. “None of our products have any padding or unfunctional hardware,” Esposito says. “The ease of pulling it on and off and feeling great is the most important thing to me.” Esposito says she was often in the habit of wearing her favorite suits under her regular clothing as underwear or accent pieces, so she designed the line to fit a variety of purposes. While they’re functional enough to stand up to her vigorous, long swims, many of the designs — such as the long-line straight top or the curve one-piece — can also serve as ready-to-wear pieces.

While packing for a trip to Hong Kong, the Sydney, Australia-based swimwear designer Tuyen Nguyen struggled to find the right swimsuit. “I wanted something for a city hotel, something that wasn’t fussy,” she says. “I couldn’t find anything that I was happy to pay for — there was only the very expensive or the cheaply made.” Frustrated, Nguyen decided to take matters into her own hands. Over the next year and a half, she and her partner in life and work, Michael Lim, worked to create Her, a line of streamlined and flattering swim staples that would fill that need. Crafted from luxurious Italian fabrics, and available in an array of thoughtfully considered cuts, the brand — which launched in 2014 — gets the job done swimmingly.

When asked to describe the aesthetic of the four-year-old swimwear and underwear label Baserange, which she founded with Blandine Legait, Marie-Louise Mogensen says: “Hopefully it’s something you can move in and you’re O.K. wearing.” This refreshingly down-to-earth response is indicative of the duo’s practical approach to design. Though the label has produced a small swimwear line since its launch in 2012, it is best known for its underwear — simple styles beloved for their comfort and versatility. Besides the change of fabric, Mogensen and Legait say there isn’t much of a difference between designing swim and underthings: “We wear our swimwear as underwear too,” says Mogensen. “With both underwear and swimwear, you have to work with movements and comfort.”

What started as a wholesale transaction blossomed into a full-blown collaboration when the e-boutique the Dreslyn and the indie underwear label Land of Women partnered to create a capsule line of swimwear. “We were the first online retailer to carry the collection and the response was amazing — the product is unbeatable,” says Brooke Taylor Corcia, founder of the Dreslyn. It was while shooting Land of Women products for the website that Taylor Corcia saw the opportunity to take their relationship to a new level: “The team was discussing how difficult it is to find swimwear that rivals the fit of lingerie, which immediately sparked a drive to translate Land of Women silhouettes into technical fabrics,” she says. “Designer Mckenzie Raley is truly visionary, so bringing the project to life unfolded organically from there.” The line, which includes mix-and-match two pieces and a handful of streamlined one-pieces, marries the thoughtful construction of Land of Women’s underwear with the simple but sophisticated aesthetic of the Dreslyn. “Mckenzie and I set out to create a line of ‘quiet essentials’ that appeal to all ages, with a simple elegance that embraces a woman’s form and truly supports with movement,” says Taylor Corcia. Driving that point home, the collection sticks to a basic palette of black and white.


