


INTERNATIONAL

An article on Thursday about an address by Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India to a joint meeting of the United States Congress misstated the year of the terrorist attacks in Mumbai. It was 2008, not 2011.

•

An article on May 14 about the death of Mustafa Amine Badreddine, Hezbollah’s top military commander, misstated, at one point, the year that Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait, where Mr. Badreddine had been imprisoned, and the year that the United States Marines barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, were bombed, an attack he was accused of having helped plan. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, the invasion was in 1990, not 1991, and the bombing was in 1983, not 1982.

NEW YORK

An article on May 27 about a court ruling that allowed New York City to proceed with a requirement that restaurants mark menu items high in sodium included incorrect information from city officials, in some editions, about the salt consumption habits of New Yorkers. On average, New Yorkers over all — not 40 percent of them — consume considerably more salt than is recommended.

SPORTS

An article in some editions on Tuesday about Novak Djokovic’s pursuit of more tennis milestones misstated the number of Grand Slam singles titles Roger Federer had after winning Wimbledon in 2009. It was 15, not 16.

THE ARTS

A music review on Wednesday about three concerts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art last weekend misspelled the title of the work by Gérard Grisey that was performed on Sunday. It is “Talea,” not “Telea.”

•

An entry in the What’s on Thursday television highlights in some editions on Thursday about coverage of the Bonnaroo Music & Arts Festival on Red Bull TV erroneously included some performers among those who will be shown live. Ellie Goulding, Pearl Jam and Miguel are not part of the live coverage.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Thursday about the psychologist Jerome S. Bruner misstated, in some copies, the number of times he was divorced. It was twice, not three times. (His third marriage, to Carol Feldman, ended with her death.)

•

An obituary on Thursday about the actress Theresa Saldana misspelled the surname of the character she played on the television series “The Commish.” The character was Rachel Scali, not Skali. (As the obituary correctly noted, her character’s husband, played by Michael Chiklis, was Tony Scali.)

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


