


Interest rates in Europe got a little crazier this week when the yield on the 10-year German government bond fell below zero.

What this means is that investors buying the bond and holding it until it is repaid are guaranteed to lose money. This would seem to turn finance on its head. Lenders usually charge borrowers interest. Investors buying a bond with a negative yield are in effect paying the borrower. Not much in Germany’s case, because the bond’s yield was only minus 0.003 percent on Tuesday, but the benchmark bond crossed a historic line.

Negative rates may not be as strange as they look. Indeed, interest rates may not be as low as they look.

In economics, it is important to look at the value of something — gross domestic product, wages, the stock market — after it has been adjusted for inflation. The same can apply to interest rates. A company borrowing at 5 percent when inflation is 2 percent is paying a real interest rate of 3 percent. If the real borrowing cost goes up by a lot, companies will borrow less and the wider economy will suffer.

Europe recently faced that danger, but for a reason that might not be obvious.

At the start of 2015, the average corporate loan had a nominal interest rate of 2.44 percent, according to European Central Bank data, down from nearly 3 percent a year earlier. But in real terms, that 2.44 percent was actually 3 percent. That’s because deflation — a decline in prices — was 0.6 percent in January 2015. Deflation, unlike inflation, makes loans cost more in real terms.

In the last 18 months, the E.C.B. has introduced more measures that have helped bring down the average cost of a corporate loan. Nominally, its interest rate was 1.99 percent in April, but the real cost was 2.24 percent. However, this is still not particularly low. From 2003 till 2008, when interest rates were considered “normal,” the real corporate borrowing rate was, on average, 2.1 percent.

A caveat: A sharp decline in the real interest rate may not lead to more borrowing if other factors depress companies’ appetite for debt. The real cost of borrowing declined below 1 percent in 2012, because interest rates were falling while inflation remained relatively high. But Europe was then gripped with fears of sovereign debt defaults; the economy stagnated; and investors and corporate managers feared deflation. Lending slumped in that period.

Demand is high for German bonds in part because investors see them as safe investments. Nervousness about Britain’s vote on leaving the European Union was probably behind the latest surge in demand for the bonds. Bond yields are also low in Europe because the E.C.B. has been buying a huge number of bonds in an attempt to stimulate the Continent’s economy.

Anyone holding bonds is probably doing pretty well right now (remember, the price of a bond rises as bond yields decline). Still, some investors contend that these negative yields are distorting markets and are doing little, if anything, for the economy..

But there are now signs of life in Europe’s credit sector. One way the E.C.B. can blow on those sparks is to keep buying bonds. This does crazy things like turning German bond yields negative. But it also pulls down borrowing costs for corporations — and as we have seen, when adjusting for inflation, companies are still not getting particularly cheap loans.


