


FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan tackled 29 questions Friday at what had been billed as a predraft news conference. All but 11 had something to do with the St. Louis Rams’ seventh-round draft pick from Harvard in 2005.

That player, of course, is quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick, who joined the Jets last March in a trade with Houston and, surprisingly, led them to a 10-6 record. Fitzpatrick, 33, is a free agent, and Maccagnan was asked if Fitzpatrick’s contract status would affect the Jets’ draft plans next week.

“We like Ryan very much,” Maccagnan said. “We feel like we have a very good situation for Ryan here. He’s a very good fit for us, too. So, hopefully, at some time we can work out some kind of an agreement on a contract.”

When asked when that might be, though, Maccagnan said, “It may take some time.”

Maccagnan said he felt no pressure to get a deal done, even though he acknowledged that he had made an inquiry with the Tennessee Titans about acquiring the No. 1 overall pick in the draft. The Titans have since traded the pick to the Los Angeles Rams.

Maccagnan is also at a contract impasse with the Pro Bowl defensive end Muhammad Wilkerson, who has not signed a $15.7 million franchise tender. Wilkerson, who is seeking a long-term deal, may be Maccagnan’s finest trade bait.

Maccagnan said he was not interested in following the lead of the Carolina Panthers, who dropped the franchise tag from cornerback Josh Norman. (After becoming a free agent, Norman signed with the Redskins on Friday, according to The Associated Press.) Maccagnan said keeping the franchise tag on Wilkerson “leaves you with multiple options.”

“We’re not actively shopping Mo,” Maccagnan said. But he also said he would not rule out drafting a quarterback in the first round — or any other round, for that matter.

The N.F.L. draft, which begins Thursday in Chicago, is likely to open with two quarterbacks being taken: Jared Goff of California to the Rams; then Carson Wentz of North Dakota State to the Philadelphia Eagles, who acquired the No. 2 pick from the Cleveland Browns this week.

It is possible that quarterback Paxton Lynch of Memphis could be available when the Jets pick 20th in the first round — or that they might trade up to get him.

“It’s such an impactful position,” Maccagnan said. “Green Bay, when they drafted Aaron Rodgers, had Brett Favre. It was not as if they were sitting there thinking, ‘We really need one.’  ”

He said it was important to have quarterbacks in the pipeline, and the Jets already have two: Bryce Petty of Baylor, who is entering his second season, and Geno Smith, the second-round draft pick in 2013, who played one game last season.

It would not be the worst thing in the world, Maccagnan said, if Fitzpatrick went unsigned even through three sets of organized team activities scheduled for late May and early June. Fitzpatrick only lightly took part in the O.T.A.s last year, when he was recovering from a broken leg.

“If we have the other quarterbacks who need more reps and more time, it benefits them, too, with their development, and that would be Geno and Bryce,” Maccagnan said. “But, no, I don’t feel any pressure to have one by a specified time.”

Although he was joining his sixth N.F.L. team and his fourth in four seasons, Fitzpatrick became an integral part of the Jets’ success despite not having reached the playoffs. He passed for 3,905 yards and a franchise-record 31 touchdowns, both career highs.

Fitzpatrick was among several Jets who attended Tuesday’s playoff game between the Rangers and the Pittsburgh Penguins at Madison Square Garden. Fitzpatrick wore the blue No. 28 sweater of forward Dominic Moore, who is also from Harvard, but did not taunt the Penguins’ coaching staff, as center Nick Mangold did.

Brian Hoyer, a 30-year-old free-agent quarterback, visited the Jets this week but left without a contract. Maccagnan said he was simply doing “due diligence” by looking at Hoyer. Other teams have not shown much interest in Fitzpatrick, either.

“Our focus is on Ryan,” Maccagnan said, “but he’s a free agent, and you never know what will happen in free agency. Our focus has always been Ryan.”

Fifteen months into the job, Maccagnan was asked how it felt to be dealing with the pressure of two critical contract negotiations while preparing for the draft. He said, “Wow,” then added that he had not really thought about that.

“It’s like playing chess,” he said later. “As long as you have moves left, you feel comfortable, to a degree. It doesn’t alleviate anything in terms of feeling stress. But it’s just the way it works.”


