


MANILA — In his first policy pronouncements since becoming the presumptive president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte said Monday that he plans to reimpose the death penalty, offer cabinet posts to communist rebels and move to amend the Constitution to give more power to the provinces.

Mr. Duterte also said during a nationally televised news conference that he will begin a military offensive to destroy Abu Sayyaf extremists on southern Jolo Island.

The announcements, a sharp departure from current policy, reflect his brash campaign pledge to end crime and corruption in the impoverished country in three to six months. Police officials have said the plan is not realistic, and they have noted that crime remains prevalent in Davao City, where Mr. Duterte has served as mayor for more than 22 years.

The military has been fighting a decades-long Marxist insurgency in the countryside, but Mr. Duterte said he would likely offer the cabinet posts of environment and natural resources, agrarian reform, social welfare and labor to the communist rebels.

“They are the most vigilant group in the Philippines about labor so they would get it,” he said.

The move would likely be strongly opposed by big business and industry.

Mr. Duterte said he would ask Congress to reimpose the death penalty, which has been suspended since 2006 in the face of staunch opposition from the dominant Roman Catholic Church. Capital punishment by hanging, he said, should be imposed for heinous crimes, and criminals convicted of killing, robbery and rape should receive “double the hanging.”

“After the first hanging, there will be another ceremony for the second time until the head is completely severed from the body,” he said.

Chito Gascon, the chairman of the Human Rights Commission of the Philippines, said his agency opposes the death penalty and would block any attempt to reimpose it, adding that the Constitution forbids cruel and degrading punishments like hanging.

“In a country where the rule of law has so many loopholes and problems, what will happen is the possibility of a mistaken conviction,” Mr. Gascon said by telephone.

Mr. Duterte also plans to switch to a federal form of government, aiming to give more power and resources to the regions, including the country’s south, where Davao City is. Such a change would require an amendment to the Constitution.

Mr. Duterte reiterated on Monday his vow to control illegal drugs and crime, even if it meant losing the presidency or his life. “Stop messing with me, because I have a sacred promise to save the next generation from the evil of drugs,” he said.

He also promised to cut government red tape and remove corrupt officials. Mr. Duterte said “contaminated” police generals facing corruption cases should “get out now” before he assumes office in June. If not, they should prepare to be sent to fight against the Abu Sayyaf militants.

“And if you are taken hostage there, say your Our Fathers because I will never, never pay anything to retrieve you,” he added.


