


Kevin Vickers, who became a national hero in Canada after thwarting an armed attack on Parliament in 2014, again took matters into his own hands on Thursday, this time during a diplomatic visit to Ireland.

The praise was less universal this time.

Mr. Vickers, the former sergeant-at-arms to Canada’s House of Commons, is now ambassador to Ireland, and his actions prodded old wounds from a century of Irish conflict with Britain. A video showed the ambassador at a memorial service for British soldiers who died during the 1916 Easter Rising running toward and then tussling with a protester.

Mr. Vickers, a look of intense determination on his face, grabbed the man by his jacket and pulled him away from the ceremony at the Grangegorman Military Cemetery in Dublin, all while the protester shouted “This is an insult!”

The video then showed Mr. Vickers coming back into view of the camera as the authorities handcuffed the protester and led him away.

Some on Twitter were quick to praise the ambassador, including some flights of fancy.

But not everyone was pleased. While many headlines again labeled Mr. Vickers a hero, The Irish Times put the word in quotation marks and asked readers if his actions were appropriate. Opinions were divided. Back home, some criticized Mr. Vickers and raised questions about the ambassador’s diplomatic qualifications.

The protester, later identified as Brian Murphy, said that his grandfather fought 100 years ago in the Easter Rising, a five-day rebellion quashed by the British. More than 400 people died, thousands of Irish were detained and parts of Dublin were left in ruins. The executed rebels, who are still revered, inspired a broader movement that led to Ireland’s independence in 1922.

Honoring the lives of British soldiers who died in the Rising was “a step too far,” Mr. Murphy told The National Post of Canada. He said he intends to fight the disorderly conduct charge filed against him.

Mr. Vickers, formerly a senior member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, rose from relative obscurity when it emerged that during the Oct. 22, 2014, attack, he had spun backward, dived to the ground and set off a volley of bullets that killed a gunman who had tried to invade Parliament after killing a soldier at the nearby National War Memorial.

After firing the shots, Mr. Vickers entered a nearby room where Prime Minister Stephen Harper and his Conservative caucus were meeting and announced, “I engaged the suspect, and the suspect is deceased.”

Until the attack, his public profile was mostly limited to carrying the large ceremonial mace into the House of Commons to open sittings. But his weapons also included a 9-millimeter pistol, as his main duty was to oversee security for the chamber.

His actions earned him international attention as well as sustained applause in the Canadian Parliament when it returned to session after the attack, and he was named Canada’s ambassador to Ireland in January 2015.


