


Four people were stabbed, two fatally, on Tuesday night at a home and a shopping mall in Taunton, Mass., the police said.

The assailant was shot and killed by an off-duty deputy sheriff at the mall, the Silver City Galleria, the Massachusetts State Police said.

The episode began shortly after 7 p.m. when a man the authorities identified as Arthur DaRosa, 28, of Taunton, was involved in a crash on Myricks Street in Taunton, left his vehicle and gained access to a home on that street. Once inside, he stabbed two women, Thomas M. Quinn III, the Bristol County district attorney, said in a statement late on Tuesday night.

Both women were taken to Morton Hospital in Taunton, which is about 40 miles south of Boston. One of the women, who was 80, died. The second woman was being treated for life-threatening injuries, Mr. Quinn said.

After those stabbings, Mr. DaRosa drove to the mall, where he crashed a car into the entrance of Macy’s. He then assaulted multiple people inside the store before heading to Bertucci’s Italian restaurant in the mall, Mr. Quinn said. At Bertucci’s, he armed himself with a knife and stabbed two people, one of whom died.

An off-duty deputy sheriff shot Mr. DaRosa once and he was taken to Charlton Memorial Hospital, where he was pronounced dead, Mr. Quinn said. The identities of the victims and the deputy were not immediately available.

“It appears that but for the actions of the deputy sheriff, there may very well have been other victims,” Mr. Quinn said.

The attacker’s motive was under investigation, but there appeared to be no tie to terrorism, the police said.

Alex Mace, 19, of Lakeville, Mass., had gone with his girlfriend to the mall to get her nails done, he said. He was smoking in a car when, he said, he saw people fleeing the shopping center.

“I saw whole families running, crying and shouting: ‘Is the car locked? Let’s go! Let’s go!’ ” he said.

Mr. Mace said he had remained outside the mall with his girlfriend as they tried to determine what was happening. Police officers arrived in minutes, he said, and he heard one of them shout at the attacker to get on the ground, then heard gunshots a few minutes later.

“I was just thankful I was lazy that day and taking my time smoking,” he said.


