


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

Tuesday is essential-oils day on Alanis Morissette’s Instagram. She doesn’t post the images every week, but she does it enough that I reflexively click over to her account every Tuesday morning when I wake up, just in case. In April, she posted a bright photograph of seven small apothecary bottles of her D.I.Y. “chakra-inspired oil/water/salt blend sprays.” She scattered the bottles across a background of large smooth river stones, the kind a massage therapist uses to scald the scapulae. The sprays have impressionistic names like “feminine,” “art,” “generate” and “stillness.” She writes in the caption that she uses them to “both start and end my day.”

I have never purchased (or tried to whip up by hand) an oil that Morissette recommends on her Instagram, but still, I find them deeply comforting. Staring into Morissette’s Instagram is like gazing out over the ocean or watching a prism cast rainbows on a wall: It is meditative, ruminant and a little numbing. The feed is a colorful font of Pinterest-ready, woo-woo, feel-good imagery: crystals organized in neat concentric circles, turquoise beads in ceramic bowls, a macro plate from Cafe Gratitude, spirituality books laid out on batik tapestry, wildflowers. The flow of images never feels too rushed or too planned — she will post three times in a single day, and then take a break for five weeks. There’s the sense that Morissette is currently doing exactly what feels right for her, and she transmits that intention into a kind of general social-media zen.

These images, as drenched in hippie aesthetics as they are, make deep sense to me, at least in a very end-of-yoga-class-spritzing-the-air-with-lavender-oil kind of way. They provide the kind of woozy (if not elliptical) affirmations that, growing up in New Mexico, I heard all the time. I hail from the land of crystal healing and meditation yurts, the land of checking in with your inner child during a long hike through sagebrush and yucca plants. Where I am from, zealous self-actualization was trending long before much of the country caught onto it. No granola business under the desert sun can really surprise me.

What strikes me more acutely about her boho-mama self-presentation and obsession with artfully placing bottles of tea-tree essence on giant tropical leaves is that these ideas are beaming out from . . . Alanis Morissette. It’s not that it is a shock that Morissette posts inspirational quotes (she loves a good Frida Kahlo aphorism) or a selfie of her lapel pins, which include the word “peace” in the shape of a dove and a golden button that reads, “Sorry I Am Such an [expletive].” Morissette has been engaging with therapeutic, new-age themes for almost as long as she has been making music (there was that time she thanked the entire country of India in a pop hook; file under: problematic faves). It is that, because of the cathartic explosion that was “Jagged Little Pill,’’ the 1995 album that taught me the vocabulary with which express anxiety and rage as I belted along in my bedroom, Morissette’s current status as a kind of virtual flower child has become a poignant valentine to the idea of personal growth. She has found herself at peace; and in doing so, has invited the rest of us to join her in her happy place.

Because, as any child of the ’90s may recall, there was a time when Morissette fumed, at least through her music. Last summer, in a special Spotify behind-the-music recording to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the release of “Jagged Little Pill’’, Morissette said that “You Oughta Know,” perhaps the album’s grittiest song, came right out of “a journal entry from a devastated time.” But she also admitted that she was using fury as a front: “When I hear that song, I definitely hear the anger as a protection around the searing vulnerability. . . . It was a lot easier for me to be angry and feel the power from that anger versus the broken, horrified woman on the floor.”

Around the release of “Jagged Little Pill,” there was some question as to whether her indignation — a product, as she would later say, of wriggling her way out of a glossy Canadian teen-pop career in which a bevy of suits commandeered her life and aesthetic — was authentic or manufactured for Top-40 singles (she worked on the record with Glen Ballard, a genius producer who had made hit after hit for the likes of Wilson Phillips). A 1995 issue of Rolling Stone considered this question, noting the “fashionable cynicism” that accompanied Morissette’s anointment as the stormy-girl du jour but also arguing that she had earned the “right to sing the postmodern blues.” She also told the magazine that her temper on “You Oughta Know” should not define her entire album, and by extension, her whole career. “By no means is this record just a sexual angry record. That song wasn’t written for the sake of revenge, it was written for the sake of release. I’m actually a pretty rational, calm person.”

I think about this quote a lot when I scroll through Morissette’s Instagram. This is where she goes to reclaim herself as that calm, rational person, and I believe her good vibes are sincere. Her feed is a holistic homage to the idea of letting go, of allowing grace and human kindness to enter into the spaces where resentment once made a home — and shaped a very public image. There is a picture of Morissette, now 41, hugging someone with her full body, accompanied with the caption that “we need the vital interaction of touching of skin and souls, to not only thrive and feel the connectedness of life, love and God that is our birthright, but as babies, we actually need it to LIVE.” There is a rainbow of fresh-pressed juices that earn hashtags like #micronutrientsfordays and #watchtheglycemia! and a glowing photo of her homemade oil blends that she tags with #privatealchemy and #sensualsupport. Morissette’s Instagram is all about how she takes care of herself, how she is eating, praying and loving in the quest for joy.

It would be easy to dismiss these posts as an example of the type of Los Angeles-meets-Santa Cruz hempy GOOP enlightenment that strikes celebrities like a virus. It would be easy to see a photo of Morissette typing (on an actual typewriter) on a colorful blanket in the sea grass at Big Sur and connect this image to the same impulse that causes starlets to take selfies drinking liquefied kale in Runyon Canyon. It would be easy to associate Morissette’s home décor, including a wall hanging that simply says “yes” and several dreamcatchers, with the marketing lingo for succulents and Lycra pants.

But then, I remember, this is Alanis Morissette, and she has earned her public mindfulness retreat. Morissette is currently working on her memoirs, and she posted a picture of herself at her writing desk, urging the words to come. She winks subtly through #tbts at her heavy past, acknowledging that without it she would not be able to embrace her present lightness. She is clearly very much in love, and the light of her life is her longhaired son, Ever, whose moments of childlike wonder she captures in a way that feels less like a mommy blogger and more like an earth mother enraptured with her own creation. Recently she has become an advice columnist for The Guardian and the host of an inspirational podcast, and she often quotes her own words on her Instagram feed: “I love my needs now. I used to hate them.”

This philosophy seems to guide most of Morissette’s posts, and I have subtly allowed her full lean-in to New Age living to guide me as well. When I was a teenager, I never allowed the rose quartz energy happening all around me to penetrate my angst; I was too busy singing “Not The Doctor” at the top of my lungs in my beat-up station wagon, pushing away my imagined antagonists who wanted me to to be responsible for their fractured hearts. Morissette taught me how to do that, but now she teaches me something new. When I am in a bad mood, I can simply open up her Instagram and scroll back through image after image of soothing sun-dappled bliss, and I calm all the way down. She confronted the broken woman on the floor and then decided to give herself the gift of serenity. I may never use essential oils, but what I get from Morissette’s Instagram has come to feel essential indeed.


