


ARLINGTON, Tex. — The Yankees are the third organization that has been seduced by the right arm of Nathan Eovaldi, whose whiplike pitching motion can hurl a baseball in excess of 100 miles per hour.

As hard as Eovaldi can throw, and as much as his curve can dart and his splitter can dive, he has bounced from the Dodgers to the Marlins to the Yankees because of his inability to harness his pitches.

But on Monday, everything coalesced for Eovaldi, an easygoing Texan. He pitched brilliantly, carrying a no-hitter into the seventh inning and leading the Yankees to a 3-1 victory over the Texas Rangers.

Until Nomar Mazara’s leadoff single in the seventh inning, Eovaldi, 26, had allowed only a fourth-inning walk to Mazara and a lone hard-hit ball: Adrian Beltre’s drive to the warning track in left.

“You can tell how good a guy is, and how good his stuff is, by the reaction of the hitters,” said first baseman Mark Teixeira, who recognized how many uneasy swings the Rangers took. “They’re swinging at pitches in the dirt, swinging at pitches over their head, because it’s just an uncomfortable at-bat.”

Though Eovaldi is from the same hometown, Alvin, Tex., as Nolan Ryan, they had not met until last season. And unlike Ryan, who threw seven no-hitters, Eovaldi has never thrown one — even in high school. While Eovaldi is also one of baseball’s hardest throwers and wears the No. 30 that Ryan wore early in his career with the Mets and Angels, he did not pattern himself after Ryan.

“No,” he said. “I just wanted to play baseball, really.”

The backup catcher Austin Romine quickly developed a rhythm with Eovaldi, who attacked the outer edge of the strike zone with his fastball against the aggressive Rangers, and on the few occasions that he did fall behind, Eovaldi was able to throw his breaking pitches for strikes.

Eovaldi allowed only one other hit, a double that just eluded the reach of right fielder Dustin Ackley, and he was pulled after beginning the eighth with a walk to Mitch Moreland. The lone Texas run came when Brett Nicholas homered off Dellin Betances in the eighth, the first earned run he had allowed this season. Andrew Miller pitched a perfect ninth for his fifth save.

No-hitters are not exactly common for Yankees pitchers. While the Cubs’ Jake Arrieta has thrown two since Aug. 30, the Yankees have not had one since David Cone’s perfect game on July 18, 1999, and they have none on the road since Allie Reynolds’s 1-0 win at Cleveland on July 12, 1951.

But last season, his first with the Yankees, Eovaldi tantalized with the possibility. In August, he retired the first 16 batters against Minnesota, and in his next start, he pitched eight shutout innings in a 1-0 win over Houston.

But he made only two more starts before ending the season on the disabled list with an inflamed right elbow. His three starts this season did little to portend Monday’s performance, which lowered his E.R.A. from 6.11 to 4.38.

But once Eovaldi got through the fifth inning, he and others started to think about the possibilities.

“I’d be lying if I said I didn’t know what’s going on,” Romine said. “But that’s unchartered territory for me. I’ve never caught one before.”

Eovaldi said he was not superstitious, and he interacted in the dugout with teammates as he would have in any other game. When Mazara hit the ground ball that would ruin his bid, it went right where the shortstop would normally be stationed, but Didi Gregorius had been stationed up the middle as part of the Yankees’ defensive shift.

“When it was hit I thought, it was an out,” Eovaldi said. “I feel like they work most of the time.”

Eovaldi, whose parents were in attendance, added, “Once it’s over with, it’s over with, and try to go as deep in the game as I can.”

The Yankees did not provide much support for Eovaldi, but solo home runs by Jacoby Ellsbury in the third and Starlin Castro in the sixth were enough. Teixeira’s double in the third drove in the other run. Alex Rodriguez did not play because of an oblique injury, though it is not expected to keep him out beyond this series.

This was all the Yankees could manage against Cesar Ramos — a journeyman who was recalled to make the 11th start of his career, replacing the ace Cole Hamels (groin) — but it was enough.

“He’s got No. 1 stuff,” Teixeira said of Eovaldi. “That’s one thing that we’ve all seen. A guy that throws 97 miles per hour with a good splitter, a good curveball, that’s No. 1 stuff and he showed it tonight.”


