


This interview with Jane Rosenthal was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Ms. Rosenthal, a movie producer, is a founder of the Tribeca Film Festival, now part of Tribeca Enterprises, where she is executive chairwoman.

Q. Tell me about your early years.

A. I always wanted to be in government and politics. When I was 16, I got a job as a page in the Rhode Island House of Representatives, and I was the youngest woman there and the first high school page. They actually paid the pages more than the representatives were getting, too.

But I wanted to help change the world, and I decided that if I was going to have an impact, I could do that through documentary films instead of being part of the political process. I was obsessed with how you change the world through telling stories.

What about your parents?

My mother’s family had a company called ACS Industries, and they made pot cleaners. I spent many Saturdays going to the factory with my father. When they were extruding polypropylene, it was all different colors, and these pinks and oranges and greens would come out of the machines like hair. I had a very active imagination. Everything to me was a toy.

One of my earliest memories of my mother in the early 1960s was her working for the N.A.A.C.P., and she would go into middle-income housing and sign apartment leases that black families could then use to move in. The civil rights issues were very real in our house, and my mother was quite passionate about discrimination and segregation. She was out there doing what she could do.

And whenever there was a big historical moment on TV, like the “I have a dream” speech, she would say, “You have to sit and watch this. You’re not going to know what this is, but you’ll always remember that I made you watch it.” She also always said to me that you can absolutely do whatever you want. It never occurred to me that “no” was an option.

And where did your interest in filmmaking come from?

My mother was also an amateur actress. I’d go with her to rehearsals, and she might have only one line, but I’d have to sit through the whole thing. I was fascinated by makeup and hair and a person transforming themselves into a character and then getting up on stage, and how a show would change from a run-through to a dress rehearsal to a final performance.

I wanted to major in acting and my parents said no. You can always go into acting, they said, but have a skill that you can fall back on. I thought, O.K., I’ll trick them. I’ll major in film and television, and then I can act in the films. And I very quickly realized that I was a lousy actress and that I was much better at producing.

Describe your leadership style.

I’m hands-off until there’s a big problem, and then I’m completely hands-on. As long as I trust that everybody is doing what they’re supposed to, it’s great. If something goes wrong, then I want to understand the process of how it went wrong and what you need to do.

In my opinion, women make better producers because we’re used to multitasking and nurturing, and a lot of what you’re doing as a producer is nurturing all the creative talent. You have to create a safe environment for everybody — both on the set and in the office — to come together and do their best work.

You want them to emit that spark of light, like a firefly, but they may have to go back and forth and back and forth, changing their mind before they do. But you have to remain calm and be very patient, and say, “This is good, let’s keep trying.”

I have to ask. Favorite movie?

I don’t really have a favorite movie. But “Mary Poppins” influenced me as a kid because she was a woman who could fly. She could speak her own language, she could take care of kids, have a job, and she loved to laugh. She was a superwoman. It spoke to me.

How do you hire?

It’s important for me to spend a lot of time with somebody I’m going to work with directly, and not necessarily in an office situation. If you’re eating a meal, do you get to the third hour? Somebody can always fake it up until the third hour, and then they can’t anymore, and that’s when the “bug me” factors might come out.

It’s like if something bothers you on the first date, it’s going to bother you for the rest of your life, so forget it.

So what are your pet peeves as a boss?

I like the bad news fast, because then it’s just part of the process. I prefer people who are transparent and just give me the information straight. Don’t try to couch it, don’t try to play me. The other thing is that if anybody has to give me any kind of financial information, they always have to do it in a narrative.

What questions do you ask in a job interview?

I like asking provocative questions or questions that are just out of the blue like, “If you were a superhero, who would you be? Why?”

How would you answer that question?

I would go back to Mary Poppins. She could take the umbrella and just fly away. She had the bag of tricks. She packed light.

Other broader life lessons?

When you’ve done something well, like a movie that’s a box-office hit, everybody’s your best friend. When you’ve done something that’s not so good, nobody calls. But it’s O.K. You’re still the same person. So it’s about understanding who you really are, no matter where you are or what you’ve accomplished.

The lesson I’ve learned is about who or what to trust, and what to take with a grain of salt or not. It’s really about trusting your instincts, because at the end of the day, that’s all you have. If you can’t trust your own instincts, then you can’t trust anything.


