


GENEVA — Burundi’s security services are torturing and illegally detaining increasing numbers of people, the United Nations said on Monday, reinforcing international alarm over the government’s ferocious crackdown on political opponents.

United Nations investigators had documented at least 345 cases of torture and ill treatment since the start of the year and met detainees with fresh wounds, including some who had been beaten or burned so severely they could not walk unaided, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, the agency’s high commissioner for human rights, said in a statement.

“These shocking figures are a clear indicator of the widespread and growing use of torture and ill treatment by government security forces,” Mr. al-Hussein said.

He added that he was also deeply concerned over reports emerging of the existence of secret detention facilities across the country.

His statement follows mounting international pressure on President Pierre Nkurunziza to defuse a political crisis characterized by escalating violence since he decided in April last year to run for a third term.

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, and a number of African leaders, among them South Africa’s president, Jacob Zuma, have visited Burundi in recent weeks to try to persuade Mr. Nkurunziza to negotiate with political opponents and avert a civil war that could ignite wider regional violence. Their efforts have had little visible result so far.

The United Nations has documented the deaths of about 500 people in the past year, but human rights groups believe many more have died at the hands of the president’s security services and Imbonerakure, a militia of the ruling party’s youth wing.

Thousands have also been detained and more than a quarter of a million Burundians have fled to neighboring countries to escape the violence, the United Nations has reported.

Overt violence had shown signs of subsiding but covert violence was rising, Christof Heyns, the United Nations expert monitoring the crisis, told the Human Rights Council in Geneva last month. He cited a growing number of disappearances and underscored the fear that the political crisis could “open up old wounds” between Burundi’s ethnic Hutu and Tutsi communities. More than 300,000 people are estimated to have died in a 12-year civil war that ended in 2005.

Mr. al-Hussein on Monday drew attention to reports that some government security agencies were involved in arrests, killings and disappearances of members of the army and the police. These abductions appear to have singled out mostly Tutsi members of a group known as Ex-Fab, made up of veterans who served in the armed forces before the end of the civil war.


