


“In truth, I’m not one of these people that likes seeing my name on everything,” the billionaire Leonard A. Lauder said of the gleaming letters spelling out his name that had been installed on the gray cantilevered facade above the entrance of the Whitney Museum of American Art. “I’m not going to mention names, but there are some people who like to have everything named after them.”

Mr. Lauder, the emeritus chairman of the museum, was holding court during its annual gala last Tuesday evening on the Whitney’s fifth-floor gallery, which had been transformed into a minimalist dining room for 600 of the art world’s elite.

Luckily, the evening, with the most affordable seat selling for $7,500, started at 7 p.m. because many seemed to be fading coming off a hectic two-week art marathon: the Frieze New York art fair and the contemporary art auctions. Not to mention countless gallery openings and dinners.

“I left town before Frieze started because I couldn’t take doing any more business,” the artist Dan Colen said. “I spent a week in Point Reyes in Northern California and then to the SFMoMA gala.”

Michael Ovitz, the art collector and a founder of Creative Artists Agency, was snug in a Tom Ford suit, seated at a table decorated with a long row of Dan Flavin-esque commercial-grade fluorescent lights down the middle. They gave the artists Barkley Hendricks, John Currin and Rachel Feinstein a sort of futuristic glow.

“The economics of art has become a sideshow,” Mr. Ovitz said as he leaned over his fiancée, Tamara Mellon. “I don’t know a lot of collectors that got interested in art because of the economics. We see art every weekend — New York, Los Angeles or San Francisco, where there’s a growing scene — wherever we happen to be. Saturdays are for galleries and studio visits, and Sundays are for museums.”

Ms. Mellon, wearing red chiffon and matching red stilettos she designed for her soon-to-debut eponymous brand, whispered: “Have you noticed black tie doesn’t mean black tie anymore?”

Nearby, the artist Cindy Sherman, in a teal leather dress by Louis Vuitton, the evening’s sponsor, was discussing her studio at her new country house in Long Island underneath colored polka-dot wall projections by the event designer David Stark. “What I fear is when I’m out there, I will be distracted by bike rides or the beach or feeding the chickens and I won’t get any work done,” Ms. Sherman said.

The lights dimmed and the singer Seal took the stage to perform one of his hits, “Crazy.”

On the first floor, the younger set (or perhaps the less affluent) were having their own party with a more accessible $250 entry fee. The D.J. Chelsea Leyland spun hip-hop as young upstarts thronged the bar.

“The building is open, they’ve tripled their attendance, it’s a smashing success,” the artist Glenn Ligon said. “Now this is a party.”


