


TEHRAN — An Iranian revolutionary court handed down long prison terms on Tuesday to four journalists supportive of the government of President Hassan Rouhani, Iranian news media reported. All were convicted on charges of having acted against national security.

Noting that Mr. Rouhani has called for more press freedom in several speeches, analysts said the prison sentences were a warning by Iran’s conservative-dominated judiciary that it would not accept any relaxation of the rules for journalists.

A prominent reporter and actress, Afarin Chitsaz, was sentenced to 10 years, the Iranian Students’ News Agency reported. Last year, she wrote an impassioned defense of the nuclear agreement between Iran and major world powers in the daily Iran, an official government newspaper.

All of the journalists worked for reformist newspapers. They included the editor in chief of Farhikhtegan, Eshan Manzandarani, who received a seven-year sentence. The other two were Davood Asadi, who received five years, and Eshan Safarzaiee, who received seven years.

The four were arrested in November by the intelligence unit of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps on suspicion of assisting the United States in ‘‘infiltrating” the country. Ms. Chitsaz was also convicted of “having connections with foreign governments,” her lawyer, Mahmoud Alizadeh Tabatabaei, said in an interview. “I will appeal this decision,” he said.

In addition to Mr. Rouhani, the four also supported Ayatollah Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, an influential former president much despised by Iran’s hard-line conservatives.

International press freedom groups denounced the punishments. “Convicting journalists for ‘acting against national security’ underlines the need to change the overbroad laws that lead to the harassment and jailing of the media,” the Committee to Protect Journalists said in a statement. “Iranian authorities must cease imprisoning journalists.”

Over the last decade, dozens of reformist newspapers have been closed by the Iranian judiciary and hundreds of reporters have been imprisoned, a campaign of intimidation that has forced many to tone down criticism or to seek other jobs. The Iranian news media remains divided along factional lines, however, with hard-liners controlling state television and some important newspapers and the reformists shifting their attention to social media where they can talk more freely.

The arrests partly reflected the rivalries between these political factions, insiders said.

“These verdicts are all unfair,” said Sayer Mohammadi, a former journalist who was ousted from the state-run news media during the era of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Mr. Rouhani’s predecessor. “We have no job security. Every day something can happen to us.”

This month, an Iranian who also holds citizenship in the Netherlands, Sabri Hassanpour, was arrested after visiting his family in Iran. Mr. Hassanpour was a host for a small satellite channel that promotes the former Iranian royal family.

Nazak Afshar, a dual citizen of Iran and France, was also arrested recently. Ms. Afshar, who once worked in the French Embassy in Tehran, left the country in 2009 after she was convicted of involvement in antigovernment protests. She was arrested at the airport on a return visit to see her ailing mother, Iranian news media reported.


