


LOS ANGELES — After months of sifting through public critiques over how India is portrayed in the sixth and seventh grades, California education officials on Thursday approved a curriculum that includes teachings about the caste system and uses the term India rather than South Asia.

Nearly 200 people lined up to speak during a meeting of the instructional committee from the state Board of Education. Dozens voiced complaints over how castes and the so-called untouchables are portrayed. Others applauded the committee for rejecting the use of the term South Asia, which some scholars said should be used to refer to an area that includes modern-day India, Pakistan and Nepal.

Those who wanted the panel to adopt the term India say that it accurately reflects what the region has long been called and represents the most influential culture in the area.

The committee debated dozens of specific sentences in the history curriculum framework, which is more than 400 pages.

“Whether we like our history or not for any particular reason, we have to stick with the facts,” said Risha Krishna, a committee member, in discussing how to phrase a sentence about jatis, groups in India that are primarily defined by birth. Some suggested describing such groups as self-governing, a definition Ms. Krishna questioned. “These groups did not have autonomy to decide how they would function. It was top down,” she said.

Some Hindu advocates argued that the curriculum puts too much emphasis on the caste system, saying that it leaves Indian students vulnerable to bullying in schools. Dozens of students told committee members that they were taunted after learning about castes in school.

But activists for the Dalits, members of the “untouchable” caste, said that glossing over the caste system would do little to protect students and would be an inaccurate portrayal of India.

“There is no way that one would self-govern yourself into oppression,” said Thenmozhi Soundararajan, a leader of a coalition that includes Dalits, Sikhs and Muslims.

After listening to four hours of public comment, Bill Honig, the vice chairman of the committee, said that the group was focused on giving all sides a fair portrayal in the curriculum.

“We try to avoid any characterization of illegitimacy,” Mr. Honig said. “We try to convey to sixth-grade students and seventh-grade students about the diversity of this region. We tried to put in strong contributions of these societies. I think we set it in the proper context.”


