


Jordana Nicole Marshall and Lonny Neal Kline were married May 21 by Rabbi Benjamin Spratt at the Glen Island Harbour Club in New Rochelle, N.Y.

The bride, 31, teaches first grade at the Rodeph Sholom School in Manhattan. She graduated from Quinnipiac University and received a dual master’s degree in early childhood special and general education from Bank Street College of Education. She is a daughter of Deborah D. Marshall and Jeffrey A. Marshall of Manhattan.

The groom, 35, works in Manhattan for the hedge fund services unit of Northern Trust Corporation, a Chicago-based holding company. He is a vice president who manages a team providing hedge funds with risk management and other services. He graduated summa cum laude from Binghamton University. He is the son of Arlene R. Kline of Manhattan and David S. Kline of Muttontown, N.Y., and the stepson of Nancy S. Kline.

The couple met in Manhattan in December 2012 at a holiday party hosted by Ms. Marshall and Marni Kagan, the New York matchmaker she then worked for. As part of her duties as a matchmaker’s assistant, Ms. Marshall would attend charity events and talk with guests to find potential matches for clients and recruit singles for Ms. Kagan’s database.

As Ms. Marshall looked through the database for bachelors to invite to the holiday party, she remembered a friend, Dr. Matthew Lorber, and invited him to attend and to bring two guests — one of whom was Mr. Kline.

Ms. Marshall decided to wear her favorite red dress just to stand out a bit. “I know every girl in New York City wears a black dress out,” she said. But she wasn’t there to find a date — she already had a boyfriend, and besides, she would be busy networking.

Mr. Kline noticed Ms. Marshall right away. “I was mingling and then saw this girl in a red dress,” Mr. Kline said. “I didn’t know who she was, but I kept an eye on her until she came over to talk to us.”

Ms. Marshall asked Mr. Kline if there was anyone at the event he was interested in meeting. “He said, ‘No, you’re my type, and there’s no one else here I’m interested in,’” Ms. Marshall said. “I was flattered, but I told him I had a boyfriend.”

But it didn’t end there. They met again a week later at another party to which Ms. Marshall had been sent to scout for potential matches. By chance, she was wearing the same outfit she had worn to the first gathering, and Mr. Kline also happened to be there. He immediately spotted Ms. Marshall.

“I’m at this party, and I see the girl in a red dress,” he said. But Ms. Marshall told him that she was still otherwise attached and worse, at least by Mr. Kline’s way of thinking, that she was meeting the boyfriend’s parents the next day.

“That means it’s serious,” Mr. Kline said. “I thought we’d just go our separate ways.”

A month later, Mr. Kline and Ms. Marshall were both at a Young Jewish Professionals event — and she was again wearing that strapless red dress. “I yelled across the room for her to come over,” Mr. Kline said.

She was happy to see him, with one reservation.

“Now I was really embarrassed because I was wearing the same dress bumping into him for the third time,” she said.

But everything still looked just fine to Mr. Kline. He asked if she was still with her boyfriend, and when she said no, he got her phone number.

Ms. Marshall still has the red dress (yes, it’s the one in the photo above) and wears it on special occasions, adding, “If I could get married in that dress, I would.”


