


NEW DELHI — The governing Bharatiya Janata Party and its allies won power in the state of Assam on Thursday, the group’s first triumph in the country’s remote northeast and a morale-raising victory after two dispiriting electoral defeats.

“This win is historic by all standards,” said the party’s leader, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in a Twitter message that congratulated party workers.

In Assam, Mr. Modi’s party defeated the Indian National Congress Party, which was also ousted from power in the southern state of Kerala, data from the Election Commission showed. Congress trailed a coalition of parties in Kerala led by the Communist Party of India (Marxist), adding to the party’s political losses after its poor showing in the general elections two years ago.

“Very clearly, the party as a whole has to move beyond this sort of clichéd introspection business into some serious action,” said a lawmaker from Kerala, Shashi Tharoor, referring his own Congress party. He suggested in an interview on the NDTV news channel that the party begin by promoting younger leaders throughout the country.

The seats won by the Bharatiya Janata Party in Assam will not significantly change the power equation in the upper house of Parliament, whose members are elected by state legislators. In the upper house, the party is in the minority and often faces setbacks when trying to pass measures to modernize and streamline the economy, as Mr. Modi promised in his rise to power.

But it was a salve for the party and for Mr. Modi after a crushing defeat last fall in state elections in Bihar, which Mr. Modi cast as a referendum on his first 17 months in office. In February of last year, it was trounced by the Aam Aadmi Party in assembly elections in New Delhi.

Parties with powerful female regional leaders triumphed in the southern state of Tamil Nadu and the eastern state of Bengal, despite accusations of corruption.

All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, the party headed by Jayalalithaa Jayaram, the chief minister of Tamil Nadu, whose corruption conviction in 2014 was overturned on appeal last year, won in more than half the races on Thursday evening. All India Trinamool Congress, the party of Mamata Banerjee, all but swept West Bengal, winning in more than two-thirds of the races and defeating an alliance of the Congress party and various Communist parties, further cementing her grip on the state.

The Congress party, once the unchallenged power in India, could take some comfort in its performance in the union territory of Puducherry, where its alliance won after a close fight against an incumbent government.


