


DETROIT — At the Movement Festival here, electronic and dance music fans were reminded once again how techno music has its seeds in the cultural dialogue between Detroit and Berlin. And that few individual conversations have been as central to the aesthetic and philosophical evolution of that genre as the one that the American Juan Atkins and the German Moritz von Oswald have been intermittently holding since the late 1980s.

The pair of musicians held court on the festival’s main stage, then stayed in the late-night mix, performing bass-heavy D.J. sets at afterparties that would not end until the sunrise. At 53, both men are regarded as techno music’s spiritual and literal godfathers. Though the two have experienced health issues (both chose not to comment on these), they continue making vital contributions to what is regarded as a youthful practice.

The pair used Movement, over the Memorial Day weekend, to mark the live debut in the United States of “Transport,” the second album they recently released under the name Borderland. Over Skype in April, Mr. von Oswald called the LP an “aura event,” a high-profile and often meditative reunion between two artists, whose relationship stretches back to before the fall of the Berlin Wall. It also poses a question: In a dance-music bazaar often driven by shiny musical thrills, mass market-oriented festivals and nighttime party economies, is there room for the ruminations of elder statesmen?

“It is this image of an aging wine,” said Dimitri Hegemann, founder of the influential Berlin club and record label Tresor, in a phone interview. He has known Mr. Atkins and Mr. von Oswald since their shared beginning and encouraged the two to record together again. “The young wine serves its purpose, but the older wine, when the plants are 80, 90 years old, it is better in a different, more profound way. This quality comes through. It’s very peaceful.”

In a phone interview from his Detroit home a week before Movement, Mr. Atkins said that he met Mr. von Oswald around 1988 or ’89, explaining that the German musician came to Detroit along with his colleagues Thomas Fehlmann and Mark Ernestus (Mr. von Oswald’s future partner in Basic Channel, the duo whose dub-heavy, minimal techno set a blueprint for the Berlin sound). “They went to all the pawn shops to buy up the analog gear — old ARP Odysseys, ARP Axxes, early drum machines, things like that.” Eventually, they knocked on the door of a house Mr. Atkins was sharing with Mike Banks, the co-founder of Underground Resistance, a Detroit techno collective central to the ensuing dialogue.

Mr. Atkins was already worth seeking out. He had been developing Detroit’s new electronic sound since 1981: first, with Rik Davis, in the electro duo Cybotron, and after, under pseudonyms such as Model 500 and Channel One for his own label, Metroplex (initiating techno’s ethos of aliases, of independence from the traditional music industry and of complete creative control).

Mr. von Oswald also came with credentials. A classically trained percussionist, he had recently departed Palais Schaumburg, the Hamburg-based avant-garde band that helped start the career of, among others, FM Einheit (later the founder of seminal noise band Einstürzende Neubauten). He had just moved to Berlin to start making electronic music.

By 1991, when Mr. Atkins took up an invitation to be a D.J. at Tresor and record with Mr. Fehlmann and Mr. von Oswald (credited to 3MB or Three Men in Berlin), Detroit artists were establishing a beachhead in the city — and deeply influencing its sound and vision. Mr. Atkins said that there was environmental empathy between the newly unified European capital with its vast postwar ruins and the Midwestern metropolis in postindustrial decay: “I think the similarities made each of us feel comfortable in the other’s city.”

For much of the 1990s and into the early 2000s, the creative exchange between the cities was unrelenting, anchored by steady collaborations between Mr. von Oswald and Mr. Atkins, and others around the Tresor camp. At the same time, the music grew from being an underground phenomenon into what is now a global culture. “Sometimes I am really amazed how far my stuff got,” Mr. von Oswald said.

Yet, while both artists continued experimenting — “Forward ever, backward never,” Mr. von Oswald said, quoting an old Jacob Miller reggae tune when asked for his creative mantra — the scene around them increasingly codified. Much of it has become a business aimed at the young, with techno tourism around the European Union (especially in Berlin and on the Mediterranean island Ibiza, Spain), Las Vegas and festivals across the world becoming the engines of its economy. Respect for techno’s originators has remained unabated, but for many, the depth and tonality of their music aged in a way the mass audience did not.

Everyone agrees that the recent collaboration — kicked off with a single 2012 session in Berlin that yielded much of Borderland’s debut — was Mr. Hegemann’s idea.

“I saw that my job was bringing together two personalities whose work I really admire, but have not worked together in a long time,” he said, recalling that he told them: “‘We are now in our 50s, not 22; half of life is behind us. You did all this work, you have this experience, you don’t have to write a hit or anything, you can just concentrate on contributing to this old, historical connection between Detroit and Berlin.’” To his surprise, “they both agreed.”

The duo said that the ease of their working relationship was the mutual regard built over many years: “We have a knack for going after and bouncing off each other’s ideas,” Mr. Atkins said.

Mr. von Oswald added: “If he plays a bass line, I know what to do with the rhythm or the strings. It’s not that complicated.”

Where in retrospect Mr. von Oswald described Borderland’s first album as “stiff,” “Transport” is “more full, more complex.” At Mr. Atkins’ insistence, it was partially recorded at his Detroit studio, “to add more of the Detroit flavor, atmosphere into the music, as opposed to just my essence.” The resulting track, “Riod,” is among the album’s deeper, dubbier numbers, and the first one completed, setting the stage for an LP that sounds at once classic and thoroughly contemporary — full of propulsion, repetition and, at times, darkly ambient mystery, but nary a drop or a vocal in sight.

Mr. Atkins cited a desire for a broader audience only in so much as “to offer people alternatives,” he said. “I don’t really think about being relevant.”

As for aging in what can at times seem like a youthful blood sport both on the dance floor and in the D.J. booth, Mr. von Oswald simply laughs it off: “There’s a lot of people who say, ‘Never grow old,’ but this is no problem for me. I like to grow old. It’s enjoyable, I think.”


