


PORTLAND, Ore. — The game was only minutes old when Austin Rivers of the Los Angeles Clippers lunged for a loose ball, but all he caught was an accidental elbow from Al-Farouq Aminu, a forward from the Portland Trail Blazers. During the subsequent stoppage in play, Rivers left the court and disappeared to the locker room as a trainer held a white towel over Rivers’s face.

Rivers returned in the second quarter after receiving 11 stitches, and his face looked as if he had gone 12 rounds. Yet he played on, his determined effort helping to carry the undermanned Clippers, who were running on fumes against the Trail Blazers on Friday night in Game 6 of their first-round playoff series.

Determination makes a difference in the playoffs, but so do healthy bodies. The Clippers finally exhausted their supply of them against the Trail Blazers, whose 106-103 victory on Friday night clinched their first-round playoff series at Moda Center.

The Trail Blazers’ Mason Plumlee made two free throws with 14.7 seconds left to break a late-game tie. After the Clippers’ Jamal Crawford misfired on a runner in the closing seconds, Plumlee added another free throw to seal the win.

After losing the first two games of the series, Portland won the final four to advance to face the Golden State Warriors in the Western Conference semifinals. Game 1 is scheduled for Sunday in Oakland, Calif.

Damian Lillard scored 28 points to lead the Trail Blazers, and C.J. McCollum added 20.

Crawford scored 32 points and Rivers 21 for the Clippers, who played the final two games of the series without the injured Chris Paul and Blake Griffin.

Still, the Trail Blazers were never supposed to be in this position. Not after losing four starters, including LaMarcus Aldridge and Wesley Matthews, to free agency and off-season moves last summer. Not with one of the youngest rosters in the league. Not with Lillard shouldering so much of the offensive load.

But under Coach Terry Stotts, Portland went 44-38 in the regular season, when most prognosticators had predicted that the team would miss the playoffs. Instead, Lillard excelled and found an outstanding backcourt partner in McCollum, whose minutes tripled along with his production. Funny how that works.

The Clippers sustained a seismic blow Monday in Game 4, when they lost Paul to a broken hand, Griffin to a quadriceps injury and then, finally, the game. The Trail Blazers proceeded to roll past the Clippers on Wednesday in Los Angeles to send the series back to Portland for an opportunity to clinch a berth in the conference semifinals at home.

With Paul out indefinitely after surgery and Blake done for the season, neither made the trip to Portland for Game 6. (Coach Doc Rivers said it did not make sense for either of them to travel after their medical procedures.) The Clippers needed epic efforts from players like Crawford and Rivers.

They nearly delivered, despite a rough start. J.J. Redick and Luc Mbah a Moute picked up two fouls each in the game’s opening minutes. Rivers, filling in for Paul at point guard, took an elbow to the head and left for the locker room.

As if to pile on, the pro golfer Peter Jacobsen walked onto the court during an early timeout and knocked down three straight free throws to win everyone in the arena free fruit smoothies.

So it was something of a surprise that the Clippers, given their all-consuming troubles, tied the game at 24-24 entering the second quarter. Against all odds, they had some hope.

It was not the finest display of basketball execution. At one end, the Clippers’ DeAndre Jordan air-balled a free throw. At the other end, the Trail Blazers used one possession to throw two of the worst lobs of the postseason — lobs that were only vaguely in the general vicinity of Plumlee. (He could not get his mitts on either of them.)

The Clippers stuck around. Crawford came off the bench to score 22 points in the first half, and Redick connected on a 3-pointer early in the third quarter to give the Clippers a 58-53 lead.

The Trail Blazers sank seven 3-pointers in the third quarter, and McCollum sank another midway through the fourth for a 7-point lead.

Rivers called a timeout and surveyed his bench, searching for solutions. The Clippers continued to fight — Redick scored on a layup and Crawford made two free throws to tie the game in the final minute — but they fell just short.


