


From its first issue, the comic-book series Preacher was teeming with outrageous scenarios and incendiary imagery: the aftermath of a daring escape from Heaven; an angel shown decapitated and another with its brains blown out by gunfire; and a small-town Texas congregation annihilated as if by an atomic bomb.

It was the kind of story its creators hoped might make a great movie, but that didn’t happen.

“It was too much for a lot of people to get their heads around,” said Garth Ennis, the writer who created Preacher with the comics artist Steve Dillon.

[ Read our review of ‘Preacher’ ]

“Not so much for the extremity of the violence or some of the sexual acts,” he explained. “But just the sheer weirdness of the concept was a lot.”

When “Preacher” makes its debut as an AMC drama on Sunday, May 22, it moves at a somewhat different pace. It tells the story of Jesse Custer (played by Dominic Cooper), the struggling minister of the fictional Annville, Tex., who finds himself imbued with strange new abilities that give him greater command over his parishioners.

At the same time, Custer is reconnected to his ex-girlfriend Tulip (Ruth Negga), a violent criminal, and meets Cassidy (Joseph Gilgun), a debauched Irishman with an unusual aversion to sunlight. Also, for some reason, religious leaders around the world are spontaneously exploding.

For AMC, which has ordered a 10-episode first season of “Preacher,” this series is the former “Mad Men” broadcaster’s latest venture into genre entertainment, where savage acts and supernatural events are regular occurrences.

The network has already achieved a brand-altering hit with one such show, “The Walking Dead,” and found respectable hits with “Fear the Walking Dead” and “Into the Badlands.” It would surely like to see “Preacher” succeed at that same scale. But even when compared with narratives about reanimated corpses that eat human flesh, “Preacher” is a much more bizarre proposition.

As is known to fans of the comics, which were published between 1995 and 2000 by the Vertigo imprint of DC Comics, there is plenty of perversity, violence and potential blasphemy to come: stories about the incestuous continuation of the bloodline of Jesus; a Ku Klux Klansman with a sexual attraction to meat; and a confrontation with God himself.

But for now, the creative team of the “Preacher” TV series (which includes Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, collaborators better known for their comedic efforts) is satisfied to serve up this provocative material more sparingly, while staying true to the audacious spirit of the comic books.

“It can be Monty Python and Quentin Tarantino and the Coen brothers,” said Sam Catlin, the “Preacher” showrunner.

But, he said: “You can’t just do whatever you want. Otherwise you’re at an all-you-can-eat sundae bar, and it just saturates.”

Mr. Ennis, a Northern Irish comics author who has also written for franchise characters like Hellblazer and the Punisher, said Preacher was meant to be “a very American story,” inspired by westerns and antiheroes played by Clint Eastwood and John Wayne.

For all of its over-the-top plots and players, Mr. Ennis said he received fairly few negative responses from readers during Preacher’s original run.

“Instead of anyone going all out to get the book banned, it was more like, ‘I hate what you’re doing, and you’ll never hear from me again,’” Mr. Ennis said. “And you think: ‘Right, well, fair enough then.’”

The property has been through the Hollywood wringer many times over the past two decades: Mr. Ennis wrote screenplays for a film, and John August worked on a script for the director Sam Mendes, while a previous attempt at a TV series was developed for and dropped by HBO.

Eventually, Mr. Ennis said that he and Mr. Dillon concluded that Preacher was unfilmable.

“But if people wanted to pay for the rights, for a couple of years, and figure out for themselves that they’d taken on an impossible task, we were perfectly happy for them to do so,” he said.

Meanwhile, Mr. Rogen and Mr. Goldberg, who have worked together on films like “Superbad,” “This Is the End” and “Neighbors,” had their own longstanding interest in adapting Preacher, over which they bonded as teenagers at an early stage in their friendship.

(“We only make things that come from archetypal moments in our relationship,” Mr. Goldberg joked.)

About two years ago, they got their chance from the producer Neal H. Moritz (the “Fast and the Furious” franchise), who held the rights to Preacher and who had worked with them on the ill-fated 2011 superhero film “The Green Hornet.”

Mr. Moritz also connected them with Mr. Catlin, a former producer of “Breaking Bad,” who was not familiar at first with Preacher and was unsure how it could be translated to television.

“It’s dark, it’s irreverent, it’s violent — it’s all these different genres,” Mr. Catlin said. “But the comic starts, story-wise, at 250 miles an hour, and I just didn’t know how we were going to be able to hit the road.”

Mr. Rogen and Mr. Goldberg, who are executive producers of “Preacher” and directed its first two episodes, said that their solution was to be patient in setting up their characters and their world, as well as the religious crisis that is their protagonist’s journey.

“In the first five pages of the comic, there were big, interesting ideas that we could draw out and make much more intriguing and mysterious, instead of just laying them out so plainly,” Mr. Rogen said.

“In the comics, you never really see Jesse being a preacher,” he said. “By the time it starts, he’s done with it. We made it a bigger part of his life, to try to create a bigger conflict between the good, spiritual side of him and the badass, thrill-seeking side of him.”

Mr. Cooper, a star of TV’s “Agent Carter” and films like “Mamma Mia!” and “The Devil’s Double,” said he approached “Preacher” with some caution because of the themes and ideas that the series would be addressing so irreverently.

“When there’s violence, when there’s the discussion on religion, of course you have to be guarded, you have to be careful,” he said.

But from his earliest conversations with Mr. Rogen and Mr. Goldberg, Mr. Cooper said their adventurousness and enthusiasm for the source material was infectious.

“It was like these animated children with beards explaining God and the world,” Mr. Cooper said. “What is going on? Who are these people? What am I about to get myself involved in? I could feel myself slipping from the clutches of reality — I was already stuck, and there was nothing I could do.”

Over time, Mr. Rogen and Mr. Goldberg said, the more transgressive content that the Preacher comic book became known for would make its way into the series.

“I think it will all come,” Mr. Rogen said.

If it didn’t, Mr. Goldberg said, “As fanboys, we’d be furious with ourselves.”

Joel Stillerman, AMC’s president for original programming and production, said his only concern with “Preacher” was “making 10 great hours of TV for Season 1, and I think we’re well on our way to doing that.”

Pointing to the network’s success with challenging and often violent shows like “Breaking Bad” and “The Walking Dead,” Mr. Stillerman said that with “Preacher,” there were ways to “stay true to the essence of it” while succeeding “on the mission that we all have, to tell the story and do it in a way that is as entertaining and broadly appealing as possible.”

So far, Mr. Rogen and Mr. Goldberg said, when creative disagreements with AMC have arisen, they have fought for their devotion to the comics and have persuaded the network to keep the faith.

“We’ve seen both head-scratching and vehement opposition,” Mr. Rogen said. “But we just talk to them. It’s not like it’s insurmountable.”

Mr. Goldberg added, “We have a running thing, which is, if it’s part of the story and it’s a good story, we just go for it.”


