


“Person of Interest” has no superheroes, no zombies, no ninjas, no direwolves. But as much as any show on television, it makes the high-low connection that’s at the heart of genre and comic-book storytelling.

The obvious appeal of this CBS series, which returns for an abbreviated fifth and final season on Tuesday, is pulpy and visceral. Its central cast includes three wisecracking assassins with good looks and hearts of gold, and the spiraling, frantic story lines allow them and their adversaries to run up prodigious body counts. (Secondary characters on “Person of Interest” almost always come with expiration dates.)

But the show’s premise, combining fear of sentient computers with fear of unfettered post-9/11 government surveillance, has been sufficiently sturdy and coherent to provide ballast for the comic-book action. It makes you think, or think you’re thinking, while you enjoy the gunplay and slightly dopey humor, and it makes you care more than you expect to about the fates of the show’s heroic, heavily outnumbered band of hackers, black-ops agents and cops.

In the new season the series pushes that conceptual framework hard. Finch (Michael Emerson), the owlish genius who created the crime-predicting artificial intelligence program called the Machine, wonders whether it’s time to pull the plug: Is the existence of a program that could exterminate us “an existential risk the world can’t afford”? (Two programs, actually, given that the Machine’s main antagonist since Season 3 has been another artificial intelligence, named Samaritan.) The answer, as fans of Finch will immediately predict, lies in the Machine’s close connection to its benevolent maker.

At the end of Season 4 (a full year ago), the writers killed off or sidelined most of the adversaries of Finch’s group, leaving the corporate-backed Samaritan and its shadowy minders as the only significant enemy. In the early going of Season 5 (four episodes were available to critics) the show spins its wheels a little.

One of the clever things the show’s creator, Jonathan Nolan, did was to encapsulate the creative tension between self-contained, crime-solving episodes (a CBS hallmark) and a long-range conspiracy story by having the Machine spit out “numbers” that led the heroes to individual, weekly cases. With 13 episodes to go, the producers appear to be leery both of spending time on cases and of setting up their climactic showdown too soon, and the plots have a neither-here-nor-there quality. In the fourth week, however, the reintroduction of some favorite characters begins to bring the story into focus.

The most crucial element of the show’s success remains the same: Mr. Emerson’s tremendously appealing, oddly moving performance as Finch, the programming genius who is uncomfortable in every situation but always rises to the occasion. As the new season opens Mr. Emerson has to play a number of very emotional scenes with a computer monitor, carrying on passionate conversations with the blinking cursor. Not one moment of this will tempt you to laugh (in fact, you might have to blink back a tear), and that’s a bit of magic as impressive as any string of computer code.


