


When Donal Burke and his wife, Monica Goel, decided to leave their rental and buy an apartment a few years ago, they knew what they wanted: a newly built condominium.

“We like modern design, big windows and plenty of light, and new buildings tend to have those and they mostly have better amenities,” said Mr. Burke, 54, a computer consultant.

But after considering shiny new possibilities across Manhattan and in Brooklyn, the couple grabbed a one-bedroom co-op at the Carlton Regency, an apartment house on East 36th Street that was built in 1966.

Major lures were the brand-new bike room and brand-new workout room, which the couple deemed equal to fitness areas in many of the just-born condos they had toured. “And the building had the bonus of having a roof deck,” Mr. Burke said. An even bigger bonus: The apartment was more spacious than its condo counterparts and about 25 percent cheaper, as co-ops tend to be.

Score one for the old kid on the block.

The Carlton Regency is one of many residential buildings in New York rethinking, refurbishing or increasing their offerings in an effort to compete with the thousands of square feet in amenities indigenous to newly constructed buildings.

For years, co-ops and a subset of older rentals were able to get by on their good looks, old world charm, pedigree and, maybe, a discreet gym or children’s playroom in the basement. But the rich menu of amenities at the city’s many freshly built condos and rentals — swimming pools, game rooms, massage rooms, yoga rooms, music rooms, party rooms, conference rooms and pet spas — has been a wake-up call and a call to arms for limestone dowagers.

According to the Census Bureau, since 2014, almost 650 building permits have been issued in New York for privately owned residences of more than five units. Of course, the new condos and rentals have their own rivals for best and brightest amenities: every other new condo and rental.

Which explains why some co-ops that want to hold their value, and some rentals that want to hold on to their tenants, are busy adding offerings, or subtracting them, as fads and changing demographics demand.

“Everyone is trying to keep up,” said Stan Olan, the president of the co-op board at Two East End Avenue, a century-old factory converted into apartments in 1979. “I drive around the city every day, and I’m constantly seeing new buildings coming up with great amenities.”

Sometimes, Mr. Olan doesn’t have to drive far. Completing construction just up the street from him at 20 East End Avenue is a condo designed by Robert A. M. Stern Architects whose amenities will include a wine cellar, a fitness center, a sauna, a children’s lounge, a billiards room and a library.

It’s probably no coincidence, then, that Mr. Olan and his fellow board members are giving serious thought to updating the two fitness rooms in the basement at Two East End — last refreshed in 2013 — and adding a rooftop deck in order to take full advantage of the building’s water views. “Residents will enjoy it,” Mr. Olan said. “But the other consideration is that we understand about amenities, and by spending some money, we’ll increase our value.”

When condos started going up in New York in the 1970s, “they weren’t the most upscale buildings and they weren’t in the most desirable locations,” said Eva C. Talel, a partner in the law firm Stroock & Stroock & Lavan, and the head of its co-op and condominium practice. “They weren’t seen as threats to classic co-ops.”

But the definition of desirable location has become quite elastic, and at the same time, “many condos being built are top of the line — with anything you could ask for in terms of amenities,” Ms. Talel said. “So, wisely, co-ops are now doing what they can do to maintain value and to attract the right kind of purchasers.”

Ms. Talel gave an example of an Upper East Side co-op that bought a doctor’s office off the lobby to convert into a gym, and of another co-op that shrank a generously proportioned laundry room to accommodate floor-to-ceiling bike storage racks.

At Trump Plaza, a co-op building on Third Avenue and 61st Street that was built in 1984, the basement workout facility is being turned into a children’s playroom, and the fitness room, complete with new equipment, will relocate to what was the super’s duplex apartment on the first and second floor of the building.

“We thought about a wine cellar and more storage space,” said Marc Cooper, the president of the building’s co-op board. “And we thought about keeping the gym downstairs, but at the end of the day, we thought a gym with natural light would be value-enhancing.” The budget, he added, is ”a healthy six figures.”

Mr. Cooper said it was “incumbent on the building to maintain its competitive standing with new construction the best it can.”

Five years ago, Julie S. Perlin, an associate broker at Stribling & Associates, the real estate firm, and a resident of the Carlton Regency, advised her co-op board that if the building had some amenities — at the time, there were none — it could more effectively hold its own with new construction. After a questionnaire revealed that a majority of the shareholders wanted a gym, a package room, a roof deck and a bike room, a capital campaign raised the necessary funds, between $4 million and $5 million. Included in the tab were a new roof and conversion from steam to gas. The amenities portion of the project was completed last summer.

Before, apartments in the building “were selling for $800 a square foot,” Ms. Perlin said. “Now, it’s about $1,200 a square foot. Part of that is the rising market. But the amenities are playing a major role in getting people to come and look at the building.”

Granted, the Carlton Regency is celebrating the big 5-0 this year. But when it comes to New York real estate, developments don’t have to be old to be considered, well, old. A residential building is an ingénue for maybe three years. By the age of 8 or 9, some decide it’s time to have some work done.

A case in point: One Morton Square, a West Village condo completed in 2004, recently expanded and refreshed its ground-floor fitness space and replaced all the equipment “so it’s state of the art and beautiful,” said Darren Sukenik, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman Real Estate and a resident of the building. The children’s playroom was renovated at the same time. The approximate cost of the upgrades: $500,000.

“We had to do it to keep up with 150 Charles Street and 160 Leroy,” Mr. Sukenik said, referring to a pair of new high-end condos in the neighborhood. “It’s definitely kept us competitive. We’re fetching north of $2,500 a square foot, and new construction is just under $3,000 a square foot.”

Jonathan J. Miller, the president of the real estate appraisal firm Miller Samuel, agrees that amenities add value, but precisely how much is hard to say. “The perception,” Mr. Miller said, “is that it’s an à la carte thing: ‘If I have a gym and I add a community room it adds X percent to the value, and if I add a sauna it adds Y percent.’ But it doesn’t work that way. It’s more of a package.”

But not all older buildings feel the need to play catch-up, Mr. Miller said. Some think they’re plenty fine just the way they are, thank you very much. There are mid-block prewar co-ops on the Upper West Side and Upper East Side, for example, that “have nothing more than the structural needs that make them a building,” he said. “They barely have a lobby, let alone a gym, and it may not be to their detriment. Layering on amenities like a wedding cake doesn’t necessarily make any difference in how a building is received by the market.”

As for rental buildings, some are feeling the same pressure and imperatives as older co-ops and condos. “As much as people are looking for location and looking for a certain apartment layout and certain finishes, they want to know what else a building has to offer,” said Mitch Gelberg, a senior managing director of the real estate firm Rose Associates.

Until recently, London Terrace Gardens in the West 20s, a 1930 property in Rose’s portfolio, had little to offer on the amenities scale, “and all of our competition had amenities,” said Amy Rose, a company president. In response, storage space and a warren of old offices were redeployed, and are now a glass-walled workout facility and a lounge with a Joe coffee outpost.

“You can learn from all the newer buildings,” Ms. Rose added. “We love to visit our colleagues’ buildings and see what they’re doing. But sometimes you’re limited by the space you have, so you have to be creative.” For example, at 21 West Street, a 1931 building converted to apartments from offices in 1998, the children’s playroom was created in an area previously given over to a staff locker room, Ms. Rose said.

Chelsea Landmark on West 25th Street, another Rose property, is only nine years old, but residents recently asked for — and received — an updated gym, barbecues for the terrace and a room that can be rented for parties. Because few tenants showed interest in the sauna and whirlpool, these were replaced by a full-size kitchen for cooking classes and demonstrations.

“We’ve started putting fitness centers into our older buildings, because people really do expect it,” said Laurie Zucker, the vice chairwoman of Manhattan Skyline, which owns and manages several thousand apartments. The company was able to capture space for the upgrade when the conversion from oil to gas heating freed up rooms that had housed mechanicals.

Manhattan Skyline is accepting no excuses for residents to be out of shape at its Manhattan East, a cluster of late 1920s buildings on East 66th Street; and two 1970s buildings, the Habitat, on East 29th Street, and the Left Bank, on West 15th Street. A workout room and a tenants’ lounge are in the planning stages at the Murray Hill, an early 1980s building on East 34th Street.

Manhattan Skyline has also tweaked the offerings at West River House on West End Avenue at 81st Street, a 1983 apartment house where the “amenities floor” included three racquetball courts and a fitness center. Both to address the changing demographics of the building — there has been an influx of families — and to compete with new properties, two of the racquetball courts were sacrificed to expand the workout facility and to build a playroom for younger children as well as a multipurpose room with a Ping-Pong table for teenagers.

“These days people are more flexible about location with rentals,” said Clifford Finn, an executive vice president of new development at Douglas Elliman. “It’s much more about the product, about the style of the building, about the vibe, and that includes the amenities. That’s why the amenities matter.”

They really matter, Mr. Finn said, with buildings that are considered contemporary but might look dated, like a structure from the 1980s.

“The design standards in those buildings were low,” he said, “so if you have a one-bedroom in a Yorkville building renting for $3,000 without amenities, a customer can go farther uptown and get the same product for less in a brand-new building, or go to Long Island City and pay just a little more for an amenities-rich new building.”

In the end, the “to thine own self be true” rule applies. “You have to look at it in the context of what your building is and maximize the assets you have,” Mr. Miller said. “If your building is 10 stories high and people want a high view, they’re not going to come to you even if you do have a gym.”

As Kathy Braddock, a managing director of William Raveis New York City, put it, “The focus shouldn’t be on competing with the new building across the street. It should be on competing in your own market segment. It should be about competing in your own weight class.”


