


Times Insider shares insights into how we work at The New York Times. In this piece, Vivian Yee, a Metro reporter, recounts how she went from looking up former New York State legislators in the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ inmate directory to passing through metal detectors with just a notebook and pen for a chat.

It’s not that hard to get in touch with a federal prisoner. All you have to do is send a letter.

I’ve been exchanging a lot of correspondence with federal inmates lately. After the convictions last fall of Sheldon Silver, the former speaker of the State Assembly, and of Dean G. Skelos, the former majority leader of the State Senate, it became clear that both men were destined for prison. Those of us who covered their trials wondered: What would it be like for them? Would they be treated differently because of their former status? How would they handle the long fall from wealth and power to the bare necessities?

New York’s State Legislature is notorious for losing members to prison cells, often because of corruption, and we had a (very long) list of such cases from the past several years. I began writing to those former members, looking them up one by one in the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ inmate directory.

I’ve had enough doors slammed in my face to know that many of them wouldn’t want anything to do with a reporter. But I figured at least a few would be interested. These were politicians, after all. They had gotten accustomed to seeing their names in the headlines for years before they got in trouble. Some part of them might still crave public attention.

It was hard to know what to say. In the end, my letters simply asked if they would tell me about how their lives had changed. I included copies of stories I had done in the past, hoping to show that I was capable of trying to understand, as opposed to merely judging them for their crimes.

Four wrote back: Pedro Espada, Jr.; William F. Boyland, Jr.; Efraín González, Jr.; and Eric Stevenson. (I also called Shirley L. Huntley, who had been released, and she agreed to let me visit her.)

Mr. González had a friend from prison call me. One of the first things he told me was that Mr. González had been a kind of jailhouse politician, holding court in the law library and answering to the title of “senator.” That detail stayed in my mind. It became a recurring motif in my story.

Mr. González was about to be released, so, communicating through his friend on the outside, we arranged to meet after he returned home to the Bronx.

Mr. Stevenson wrote back, eager to talk — I had hit “the jackpot” with his story, he wrote — but later changed his mind after his lawyer learned about the interview. Mr. Boyland and Mr. Espada added me to their email lists; you can’t initiate email contact with inmates, but they can ask to email you through a system called CorrLinks. It’s sort of like the Gmail of the federal prison system, except that it looks like it was designed in 1992.

It took me a few days to get used to seeing the names of incarcerated ex-lawmakers appear in my inbox. But both seemed interested in talking, so I started reaching out to the wardens of each prison to set up official media visits.

The process was bureaucracy in full glory: It took more than two months just to establish contact, process my official requests, perform background checks on me and set the dates. I would be allowed to bring a notebook and a pen — nothing else.

In March, I drove to Loretto, Pa., a tiny hamlet in western Pennsylvania, to see Mr. Boyland. Leaving everything but my notebook, pen and ID in the car, I passed through a metal detector and several sets of locked doors before arriving at a spacious, brightly lit visitors’ room, sort of like the multipurpose room at my high school. A guard brought the prisoner in, and we talked for three hours, sitting across from each other at a round table. He was warm, candid and occasionally funny.

But whenever I asked him about his crimes or whether he had any remorse, the smile disappeared. He would insist on his innocence. The people at home still loved him and believed in him, he said, over and over.

It was the same with all of them: Reflective, thoughtful and raw conversations would turn stilted, canned and defiant as soon as I approached the subjects of Albany, indictments and convictions. It was as if their politician masks had suddenly snapped back into place. They protected a belief in their innocence as though it lay at the core of their identities.

Which, maybe, it did.

This dynamic was especially interesting with Mr. Espada. Everything I had read about him revealed him to be a bombastic opportunist with a gift for making every situation about himself — a stunt master and escape artist who was finally paying for his misdeeds. He was, in a word, preposterous.

I could tell from our first few interactions that I was in for the classic Espada experience. He said he wanted to talk to me to expose the injustices of the prison system; then he said he had changed his mind; then, after I pressed him, he changed it back again, saying he felt the cause of prison reform was too important for him to walk away from the interview.

Sure. Whatever gets you talking.

When I met him at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn, though, I was struck by how shrunken and almost deferential he seemed. The puffed-out chest had deflated. There seemed to be moments of introspection as he told me about how he had gone from considering himself to be above the rules to realizing he had to adapt and learn to accept his lot.

Then, of course, he started talking about prison reform, the “political revolution” he had led in Albany and his innocence. The old Espada came blustering back.

A few readers — including a former inmate who met Mr. Espada and several other former lawmakers in prison — have questioned whether I let my four subjects off too easy. I think, respectfully, that my story wasn’t about parsing whether they deserved their punishment or not, or whether they were guilty or not. They were all convicted of their crimes; I took that as a given. Now that they were being punished, I wanted to delve into the details of their day-to-day lives and learn how they were coping — emotionally, physically, spiritually — with their falls from grace.

They hurt a lot of people. Has prison helped them come to terms with that fact? The answer, it seems, is no.


