


Jennifer Rossmann, 41, has been a waitress at the Delta Diner in northwestern Wisconsin for 10 years.

Q. Did you have a waitressing background when you joined the diner?

A. No, but I did work at a doughnut shop for a year in Eugene, Ore. I was also a barista at a coffee shop in Duluth, Minn. I worked for a season at a salmon packing factory in Larsen Bay, Alaska. And I was an assistant manager at a Nature of Things, a chain retail store for nature lovers, also in Duluth.

What has kept you working at the Delta Diner for 10 years?

The owners, Nina and Todd Bucher, and the whole staff are like family to me. Our food is authentic diner food but with a creative flair. We don’t hand out menus; each waitress recites what’s being served that day to each table. We have a no-tipping policy; instead, we increased all menu items by 20 percent, allowing for a base adult wage of $15 an hour, many making more. Finally, it’s in the middle of nowhere, in the heart of the Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest, so you know people who come really want to be here. That happy mood is contagious.

What’s challenging about the job?

There are seven or eight of us working the busiest shifts at once in a 720-square-foot space, a restored 1940s diner, which includes seven booths, 16 counter stools and the hot grill area. So we have to move carefully and in sync with each other. Todd likes to compare it to a well-choreographed, well-rehearsed dance routine.

What would you be doing if you weren’t a waitress?

Actually, I work three-quarter time. I have been sculpting for 20 years; I work with all sorts of media, making figurines and caricatures, anything from little birds to wedding cake toppers. I call that business J’s Clay. I also draw cartoons. I am also a volunteer coach in discus and shot put at Northwestern High School in Maple, Wis.

How do you measure your success?

Success is how you define it. Though I would love to make $300,000 a year, if it messed with my quality of life and happiness, I would easily walk away. At work, it’s being part of something bigger than me; I feed off that energy. At home, it’s raising three great kids with my husband, Tom, and owning a home we built on 85 acres near the Brule River State Forest. Plus, we get to take advantage of all the outdoor recreation in this part of the country. These things are priceless to me.


