


Henry Threadgill, who on Monday was awarded this year’s Pulitzer Prize for music, is a composer and bandleader of intense, unyielding originality, nobody’s idea of a compromise. An alto saxophonist and flutist with a distinguished career in the post-1960s American avant-garde, he has amassed a body of work with its own functional metabolism, perpetually humming in a state of flux. He has certain affinities with, but no particular allegiance to, the jazz tradition.

“In for a Penny, in for a Pound,” Mr. Threadgill’s award-winning album, is a suite-like composition released on two discs by Pi Recordings last year. It’s an intricate and thoroughly enigmatic piece of music, but above all it stands as a showcase for his longtime flagship, Zooid. (The group takes its name from a biological term for a cell that is capable of movement independent of its parent organism.) From the first moments of the title track, which opens the album, you experience a distinctively slanted feeling, the byproduct of an unstable but carefully coordinated form of counterpoint. The music has formal rigor and forward pull, but it doesn’t provide an orienting framework, or any clear distinctions between composition and improvisation.

When Mr. Threadgill got the call on Monday that he had been awarded a Pulitzer, he was beyond surprised.

“I was speechless,” Mr. Threadgill, 72, said in a telephone interview. “I said, ‘What for?’”

Asked how he categorized his music, or where it falls on the jazz-avant-garde continuum, he demurred.

“I create what I create,” he said. “When I’m fortunate enough to create a work, that’s the end of it in my mind. Where it’s placed, where it goes, what people say about it, that is really not my department. I’m in Lingerie, I’m not in Hardware, you know?”

If you do call him a jazz composer, he is the third to be awarded a Pulitzer in the history of the awards; Wynton Marsalis was awarded for his oratorio “Blood on the Fields” in 1997 and Ornette Coleman was awarded for his album “Sound Grammar” in 2007.

Mr. Threadgill is a longtime resident of the East Village. He has been a musician of multidimensional interests since his youth in Chicago: He had formative experience in marching bands and with a traveling Church of God evangelist, before joining the first wave of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians. In the mid-1970s he formed a trio, Air, that was one of the most celebrated groups to emerge from that cohort. (His other groups have included the Henry Threadgill Sextet and Very Very Circus.)

Last year, in addition to releasing his own album, he took part in a 50th anniversary celebration for the association, presenting a new chamber piece and appearing on “Made in Chicago,” an ECM album featuring his fellow members Muhal Richard Abrams on piano, Roscoe Mitchell on saxophones and Jack DeJohnette on drums.

That’s a council of elders, with longstanding bonds between them. “In for a Penny, in for a Pound” puts Mr. Threadgill more in a position of authority, though he wields it lightly. The album features the extravagantly sensitive interplay among his band mates: Liberty Ellman on acoustic guitar, Jose Davila on trombone and tuba, Christopher Hoffman on cello and Elliot Humberto Kavee on drums. Zooid has been a working unit for more than 15 years, its rapport honed through extensive workshopping and rehearsals.

During a series of conversations in 2009, members of the ensemble described Mr. Threadgill’s methodology as intimidatingly complex but also deeply intuitive. He explained it as “a serial intervallic language” ruled partly by mathematical principles and inspired, obliquely, by the 20th-century composer Edgard Varèse. But part of the magic in the music is that its predetermined structures give way, unpredictably, to various sorts of spontaneous digression.

“For people who listen to jazz music in the traditional sense, it’s easier to follow the form if you know the piece,” Mr. Ellman said. “But Henry isn’t really concerned with that formality. In this music we have a lot of through-composed things, and we might play one section in a piece, and there might be room for a solo in that particular section, or there might be two or three solos before we go back to the written material. Every piece has a completely different form.”

Mr. Threadgill wrote four concerto-like movements for “In for a Penny, in for a Pound,” each designed to spotlight a member of Zooid. (Mr. Ellman’s is “Unoepic (for guitar).”) But each piece, and the album’s two other tracks, is as likely to feature digressions from someone other than the featured improviser. Mr. Threadgill is a voluble commentator even when he isn’t out front.

He happens to have another album out as of this month: “Old Locks and Irregular Verbs,” featuring the new group he calls Ensemble Double Up, whose members include Mr. Hoffman and Mr. Davila. Divided into four parts, it’s another statement of grave but wriggling purpose, just as easy to picture in Pulitzer contention. What that illustrates, among other things, is the abundance of Mr. Threadgill’s restless creative energy. Becoming a Pulitzer winner should be welcome validation for him, but it seems unlikely that he’ll be resting on any laurels.


