


“Figure out if the person is in your genetic range,” says John Di Domenico, a professional impersonator who has been playing Donald Trump for 12 years. Can you mimic the voice? Is there a resemblance, with the aid of wigs and makeup? If so, begin the research phase. Watch every video you can find. Listen to recorded interviews. Take detailed notes.

Concentrate first on your subject’s voice. Determine where in the body the sound originates. Is it low and gravelly or pushed up into the nose? Don’t let the person’s physicality distract you. “For a guy that big, Trump’s voice is high,” Di Domenico says. Study the jaw and lips. Professional actors open their mouths wide while speaking. Trump puckers his lips, squeezing words out. To mirror someone authentically, you’ll need to break down the vocal components and build them again inside your own mouth.

Learn the quirks of gesture, expression and posture. Until Trump announced his candidacy last June, he was just one of dozens of characters in Di Domenico’s repertoire (identifiable mostly by the phrase “You’re fired!”). Now nearly all his corporate clients want Trump at their conferences, trade shows and award ceremonies, and Di Domenico has become a scholar of slight shifts in the candidate’s body language and speech patterns. To really embody someone will take hundreds of hours of practice. “You have to build the character into your muscle memory,” Di Domenico says.

Sometimes it is looking the part that will keep you in character (Di Domenico has a manicure and eyebrow bleaching before appearances). Don’t get too comfortable. “Always go back and refresh with original material,” says Di Domenico, who checks CNN and Fox all day for Trump news. Still, don’t take yourself too seriously. “You have to be funny, that’s the bottom line,” he says.

Expect your source to infect your life in unexpected ways. Recently, Di Domen­ico’s brother told him his real voice is starting to sound nasally and Trump-like. “I’ve gotten a little more surly in my regular life,” Di Domenico says. “You have to be careful: A character can change you.”


