


PARIS — Asked if she noted a difference in security this year at the French Open, the Spanish star Garbiñe Muguruza chose to demonstrate by frisking herself thoroughly.

“I sense that there is more focus on it,” she said Friday shortly after the draw at the world’s premier clay-court tennis tournament.

The new level of scrutiny at Roland Garros is evident and understandable as France, still in a state of emergency, prepares for two months of sport that also present a major security headache.

The European soccer championship, from June 10 to July 10, will be the much bigger challenge, with its full stadiums and fan zones nationwide. But the French Open, nestled among the foliage and red clay on the fringes of the city’s 16th Arrondissement, could also be a target.

It begins Sunday with Novak Djokovic aiming to win the only Grand Slam singles title that he lacks and Serena Williams trying to tie Steffi Graf for the Open era record by winning her 22nd major singles title.

There are new checkpoints and policies and a much more visible police presence outside the stadium gates, with the security cordon clearly much wider.

“I think you have to have confidence in the professionals,” said Guy Forget, the new French Open tournament director. “For security questions, we are required to count on the professionals: the prefecture of police, the special forces. And we say, ‘What should we do? Give us the means. We want there to be as close to zero risk as possible.’ And we follow what they tell us to do to the letter.

“In our organization internally, we have security employees inside the stadium because security is not only the risk of an attack. It can be minor things, too. It is to protect the players, the public and all the populations here from the smallest danger. It was always the case, and today we know with the current political situation that the risks are greater, so we have taken much greater measures. And now we will cross our fingers and be as vigilant as possible.”

That Forget, a former French star, is now the tournament director is a reflection of the tumult in the last four months within the French Tennis Federation, which organizes the event. In February, Forget’s predecessor, Gilbert Ysern, was dismissed by the federation president Jean Gachassin and summarily escorted off the Roland Garros premises. Gachassin maintained that Ysern had mishandled the replacement of the French Davis Cup captain Arnaud Clement by Yannick Noah, and too often acted unilaterally.

Ysern has disputed those accusations, but Gachassin, the diminutive and ebullient former French rugby star whose final term will soon end, now has major problems of his own, including a police investigation into allegations that he sold French Open tickets that he received as president for personal gain. He has denied the charge through his legal representatives.

On May 3, the police searched the French Federation headquarters at Roland Garros. All this does not help the tournament’s expansion cause, which has required public support even if the work is to be largely financed by loans and the federation’s own revenue.

Security inside the stadium has also too often been a concern in recent years, with demonstrations and court intrusions disrupting some players’ concentration and sense of well-being. Last year, on opening day, a fan blithely stepped over a barrier and onto the main Philippe Chatrier Court to ask Roger Federer to pose for a photograph with him. Guards were slow to respond, and Federer, not generally one to call out tournament organizers, was not amused.

“Obviously, not one second I’m happy about it,” Federer said after the incident.

The timing of this year’s event has only increased the urgency about security. The French Open, which lasts 15 days and attracts crowds of more than 30,000 daily during the first week, will be the most significant and extended sporting event in Paris since the terrorist attacks in November that left 137 dead.

“I mean, that’s something I think a lot of the players wanted, as well, is a little bit more security,” Williams said Friday. “We’ll see. You know, we just want to be here. We want to do what we do. We just want to play tennis. We want to enjoy ourselves and just live our lives.”

Williams, still ranked No. 1 at age 34, has an apartment in Paris, and many other players also have a deep connection with the city and its inhabitants.

“They have gone through a lot,” said Bethanie Mattek-Sands, the reigning French Open women’s doubles champion with Lucie Safarova. “When we first heard about those attacks, it was one of those moments where you remember where you were, and you stop for a moment and think about it because it’s not somewhere in a land faraway. It’s the place where you go every year.

“Coming back, it’s something that is in the back in your mind. It’s something that didn’t happen long ago, and it’s something you can’t really predict. So as much as you don’t want to kind of live in fear of what could happen, you never know. And I hope that the French Open, like with the Olympics and other sports, brings people together. I’m still going to explore and love Paris as I have in years past.”

The back story is not all that has changed at Roland Garros this year. The backdrop is changing, too. The long-contentious extension project into the neighboring botanical gardens is still contentious, and construction of the new “greenhouse” court is blocked for now.

But work inside the existing site has continued apace, and where Court 7 once stood, there is now a large construction pit, hidden for the duration of the tournament by temporary pavilions and concession stands.

The iconic Place des Mousquetaires is also lacking musketeers, with the four statues of the four great French players of the 1920s and 1930s — Rene Lacoste, Jean Borotra, Henri Cochet and Jacques Brugnon — no longer in place, at least for the moment, to improve pedestrian flow during the renovation.

Roland Garros, overcrowded during the first week in the best of circumstances, could become even more of a scrum in 2016. But that would only be an annoyance. What matters most, of course, is that everyone emerges safe and sound from 15 days of watching forehands, backhands and long, sweeping slides in the terre battue.


