


When “Game of Thrones” returned to HBO on Sunday night, many viewers probably had to rely on the map in the opening sequence to reorient themselves in the sprawling fantasy world. What’s the name of that sandy place in the south with the snakes? Oh, right, Dorne.

The opening title sequence plays the very practical role of providing viewers the only guide through the physical landscape, not to mention the earworm so closely associated with the show. It’s one of several title sequences in recent years designed to be a significant part of how you process and remember a program — in other words, something you don’t want to fast-forward through.

“They can do things that the show itself isn’t necessarily capable of doing,” said Angus Wall, a co-founder of the design studio Elastic and the leader of the team that created the “Game of Thrones” opener. “They can sort of give you a broader sense of the world in which the show takes place.”

Elastic is also the firm responsible for several of the most memorable opening sequences on TV, including Netflix’s “Daredevil,” “True Detective” on HBO and “The Man in the High Castle” on Amazon. In addition to “Game of Thrones,” Mr. Wall has created the openers for “The Leftovers,” “Deadwood” and “Carnivàle.”

While “Game of Thrones” offers exposition in its opening, others in the current trend of slick, highly produced openers are more intended to establish a mood, said Lola Landekic, the managing editor of Art of the Title, a website focused on opening sequences. Think of the dripping, red sludge of “Daredevil,” or the brooding landscapes of the first season of “True Detective.” They’re aiming to walk you through a gateway, away from your normal life, she said.

“They’re really preparing you and giving you the feeling and tonality you need to enter that world,” Ms. Landekic said.

Mr. Wall said he believed the era of the elaborate opener was unlikely to continue indefinitely. Interest in title sequences tends to ebb and flow, with surges in the 1960s and 1990s, and a new one sparked largely by HBO and “The Sopranos.”

For “Game of Thrones,” the map concept grew out of the show’s original idea of having a crow fly from King’s Landing to Winterfell, two of the key locations.

Anticipating that viewers would have trouble keeping up with the action, Mr. Wall and his team designed interstitial scenes for the pilot that would move viewers from one location in Westeros to the next, much like the style of what ended up being the opening credits. The idea was to help viewers place where each scene was happening in the big, confusing world.

“It was awful, and it ended up disrupting the narrative rhythm,” he said, explaining why the scenes never made it to air.

But that highlighted viewers’ need for some kind of legend to understand the layout of the world, to remind them this wasn’t happening on Earth, Mr. Wall said. In the books, readers could always turn to an included map. Viewers had no such anchor.

So a team of 25 to 30 people worked on creating the map for the first season. It features a level of detail Mr. Wall said most viewers would never notice, with cogs and gears mostly under the surface that you can see only if you’re looking in small gaps. Now a team of five or six people works on updating the map before each season, he said.


