


The Biennale des Antiquaires, known as the grand dame of antique fairs and the world’s major showcase for haute joaillerie, will have a very different feel when the 28th edition opens in September at the Grand Palais in Paris.

Eleven of the 14 jewelry houses that exhibited in 2014, including the luxury giants Cartier, Van Cleef & Arpels and Bulgari, will not be participating — decisions that some observers say stem from organizational changes that were made to reduce the jewelers’ presence in the wake of antique dealers’ complaints.

At press time, the Syndicat National des Antiquaires, which runs the fair, said through a spokeswoman that the organization was preparing to confirm additional exhibitors, once negotiations were completed. Both David Morris, which exhibited in 2014, and David Webb, which would be exhibiting for the first time, confirmed that they were still negotiating with the organizers.

On April 13 the Syndicat released an initial list of 112 exhibitors: It included antique dealers that sell jewelry, but no contemporary jewelers.

Cartier, which had the fair’s largest stand in 2014 and has been associated with the Biennale since 1964, was the first jeweler to announce its withdrawal, doing so in early February.

“Cartier has made the decision not to participate in the next Biennale des Antiquaires due to new technical measures adopted by its organizers,” the company’s statement said, referring specifically to “the request to drastically reduce the maximum surface area of the stand.”

Cartier was followed by two other Richemont-owned brands, Van Cleef and Giampiero Bodino, while brands based in the Place Vendôme in Paris, such as Boucheron and Alexandre Reza, also pulled out. Graff Diamonds is the most recent house to announce its departure.

Increasing competition from international art fairs claimed at least one former participant. A spokeswoman for the Hong Kong jeweler Wallace Chan, who exhibited at the Biennale in 2012 and 2014, confirmed that this year the designer had decided to show at the European Fine Art Fair, known as Tefaf, in the Netherlands in March and the Masterpiece fair in London in late June and early July.

But the Biennale will have some high jewelry representation. Fawaz Gruosi, founder and chief executive of the Swiss company De Grisogono, confirmed that the company would return to the Biennale this year. (Its only previous outing was in 2008.)

As for the other jewelers’ departures, he said, “It’s even better for us. It is an opportunity to make new contacts and start long-term relationships.”

And making her debut on the international fair scene will be the Taiwan-born jeweler Cindy Chao, who described the Biennale as “the highest podium for fine jewelry in the world.” She added that she planned an ambitious presentation. “I want my stand to leave a strong impact in people’s mind.”

Ms. Chao and other exhibitors noted that they had not received much information about the event from the Syndicat.

Last month the organization announced it was taking back responsibility for relations with Biennale exhibitors and other professional bodies from Reed Exhibitions, a global events company, less than a year after Reed’s appointment to manage the event. Reed will continue, however, to work with the Grand Palais and private collectors.

One question that has been widely discussed by jewelry customers and fans is, where the departing houses will show the collections they have long been working on for the Biennale?

The answer for many appears to be the twice-yearly couture week in Paris, which has had a haute joaillerie component pitched to the press and private clients in recent years (but it generally has not been a focus during Biennale years). Bulgari, for example, said it would present an invitation-only show on July 5, during couture, at the Italian Embassy in Paris.

Yet Lee Siegelson, the New York-based antique jewelry dealer who will make his third Biennale appearance, noted that the fair remained a special opportunity to exhibit jewelry at the Grand Palais, where the term Art Deco was coined to describe the extraordinary creations by the likes of Cartier at the 1925 Paris Exhibition. “There’s no other space like it in the world,” he said.


