


J. Michael Pearson, the former chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International who departed in early May during a series of investigations into the company’s business practices, will receive a $9 million severance payment and continue working as a consultant through 2017, Valeant said Tuesday.

The company, as well as a major investor, William A. Ackman, have taken steps to distance themselves from Mr. Pearson and signal that the company was making a fresh start. But under the agreement, Mr. Pearson will also receive more than $83,000 a month through the end of this year and $15,000 monthly in 2017, plus expenses and health insurance benefits, to help the company make the transition to a new chief executive and handle the host of legal investigations.

He will also be eligible for bonuses tied to the company’s performance in 2016 before May 2, when he left the company.

In recent months, Valeant shook up its board and added a new chief executive, Joseph C. Papa. Mr. Ackman, whose firm Pershing Square Capital Management is a major investor, took a seat on the board and pledged that he would steer the company away from its reliance on the drastic price increases that once drove profits but drew outrage from patients, doctors and members of Congress.

Mr. Pearson, a former consultant for McKinsey, arrived at Valeant in 2008 and transformed the company’s business model into one based on acquiring companies, slashing costs and sharply raising drug prices. His approach drew accolades from Wall Street, including some from Mr. Ackman, and helped drive the stock past $260 as recently as last summer. But the stock has plunged since then among a series of inquires into Valeant’s pricing and accounting practices as well as its relationship with a mail-order company, Philidor. It also has about $30 billion in debt.

The company now faces investigations from Congress, United States attorneys in New York and Massachusetts, and the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The company also said Tuesday that it planned to announce its first-quarter results on June 7.


