


Alex Ovechkin scored twice, Braden Holtby had 31 saves, and the Washington Capitals moved one game closer to a sweep in their first-round playoff series with a 6-1 win over the host Philadelphia Flyers on Monday night.

The Capitals lead a series by three games to none for the first time in team history. Game 4 will be Wednesday night in Philadelphia.

Ovechkin broke a tie with his 38th postseason goal, and Holtby made the lead stand with his third straight sensational effort in the series. The Capitals scored five power-play goals, four in the third period.

The Flyers lost in their first home game since their co-founder Ed Snider’s death last week. Michael Raffl scored 57 seconds into the game and sent a crowd already rocking after an emotional pregame tribute into a frenzy.

The Flyers dedicated their postseason run to Snider, who died after a two-year battle with cancer.

Raffl knocked in the first shot of the game off Brandon Manning’s attempt from the point.

The Flyers had motivation, home ice and a bit of history on their side — Washington had been 0-7 in Game 3s in best-of-seven playoff series when leading, 2-0.

But this season’s Capitals had the best record in the N.H.L. and had outplayed the Flyers in the first two games. Once the crowd and the Flyers settled down, the Capitals got going and looked every bit as dominant as they had all season.

Marcus Johansson tied the game, 1-1, in the first, beating Steve Mason for his first career postseason goal on a power play.

Mason gave up two easy goals that hushed the home crowd.

Ovechkin bounced over the boards and snapped a long-distance wrist shot from above the circle past Mason. That gave Ovechkin 38 goals and 34 assists to match Dale Hunter for first place on Washington’s career playoff points list with 72.

On a third-period power play, Justin Williams’s shot off the boards settled near Mason, who pawed at the puck and watched it trickle away. Evgeny Kuznetsov pounced and pounded it into the net for a 3-1 lead on just 18 shots.

John Carlson, Ovechkin and Jay Beagle made it 6-1, also scoring power-play goals in the third. The Capitals have eight in the series.

There were reminders of Snider all around Wells Fargo Center.

The Flyers hung a banner outside the arena with Snider’s picture and the words “A Flyer Forever.” His silhouette was inside the Flyers’ logo for a playoff T-shirt giveaway, and some fans left flowers and cards at a temporary memorial next to the team flag.

WILD 5, STARS 3 Given a pair of quick goals by Patrick Sharp, Dallas pushed the cruise-control button.

Jason Pominville and Minnesota raced past them and surged back into the series.

Pominville scored twice and had an assist for the host Wild, and Minnesota roared back from an early two-goal deficit for a victory that sliced the Stars’ advantage in the Western Conference quarterfinals to 2-1.

Pominville scored with 47 seconds left in the second period to give the Wild their first postseason lead in seven games, a span of nearly 400 minutes, and added an empty-netter in the closing minutes.

Chris Porter put the Wild on the board in the final minute of the first period for their first even-strength goal of the series. Erik Haula added a goal and an assist, Mikko Koivu scored on a power play in the third period and the Wild stopped a seven-game losing streak that started on March 31.

“We threw the kitchen sink at them,” Haula said.

Game 4 is in Minnesota on Wednesday night.

KINGS 2, SHARKS 1 Tanner Pearson scored 3:47 into overtime and Los Angeles bounced back from a pair of series-opening losses at home to beat San Jose in Game 3 in the first round.

Anze Kopitar added a power-play goal, Jonathan Quick made 29 saves and Los Angeles killed two third-period penalties to cut San Jose’s lead in the series to 2-1. The Kings rallied from a 3-0 series deficit to beat the Sharks in the first round two years ago on the way to their second Stanley Cup title.

Game 4 is Wednesday night in San Jose.

Joe Thornton scored 30 seconds into the game for the Sharks, but San Jose could not get anything else by Quick as their regular-season pattern of road dominance and home struggles extended to the playoffs. The Sharks led the N.H.L. with 28 road wins in the regular season and added two to start this series. But San Jose has lost 24 of 42 home games for the worst record on home ice of any playoff team.


