


Ask The Times, a Times Insider feature, draws on New York Times staff members’ expertise to answer questions about current events, science, sports, culture and whatever else is making headlines.

A reader asks: “I’ve noticed that when referring to Donald Trump, The Times usually uses his middle initial, J. I’ve also noticed that this is not/was not the case for the other candidates, like Hillary [Rodham omitted] Clinton and John [Richard omitted] Kasich. So why the initial for Mr. Trump?”

Charles V. Bagli, a Metro reporter who writes about the intersection of politics and real estate — and has covered Mr. Trump for years — responds.

“I don’t care what the newspapers say about me as long as they spell my name right.”

Words to live by for many politicians, businessmen, authors and con artists, even if no one knows whether this bit of insight originally came from P.T. Barnum, Mae West, George M. Cohan or someone else.

But which of the potentially many versions of a person’s name does a newspaper like The Times choose to use when it refers to an individual in a story?

The name of that brash kid from Queens first appeared in The Times on Jan. 28, 1973, in a story about his father, Fred C. Trump. He was simply, “Donald Trump.”

His middle initial premiered in another story 10 months later. Both versions were in play for a couple of months, before The Times settled on: “Donald J. Trump.”

Mr. Trump, whose business has largely become his name, long ago perfected a signature with a distinctive, dense string of vertical lines and a machine-like precision, if not legibility, seeming to spell out Donald J. Trump. (The J. stands for John.)

Mr. Trump has on rare occasions resorted to the diminutive “Donald,” as he did in a 1998 letter, when he asked former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for a favor.

The Gray Lady, of course, has rules about this sort of thing, although it does not appear that The Times’s editors have been plagued by that hobgoblin of little minds — consistency.

“In the good old days, the saying was that Ever E. Body got a middle initial in The Times,” explains the paper’s chief copy editor, Jill (no middle initial) Taylor. “But that blanket practice has given way to preference.”

So the other presumptive nominee for president made her first appearance in The Times as Hillary Rodham Clinton, in 1984. Depending on the article, she appeared as either Hillary Clinton or Hillary Rodham Clinton for many years, before ultimately choosing the latter.

Her insistence on using three names may have represented an attempt to assert a separate identity from that of her husband. By the same token, her more recent request that we jettison Rodham may have been an attempt to reassert her connection to her popular husband.

“Hillary did in fact use Rodham for the longest,” Ms. Taylor notes, “but last fall she confirmed to several news outlets that she preferred to be, simply, Hillary Clinton.

“And it was her choice to be Mrs. rather than Ms., a policy that many readers assume we imposed on her,” Ms. Taylor adds, referring to an option offered to all women who are quoted in The Times. “We did not.”

Bernie Sanders, on the other hand, has been “Bernie Sanders” since a Times story in 1981 about the new, Socialist mayor of Burlington, Vt.

Have a question for Ask The Times? Submit it using the form below.


