


For a problem to gain attention, does it need a name and a face?

In at least two areas of American life — policing and politics — that question seems to be central to the debate.

Consider the dire state of policing and race relations in the United States. Much of the American intelligentsia and political class would probably say black men are policed too much. In New York, the police have moved away from stop-and-frisk practices. In Congress, a bipartisan coalition is working on legislation to scale back the prison population boom that disproportionately locks up black men. Across the nation, the Black Lives Matter movement has drawn attention to police shootings of unarmed black men.

Yet over-policing is only one way of looking at the story. “Ghettoside,” a deep piece of reportage by Jill Leovy, who for years covered homicides for The Los Angeles Times, draws attention to the flip side, the failure to investigate and prosecute the murders of black men — most of them not by police officers, many of them at the hands of other black men.

Ms. Leovy’s claim is, she admits, “not an easy argument to make in these times”: that black men are far more often killed by police neglect than by police action — a problem of under-policing, not over-policing.

When a police officer shoots a young black man, and cameras record it and the world sees, the problem has a face. Justice has a focus. There is a demand that the officer be punished.

But when a young black man kills another in South Los Angeles, and cameras don’t record it, the case languishes unsolved; the problem has no face. We are not sure where to focus, or what to demand, or whom to punish. These are the nameless, faceless crimes.

Some of the officers, Ms. Leovy writes, have a cruel shorthand for the kind of case that has neither suspect nor story: N.H.I., for No Human Involved.

One of the notions underpinning Ms. Leovy’s book is that problems without a face, like infernos without a demon, are harder to process, harder to get mad about, and therefore harder to change.

Assuming the presidential race becomes a head-to-head contest between Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump, this notion will get another test.

It is difficult and probably oversimplistic to put a single face on many of the country’s biggest challenges. These include the slowing of social mobility, the dislocations of trade in a globalized world and the immigration system. These are messy problems in a messy world. They have their causes, but there are too many of them, too many faces to bring into focus.

Mrs. Clinton’s instinct has been to treat messy, complex systems as messy, complex systems. Her rival in the Democratic race, Bernie Sanders, gives at least some of these problems a name and a face: They are embodied by Wall Street bankers. It is a powerful, simple message that Mrs. Clinton has had mixed success countering.

Mrs. Clinton would face a similar challenge — albeit taken to alternative extremes — by Mr. Trump, who tends to personalize any system he encounters. He gives a name to every problem and puts a face on every demon. For instance, he tries to simplify the problem with the immigration system by giving it the face of a Mexican rapist. He tries to personalize trade policy by talking of Chinese bulk manufacturers “killing us.”

Even his tendency to recast activities of state — the passage of legislation, the conduct of diplomacy — as deal making is itself a personalizing tendency, a way of transforming an abstract problem into a person-to-person contest. His propositions may seem simplistic generalizations, but they are easy to understand and they grab attention.

In an election marked by much scapegoat-seeking anger, voters could soon be facing a stark choice: Will they favor a candidate who speaks of the nation as a system of problems without a face, like a complicated engine needing dozens of intricate repairs?

Or will they favor a candidate who seems to instinctively avoid the No Human Involved problem, by slapping a suspect, any suspect, onto every crime?


