


The Donald J. Trump show just got picked up for the fall.

With his win in the Indiana primary Tuesday night and the suspension of Ted Cruz’s campaign, Mr. Trump, the former “Apprentice” host, became the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. With that came the hint that he may retool his programming for the coming season.

Making the transition from a primary to a general election is like moving from cable to a major network. In a primary, you’re niche-casting to intense fans. In November, there are more rewards for getting a lot of people to like you a little bit. Not everyone can scale up successfully.

In his victory-night remarks, Mr. Trump flashed, as he has before, a new approach. He spoke with more restraint, which for him meant not referencing anyone as “Lyin’” or telling us how much higher the Mexican border wall just got.

Whereas, after the Michigan and Mississippi primaries, he gave remarks surrounded by heaps of self-branded steak and wine, he was now surrounded by his slickly coifed, benignly smiling wife and children. Mr. Trump even went so far as to compliment his opponent as “one hell of a tough competitor.” It was less a QVC pitch, more a glossily aspirational portrait, like a classier reality show on Bravo.

Of course, that same morning, Mr. Trump had gone on “Fox & Friends” and cited a National Enquirer article that accused Mr. Cruz’s father of having associated with Lee Harvey Oswald. But that was the morning! Ages ago! Bygones, right?

Whether Mr. Trump’s campaign and presentation are truly ready to change, we’ll see. (The next day, Mr. Trump was on “Good Morning America,” still defending The Enquirer’s Oswald story.)

But it was not only Mr. Trump pivoting Tuesday night. With the possibility of a contested Republican convention gone, the news networks were facing a general election that could be unpredictable, and in which the usual dynamics and rules of behavior could be scrambled.

Fox News, for instance, will now cover a Republican nominee who’s friendly with many of its conservative hosts — and who has been complimented by the big boss, Rupert Murdoch — but who has repeatedly assailed the channel’s rising star, Megyn Kelly. If there’s post-primary awkwardness in the Republican Party, Fox may both cover it and live it.

And while the general election is half a year off, the early polls — most of which have the likely Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, leading considerably — could frustrate TV’s desire for a nail-biter. Anything can change, but if the race proves lopsided, it could be tempting to seize on any data point that hints otherwise.

On MSNBC, the Republican strategist Steve Schmidt said that Mr. Trump’s win — in spite of, or because of, talk that would kill a normal political career — upended not just the party establishment but the umpire role of the press. “The days of the media policing what’s a negative comment, what’s fair, what’s a low blow, what’s in bounds — it’s all over,” he said.

Maybe, although having a candidate with a shall-we-say open attitude to rumors and conspiracy theories might also give us more aggressive fact-checking than the usual “both sides do it” default. After Mr. Trump’s Oswald comments, CNN’s Jake Tapper excoriated the candidate for making an unfounded, “ridiculous and, frankly, shameful” charge.

“That’s not an anti-Trump position or a pro-Cruz position,” Mr. Tapper said. “It’s a pro-truth position.”

It was the kind of straight talk that our political culture actually could use more of, but it remains relatively rare in TV news. Still, there was a sense in the night’s coverage that, however things play out in November, something in the culture had already shifted.

Reveling in his Indiana success, Mr. Trump thanked not any local politician for endorsing him, but the former Indiana basketball coach Bobby Knight. Here were the sources of power and authority in this primary, and maybe America as a whole: sports, pop culture, celebrity, social media.

We’d seen it coming for months, but Tuesday it was immediately real. An ’80s pop-culture figure and reality-show host was about to become the Republican nominee; the man who once owned the Miss Universe pageant would be wearing the tiara in Cleveland.

It’s not as if no one has come to head a major-party ticket from outside politics, of course. But the last person to do so, Gen. Dwight Eisenhower, did it by defeating the Nazis in the European theater. Mr. Trump did it by firing Gary Busey on NBC.


