


CLEVELAND, Miss. — The multicultural high school band kicked off a punchy “Pomp and Circumstance” as the 2016 graduates of Cleveland High School marched across the gymnasium. They were a near-equal mix of black and white students, with the occasional Nguyen, Patel or Rojas sprinkled among them.

Here in the heart of the Mississippi Delta — where whites once howled over federal desegregation orders, ignored them for years, then largely abandoned their public schools — it seemed, in many ways, a rare scene of racial redemption. The school is 45 percent black and 47 percent white. A white co-valedictorian spoke, followed by a black one, Jasmine Shepard, who argued that their educational experience had been enhanced by the diversity.

“We are better prepared for the world because of it,” Ms. Shepard said.

But the ceremony also came days after a federal judge ruled, in a case that has dragged on for a half-century, that Cleveland High is part of a school district that has, in other ways, “deprived generations of students of the constitutionally guaranteed right of an integrated education.” The town’s other high school, East Side High, is virtually all black, as segregated as the schools before the Supreme Court’s 1954 ruling declaring school segregation illegal.

If the judge’s ruling stands, Cleveland High, as Ms. Shepard and her classmates knew it, may soon be no more.

At a time when the percentage of the nation’s schools that are overwhelmingly populated by the poor and racial minorities is climbing, Cleveland is wrestling with a quandary quite different from one it faced during the days of legal segregation: Should it fight to maintain the modicum of integration it has achieved, which has kept whites in the district while leaving many blacks in all-black schools? Or should it accept the federal government’s more vigorous efforts to pursue something akin to full integration?

Mississippi’s troubled history is still reflected in Cleveland’s geographic reality. A north-south railroad bed separates the predominantly African-American east side from the west, which is still considered the “white” side. Yet the races in this city of 12,000 people work and socialize together in ways unimaginable decades ago. The school superintendent is African-American. So is the city manager. As in much of the Delta, the region’s near-mythic African-American practitioners of the blues are considered its most vaunted figures.

But reactions to the school decision break down, to a large degree, along racial lines. Many African-Americans are optimistic that the May 13 ruling will go even further in erasing what is left of the old racial divisions by forcing Cleveland High, the west side’s all-white school during the days of de jure segregation, to consolidate with East Side High.

Valencia Brown, 45, a teacher’s assistant who has two children who graduated from East Side High, considers a consolidation plan that was formulated by the Justice Department to be “the big change that would bring us all together.”

But many whites fear that a more aggressive desegregation effort will spoil the accommodation the district has developed over the years while under pressure from the federal courts. It has allowed whites to attend their traditionally white school while giving the same opportunity to blacks who also wish to attend.

Dismantling that system, they say, would prompt whites here to do what they have done in so many other Delta cities: decamp en masse for private schools, or move away. This federal “desegregation,” they argue, would really mean the resegregation that has happened in other impoverished Delta communities nearby.

Will Tierce, a white parent who attended the May 20 graduation ceremony to hear his son play in the school band, said there was “already talk” among some white parents about pulling out. He said he was not one of them; he planned to keep his child in the system no matter what.

“But my concern is that it’s going to happen,” said Mr. Tierce, 58, who remembers being abruptly pulled out of his public middle school in Indianola, Miss., with the rest of the white students when integration came in the late 1960s. “It’s like a snowball when it starts. And then it’s over.”

The 96-page ruling, by Judge Debra M. Brown of United States District Court in Greenville, also calls for the merger of two Cleveland middle schools that follow the same pattern as the high schools. The Cleveland School District, which oversees roughly 3,700 students in 10 schools, is considering whether to appeal.

The case is one of 177 school desegregation cases in which the Department of Justice is currently a plaintiff — a reflection of the continuing struggle to comply with Brown v. Board of Education 62 years after the Supreme Court unanimously declared in that case that separate educational facilities for the races were “inherently unequal.”

The ruling here also comes amid fears of a new wave of school resegregation decades after the searing and sometimes violent debates over federal efforts to engineer racial balance in public education. An April report by the Government Accountability Office showed a growth in the percentage of public schools with large numbers of “poor and black or Hispanic students” from 2000-1 to 2013-14.

The experiences elsewhere further frustrate the supporters of Cleveland’s status quo. During and after graduation week, parents and students on the west side were eager to show a reporter their cellphones, swiping through photo galleries of smiling students of different races as they learned and played together.

“We feel like it’s not very segregated at all,” said Mohamad Sharabatee, 17, a graduating Cleveland High senior and a Palestinian-American. “We feel like every student has their own choice to go to whatever school they want.”

Gary Gainspoletti, 64, a city alderman, said it was “disgusting” that the federal government was forcing a consolidation plan that resulted in white flight in so many other Delta towns.

“They repeatedly do something when it repeatedly, consistently creates negative consequences,” he said.

The lawsuit was filed in 1965 by a group of black residents frustrated by the fact that the schools in Bolivar County, which includes Cleveland, remained segregated more than a decade after the Brown decision. In 1969, a judge assigned each high school an attendance zone on its side of the tracks. Crucially, he also allowed children who were in the racial majority in any school to attend a school where they would be a minority. Black enrollment at Cleveland High increased slowly but steadily.

In 2013, a federal judge, Glen H. Davidson, abolished the attendance zones and allowed all students to choose their high school or middle school. But while some black students crossed the tracks, no whites were enrolling in the east-side schools despite numerous efforts to entice them.

The school district has argued that its open enrollment system is constitutional. But Judge Brown determined that the all-black composition of east-side schools was “a vestige of discrimination.” She rejected two plans proposed by the district that would have averted or postponed school consolidation.

The district is about two-thirds black. Its lawyers have submitted research from Christine H. Rossell, a political scientist at Boston University, that shows that in school districts that are more than 35 percent minority, there is significant loss of white enrollment if a “mandatory reassignment plan” like school consolidation is put in place.

“We’re hoping that doesn’t happen in Cleveland,” said Jamie Jacks, the school district’s lawyer.

No one is sure how intense the white flight will be if the ruling stands. Many whites in the system may not have the means to pay for private school. Blacks and whites alike note that students have been learning side by side for decades now; many students at both high schools take buses to the rival school for classes not offered on their campus.

The Justice Department’s plan calls for rebranding the new consolidated high school and middle school, and there are a number of residents here, both black and white, who are concerned about losing traditions. The separate homecoming celebrations, and the football rivalry between the Cleveland High Wildcats and East Side Trojans, are deeply embedded in the city’s social fabric. ”Home of a Trojan FAN!!!” exclaims a sign that adorns some east-side yards. “Never Say Die Even in the Face of Defeat.”

Others are worried about lost opportunities. Tish Givens, 45, a white parent, said she would keep her children in the school system, but was concerned that one school would mean fewer opportunities for students to earn spots on sports teams, or play in the band.

But there is also lingering concern, among many African-Americans, that the current setup allows whites to stealthily work the system to their advantage.

“Separate will never be equal,” said Sherry Shepard, 53, the mother of Cleveland High’s black co-valedictorian. In Mississippi, she said, when there is a choice between sending resources to black children or white children, “the black children will lose out every time.”

Court documents and state accountability ratings suggest relative parity between the schools, at least in recent years. Per-pupil spending tends to be higher at East Side than at Cleveland High, and East Side, in 2014, earned a higher state rating than its crosstown rival. That year the state gave both middle schools a grade of D.

Some feel that without a change, deeply held suspicions are likely to linger.

A few days after graduation, Ms. Shepard, in an email, contended that her daughter had been “forced” to share the valedictorian spot with a white student as part of a “cover-up.” (Ms. Jacks, the school district attorney, said the two students’ grade point averages were the same.)

“I feel that race has everything to do with this debacle!” Ms. Shepard wrote.

But would a change in the status quo lead to progress or turmoil? Saul Brown, 50, a black resident, contemplated the possibilities on a warm, quiet weeknight in front of an east-side grocery store.

Mr. Brown graduated from East Side High, and a son is enrolled there now. In general, he said, he was pleased with the system in place now. “We done worked it out ourselves,” he said. “By messing with it, they’re going to pull off all kinds of scabs.”


