


FRONT PAGE

An article on Saturday about a split on social issues between urban and rural parts of the South misstated the number of times that Houston has elected an openly gay mayor. It is three times, not two.

NATIONAL

An Associated Press report in the National Briefing column on Friday about a recommendation that Leslie Van Houten, a former Charles Manson follower, be paroled, omitted, in some editions, a step in the parole process and misstated the number of times she has appeared before a parole board. The recommendation goes to Gov. Jerry Brown if it is upheld after administrative review by the parole board; it does not immediately go to Mr. Brown. And Ms. Van Houten has had 20 parole hearings, not 21.

•

An article on Sunday about David Gowan, the speaker of the Arizona House, referred incorrectly in some editions to the location of Pinal County where Paul Babeu, a rival of Mr. Gowan’s for the United States House, is sheriff. It is near — not along — the Mexican border. The article also misstated the year in which Representative Ann Kirkpatrick, who is vacating her United States House seat, defeated Andy Tobin, a former Arizona House speaker. It was 2014, not 2012.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on April 8 about a supporter of Mayor Bill de Blasio who began a 15-day jail sentence misstated the charges on which he was convicted. The supporter, Ari Noe, was found guilty of third degree sexual abuse and attempted forcible touching, not forcible touching.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on the DealBook page on April 6 about an activist campaign by the American asset manager BlackRock against the G-Resources Group, a Hong Kong company, misstated the timing of a recommendation by the proxy advisory firm Glass Lewis against a proposal by G-Resources to sell a gold mine. Glass Lewis issued its recommendation before — not after — BlackRock campaigned against the deal.

•

The Your Money column on Saturday, about the difficulty in getting a refund of the airline baggage check fee when the luggage goes missing, misstated the rate of mishandled bags in 1990. It was 6.84 per 1,000 pieces of checked luggage, not 6.24.

SPORTS

An article in some editions on Sunday about the Yankees’ 3-2 loss to the Seattle Mariners misidentified the Yankees player who made a heady defensive play in the fifth inning by throwing out Luis Sardinas at third base after he rounded the bag. The play was made by shortstop Didi Gregorius, not by second baseman Starlin Castro.

WEEKEND

An art review on Friday about “Pergamon and the Hellenistic Kingdoms of the Ancient World,” at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, misidentified the institution from which the “Dying Gaul” sculpture is on loan. It is from the National Archaeological Museum in Naples, not the Capitoline Museums in Rome. The review also misstated part of the title of another sculpture, of a child pulling a thorn from his foot. It is “Lo Spinario,” not “Il Spinario.”

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


