


An arts charity whose executive director was attacked with lye after she began investigating missing money shut down suddenly on Wednesday.

The charity, Healing Arts Initiative, based in Queens, provided arts performances and workshops for more than 350,000 disabled, poor and older New Yorkers annually. Its board said on Wednesday that Healing Arts was months behind on rent and other payments and that it expected to declare bankruptcy.

Founded in 1969, the organization had been in turmoil for months.

Shortly after being hired last summer, the director, D. Alexandra Dyer, was disfigured in an attack that led to three arrests and the exposure of what prosecutors said was a $750,000 embezzlement scheme.

In April, Ms. Dyer sued the board on behalf of the charity itself, claiming that the board’s negligence had enabled the thefts. Last week, the board fired Ms. Dyer and her chief financial officer, Frank Williams.

The board said on Wednesday through a spokesman, Timothy Gilles, that expenses for program, payroll and administration had exceeded revenue for many months but that the board did not know the extent of the problem until this week because Ms. Dyer and Mr. Williams had withheld “crucial financial information.”

Ms. Dyer and Mr. Williams said that they supplied all possible information and that the board ignored complaints about malfeasance for years.

“If the board thinks that by firing Alexandra Dyer, who uncovered the thefts, and by putting H.A.I. into bankruptcy, they will thwart the investigation into their incompetence, they are sadly mistaken,” Ronald G. Russo, a lawyer for Ms. Dyer, said.

Mr. Williams said that as recently as last month, the chairman of the board, D. Leslie Winter, insisted that $100,000 from city contracts that should have gone to pay performers be used instead to pay off a loan from a small-business development organization of which Mr. Winter is president. Mr. Winter said, through Mr. Gilles, that he did not and would not issue any such instruction.

The state attorney general’s office said it was monitoring Healing Arts.

Mr. Gilles said, “We are working with the attorney general to understand what happened.”

A social worker for a man who participated in the charity’s art studio for the mentally ill said her client was saddened by the news.

“He’s devastated to lose his peer group and all the opportunities he had for making his art and sharing it with the world in gallery settings,” the social worker, Alexis Carter, said.


