


The British have been warned many times over.

The International Monetary Fund; the Bank of England; Britain’s Treasury; David Cameron, the country’s prime minister; top bankers like Jamie Dimon; scores of economists; and even Benedict Cumberbatch and Keira Knightley have said that a vote to leave the European Union would hurt the British economy.

Yet the warnings so far have not worked. A stream of recent opinion polls suggests that Britons will vote Thursday to leave the European Union. But the polls were wrong in Britain’s general election last year, and betting markets are saying there is a 64 percent chance that Britain will vote to stay.

What is clear is that the gloomy forecasts of economic pain have not resonated with voters. That’s partly because the referendum has mostly become about national sovereignty and curbing immigration. A country in the European Union has little control over the movement of people between other countries in the union. The British have long been concerned about this freedom, and the “leave” campaign has focused on those worries.

Still, the extent to which the economic question has taken a back seat is surprising.

True, voters are sometimes willing to accept some economic pain to achieve other goals they consider important. A stark example: In the lead-up to the Iraq war that began in 2003, most people said they expected the economy to suffer even as they strongly supported going to war.

A not-insignificant proportion of the British voters who support leaving the European Union expect significant economic pain if it were to occur. A recent poll from ComRes found that 21 percent of “leave” voters thought a recession fairly likely, and 5 percent very likely.

Over all, 49 percent of respondents said a recession was likely, and 48 percent said unlikely. That suggests there was enough economic fear circulating to benefit the “remain” camp.

Still, other polls suggest the British people are not particularly nervous about the economic impact. In a recent YouGov poll, 37 percent of people said Britain would be worse off if it left the E.U., while 22 percent said the country would be better off. But 26 percent said it would make no difference to the economy. In other words, almost half the respondents thought the economy would be better or no different. (In this poll, 15 percent were “don’t knows.”)

If British voters do feel unfazed, it’s understandable. The country’s economy has done relatively well in recent years. Unemployment is low, and the share of the working-age population with jobs is at record levels.

Also, British business owners and executives, especially those at smaller companies, are mostly unworried by the prospect of leaving the European Union, according to a recent survey of 3,394 firms. Nearly 40 percent said Brexit would make no difference to the economy, and another 25 percent said it would be a positive development.

Certainly, there appear to be big contradictions in the minds of the “leave” camp when it comes to economic questions. Britain relies heavily on immigrants, so restricting immigration could hurt the economy. And leaving the European Union might also reduce British companies’ access to an enormous trade area.

But maybe voters do not expect strict curbs on immigration if Britain leaves the E.U. A survey from Ipsos Mori this week, which attempted to measure conviction levels for an opinion and outcomes, suggested that “leave” voters are not strongly convinced that a British exit would actually lead to lower immigration. It’s also possible that some of the “leave” voters just want more control over immigration rather than actually using that control to slash the number of migrants. The polls offered no clarity on that.

But what about Brexit’s threat to trade? Voters may simply find it hard to gauge the importance of trade agreements. Or they may believe that the European Union would seek to maintain most of the current trade arrangements, rather than taking a sharply retaliatory line. That’s not a crazy expectation.

A lot is still in flux, especially because of the murder of Jo Cox, a member of Parliament who supported staying in. Both sides of the issue have suspended their campaigns. Despite the strong economy, it is always possible voters may begin to fear economic consequences of Brexit in these final days of the campaign, leading to a victory for the “remain” camp. A big stock market plunge would provide a jolt. There are five trading days left until the Brexit polls close.


