


On a cloud-free day, just as the sun is rising and dew drops cling to blades of grass, go out onto your lawn.

Turn your back to the sun.

Now, look at your shadow. A dazzling white light will glow like a halo around your head.

This optical phenomenon is known as heiligenschein, which is German for “holy light” or “saintly appearance.” And early in the morning, when the air is moist and the temperature is still cool enough to prevent dew from quickly evaporating — about 55 to 70 degrees Fahrenheit — is a lovely time to become a shadow angel. (Check out this map to know what temperature is best for dew at what time of day.)

“It’s best viewed when the sun is low and you have a nice long shadow,” said Steven Ackerman, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, who has experienced the phenomenon numerous times.

The heiligenschein is created by retro-reflection, the same process that makes cats’ eyes glow when light peeks into a dark room. When light shines through a spherical object attached to some kind of background material (like a cat’s eye, which has a reflective layer at the back of it, on the retina, or water drops suspended on blades of grass), this apparitionlike glow can appear. In the case of holy light, the nearly spherical dewdrop acts as a lens, focusing the light onto one point on the blade before shooting it back out the same way it entered.

Light bouncing like this appears brighter around your head because your eyes are directly opposite the sun, or located right at what is called the antisolar point. Every person has their own antisolar point. This is why you won’t see a halo around someone standing beside you (unless they’re peeking over your shoulder, making their shadow near your eyes). Or why if you take a photo, and hold the camera at your hips instead of your eyes, the halo will appear there in the picture.

The aura appears white, not green, because the sunlight doesn’t fully penetrate the blade and absorb its color before bouncing back out. “Anything bright and reflective tends to wash out and go to white really quickly,” Dr. Ackerman said.

And the light that creates heiligenschein isn’t restricted to reflecting off grass. You can also spot an airplane’s heiligenschein from an airplane window, just around the plane’s shadow as it passes over bare fields, as long as the sun is behind it. On the moon, light that creates it bounces off moon dust — just look at Neil Armstrong’s shadow.


