


“Last year, I clocked 14,500 miles just driving upstate,” says Kate Orne, who crisscrosses from the Catskills to the Berkshires, even down to Connecticut, to interview and photograph subjects for Upstate Diary, the art-oriented publication she launched in 2014. That figure on her odometer is more or less the distance from New York City to New Delhi and back again, and yet Orne betrays not the slightest hint of fatigue as she describes her project with an almost evangelical passion.

When Orne, a former fashion and editorial photographer, first moved from Manhattan to the Hudson Valley in 2009, she sometimes found herself feeling isolated, and began seeking out conversation with other creatives in the area. From this informal, back-roads networking eventually emerged an online journal documenting the lives (and gorgeous cabins, farms and studios) of the painters, writers and designers who have made the region beyond New York City their home. The first print issue of Upstate Diary followed in August 2015; and the second, this past April. (Issue Three is slated for August.)

Soon after the publication’s debut, Orne also began holding a parallel series of salons to get creatives to come out of the woods (both literally and figuratively), get to know one another and even collaborate. Which is why one recent evening found Orne — who in person is a commanding presence with no shortage of opinions (“Please don’t call Upstate Diary a magazine,” she insists. “It’s a publication, because I see it as something more timeless”) — at the Hillsdale, N.Y., home of the art dealer Paul Morris and his partner, Dr. Sam Grubman. Guests included the artists Duncan Hannah, Josephine Halvorson and Carlos Vega; the photographer Jeannette Montgomery Barron; the young filmmaker Blair Dorosh-Walther; and the gallerist Jack Shainman. As everyone gathered over cocktails and dinner to toast Morris’s new role as an Upstate Diary contributor, talk swirled around living and working in the countryside, and its many joys (the quiet, the beautiful light) as well as challenges (the frigid temperatures).

Shainman, who represents such talents as Carrie Mae Weems (a subject of Upstate Diary’s inaugural issue) and the late Malick Sidibé, relayed his misadventures in purchasing and renovating the 30,000-square-foot, 1920s school building in Kinderhook, N.Y., that now serves as his sprawling exhibition space called the School. The first winter was so cold, he said, that he and his partner (Vega) burned through 30 gallons of oil per day, despite never heating the space above 60 degrees. And Morris — who along with the dealers Matthew Marks, Colin de Land and Pat Hearn founded the Armory Show in 1994 — described how being in the mountains in recent years has freed up his mind and inspired him to take up rustic pastimes such as knitting. (He makes throws and scarves with wool from sheep on an adjacent farm.)

And while Upstate is a big draw for many marquee names — from Richard Prince, who once owned a house in the Hudson Valley that famously burned to the ground in a lightning storm in 2007, to Ryan McGinley, whose recent photographic series took him to locales such as Albany and the Finger Lakes — those present at the salon agreed that the region attracts artists who prefer to lay low. Morris, who traded in his and Grubman’s Fire Island home in 2009, joked, “In gay culture, first you’re at Fire Island, then you go to the Hamptons — and then to die, you go Upstate, because it’s seen as so isolating and boring. But in fact, there are so many interesting people that come here for similar but very personal reasons.” Hannah, who was a stylish fixture in the early-’70s punk scene in New York City, added, “I’ve spent summers in the Hamptons, and the artists I knew, they were just going to parties. The creative people I’ve met up here seem a bit more under the radar.”

“People really seek out privacy here,” Orne notes, echoing these sentiments. So much so that the former art-world agitator Terence Koh, who was not present at the salon but whose Catskills hideaway is featured in the current issue of Upstate Diary, made sure his location remained unnamed. (Koh’s latest show, “Bee Chapel,” takes its title from a small treehouse-like structure at his wooded retreat, and is currently on view at Andrew Edlin Gallery in Manhattan.) Elsewhere in the issue, Gregory Crewdson speaks of the sense of peace he found hiking in the Berkshires in the wake of a divorce, and how that inward-turning period led to his latest body of work, “Cathedral of the Pines.”

If Upstate Diary has a bit of the feel of the laid-back conversation at one of Orne’s salons, that’s entirely intentional. “We are not aspiring to be an intellectual art publication,” she notes. “We are about life and the human aspects behind the creations, the living spaces and the landscape.” And despite the geographic specificity of its title, Orne says she intends to expand her scope to explore the lives of creators in other rural areas of the world. “I see this not as a regional publication, but more as a frame of mind,” she explains. “We are really discovering and defining a cultural community which is beyond the metropolitan areas.”


