


An investigation by the New York State Board of Elections found evidence of flagrant violations of campaign finance law by a team of people that Mayor Bill de Blasio created to raise money for Democrats running for the State Senate in 2014, according to a confidential board report.

The board sent the report to Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, three months ago, prompting a criminal investigation into the fund-raising.

The mayor’s Senate effort, which failed in its goal to wrest the legislative body from Republican control, has proved damaging to him in multiple ways. Democrats remained in the minority in the Senate; the mayor’s relationship with Senate Republicans was severely strained, hurting his ability to win support in Albany for his agenda; and now it has led to one of several investigations that are tarnishing his administration.

The investigation by the state board was reported on Friday by The Daily News.

The board’s investigation, and the subsequent continuing inquiry by Manhattan prosecutors, is looking at whether there was an effort to illegally circumvent limits on campaign contributions to individual candidates by directing money instead through Democratic Party county committees and a statewide party campaign committee.

The county and statewide committees can receive contributions of up to $102,300, which is much greater than the general election limit on contributions to candidates’ campaigns, $11,000 per donor.

“The evidence demonstrates that the de Blasio team coordinated its fund-raising activities” with the campaigns of several candidates and routed contributions to them through the county and statewide committees “in order to evade contribution limits and to disguise the true names of the contributors,” according to the report.

Risa S. Sugarman, the board’s chief enforcement counsel, wrote in a memo to board commissioners, “I have determined that reasonable cause exists to believe a violation warranting criminal prosecution has taken place.” She added, “The violations discovered by this investigation can only be described as willful and flagrant.” The New York Times obtained a copy of the report.

The board’s investigation was prompted by complaints from Republican Party officials in Putnam and Ulster Counties, where hundreds of thousands of dollars in contributions from union political action committees and others poured into the local Democratic county committee in October 2014, shortly before the election. Large sums of money were then transferred to the local Democratic candidates. Those candidates also received large transfers from the statewide Democratic Senate Campaign Committee.

The investigation focused on the campaigns of Cecilia F. Tkaczyk, who was running in a district that includes part of Ulster County, and Terry W. Gipson and Justin Wagner, whose districts included part of Putnam County.

The board’s report says that the fund-raising effort was run out of Mr. de Blasio’s City Hall and involved Emma Wolfe, his top political aide, and Ross Offinger, a fund-raiser for the mayor’s election campaign as well as the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit created by Mr. de Blasio to support his agenda. The report also names several union officials and political consulting firms, including BerlinRosen, which has longstanding ties to the mayor.

It says that those people worked closely with the candidates and their campaigns in arranging for large donations to be made through the county and statewide committees, and then designated how the money would be spent. Some of the checks to the statewide committee included notations such as “Donation per Mayor,” the report said.

One of the potentially most damning pieces of evidence cited in the report was in an email from the treasurer for Ms. Tkaczyk’s campaign, Matthew Lerch, to Hayes Clement, the treasurer of the Ulster County Democratic Committee. “Has the check for $60k cleared?” the email from Mr. Lerch said, according to the report. “Below is our banking info, we need the 60 transferred over ASAP please.”

The email was sent on Oct. 16, 2014. State campaign finance records show that the Ulster County committee received a $60,000 contribution from the political action committee of the New York State Nurses Association, a union, on Oct. 14. The records indicate that on Oct. 17, the county committee transferred the same amount to Ms. Tkaczyk’s campaign.

In all, the Ulster County committee transferred $330,000 to Ms. Tkaczyk’s campaign over a few days. Around the same time, the Putnam County committee transferred $367,000 to Mr. Wagner’s campaign and $273,750 to Mr. Gipson’s, in each case after taking in similar amounts from donors outside the county.

“Reasonable cause exists to believe that all the contributions were made to the county committees simply as straw donors,” the report said. “Therefore they should be considered contributions to the candidates and subject to the candidates’ contribution receipt limits.”

Despite the flood of cash, all three candidates lost their races.

Investigators said that similar patterns existed with candidates running in Monroe and Erie Counties.

Ms. Tkaczyk did not return a call for comment on Friday night. An email message for Mr. Clement was not returned and his voice mail was full. Efforts to reach Mr. Lerch and Mr. Gipson were also unsuccessful.

The inquiry comes as Mr. de Blasio is facing investigations by several different agencies, including from federal prosecutors with the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, into his donors and fund-raising practices.

“We are confident that all of our efforts were appropriate and in accordance with the law at all times,” Karen Hinton, a spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio, said on Friday. “We will cooperate fully with the investigations.” Of Ms. Wolfe, the mayor’s aide who led the effort to capture the Senate for Democrats, she said: “Emma Wolfe is a highly regarded public servant whose integrity should not be in question. She followed the letter of the law.”

Mike Murphy, a spokesman for the statewide Democratic Senate Campaign Committee, said that it had followed all campaign finance regulations.


