


Gov. Jerry Brown turned in nearly a million signatures on Friday backing his bid to ask voters to approve new ways to reduce California’s prison population, a spokesman said. Mr. Brown, a Democrat, wants voters in November to increase credits that allow adult inmates to get out of prison more quickly and to allow earlier parole for nonviolent felons. About 585,000 valid signatures are required for a constitutional ballot measure this year. California’s district attorneys say his initiative would increase crime and undermine laws intended to protect crime victims’ rights. (AP)

The last 50 wild donkeys on Hawaii’s Big Island will be rounded up, the final step in a six-year effort to get them in adoptive homes. The donkeys are the last of more than 500 that were castoffs from the early days of Hawaiian coffee and agricultural plantations. When drought forced the donkeys into residential areas in search of water, the herd became a problem. The Humane Society and Big Island residents were working on Friday to prepare the donkeys for adoption. All of the donkeys will get checkups from a veterinarian before they are taken to their new homes. Donkeys are social animals, so they must be adopted in pairs or have another animal to keep them company at their new home. (AP)

The state’s top education official says state school districts do not have to comply with the Obama administration’s recent guidance that transgender students at public schools be allowed to use bathrooms and locker rooms consistent with their gender identity. Superintendent Richard Woods said in a letter released on Friday that the directive “does not have the force of law.” Courts have issued mixed rulings on whether transgender people are protected by federal civil rights law. However, the directive from the Obama administration says schools refusing to comply could lose federal aid. Mr. Woods said in the letter to school superintendents that his agency will “take appropriate action” if that happens. Gov. Nathan Deal, a Republican, this week asked Mr. Woods to provide guidance. Mr. Deal has not promised to take legal action as in other Republican-led states. (AP)


