


Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics will weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in a new version of the Playlist column. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like the new format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.

Desiigner’s debut single, “Panda,” which was released in December, made it to the top of the Billboard Hot 100 before it even had a video. So the clip — now widely available after a spell in Tidal purgatory — doesn’t need to serve as an amplifier. But it does need to act as a translator: Desiigner, a 19-year-old Brooklyn unknown, is largely a cipher still, and his lyrics verge on the inscrutable. So what do we learn in this video, which feels like a video game (for a song inspired by one)? Desiigner is fascinatingly unhinged: bug-eyed, head tilted at odd angles, dabbing constantly and seemingly uncontrollably. As a rapper, he has a pleasingly gummy style, a clear inheritor of Future. But the precedents for his visual presence are far weirder: victims in horror movies, mad scientists, Vine comedians. He hasn’t been around long enough to be told how to behave, or to learn best practices from his peers, so eccentricity it is. Still, that’s limited information. Given that Desiigner hasn’t offered much beyond “Panda,” you’ve got to grab the details where they pop up, and a smattering of other videos have been more telling than the “Panda” video. Here is Desiigner, more excited than any person has ever been to perform on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert.” Here is Desiigner, rapping “Panda” at maybe half-speed, so that the words are (sort of) clear. Here is Desiigner, vomiting on stage while performing “Panda,” and not stopping for one millisecond. JON CARAMANICA

“Vincent” is one of the outliers on Car Seat Headrest’s album “Teens of Denial” — the track that doesn’t get straight to the verse-chorus-verse of Will Toledo’s latter-day new wave. For most of the album, he uses the legacy of chunky, melodic, fuzztone-loving rock — the Cars by way of the Pixies and Weezer — to reveal the insecurities and torturously layered self-consciousness of growing up as a digital native. “Vincent,” nearly eight minutes long, is different; it starts out with two minutes of absorbing, slowly accreting Minimalism, with loops of guitar trills, pinging single notes and fleeting sounds running in reverse. Then it steams into a crescendo of neurosis, from krautrock to raveup: “I find it harder to speak when someone else is listening,” Mr. Toledo sings. Before making “Teens of Denial” in a studio with a band, he released 10 low-fi albums recorded on his own followed by last year’s “Teens of Style” remakes of some previous recordings. “Vincent” shows he’s still a studio tweaker, a good thing. JON PARELES

“It’s all green,” sings Corinne Bailey Rae, contentedly, “And new/And I want to spend it with you.” These words lead into the chorus of “Green Aphrodisiac,” a track from her artfully affirming new album, “The Heart Speaks in Whispers.” You probably won’t hear a new song with a clearer metaphorical link between springtime and spiritual renewal, and Ms. Rae has reasons for that. It has been six years since she released her previous album, “The Sea,” created in a fog of grief after the death of her husband. She’s now in a different place: married to her longtime producer, Steve Brown, and tapping into a deeper current of soul. Appearing on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” this week, she performed “Green Aphrodisiac” in verdant, glittery garments, easing into gear with her band in a simmering slow-funk mode, projecting radiant self-assurance along with a touch of bliss. NATE CHINEN

The English singer Sampha makes new versions of the R&B ballad: he’s not taking its conventions and form for granted, singing emotionally over strange or haunting backgrounds. (Drake, among many others, has noticed, featuring him on a few tracks from “Nothing Was the Same.”) “Timmy’s Prayer,” which came out online last Monday, is his first new material in three years. The song is processional and full of regret, sketching a scenario in which heaven is prison and he is a prisoner. Then the song changes hue, and he’s free; he returns for a visit, only to be turned away by the object of his desire. “I messed up — hoo! — I know now,” he sings. “There’s no room for me to play now/No way to dig my way out.” BEN RATLIFF

Weekend Nachos, the Chicago band operating in the extreme corner of hardcore punk known as powerviolence, is breaking up. Its final record, “Apology,” comes out today from Relapse, and on it the band sounds bilious, fast, rugged, and not without pleasure. It’s a kind of aesthetic Möbius strip, so negative that it turns over and becomes joyful. (The band is also on tour, and plays tonight at Saint Vitus in Brooklyn: that’ll be a scene.) B.R.

The fabulously nimble and versatile Chicago rapper Joey Purp is in top form on this club track with echoes of the Native Tongues and the Neptunes. He’s a slick talker, and funny, too: “She taking photos of me/that she carry all around like rosaries.” (See also “Photobooth,” released a few weeks ago, a breathless shout exercise redolent of Kendrick Lamar’s “Backseat Freestyle.”) Then, once he’s set the table, Chance the Rapper — already having a great week — turns up, rapping about girls in the club who shoot “why-I-let-him-drag-me-here?” looks and read Ta-Nehisi Coates. JON CARAMANICA

An epitaph is an unusual way to announce a new album, but Will Sheff knows how to carry it off. “Okkervil River R.I.P.” is the pensive first offering from “Away,” the new album by his band Okkervil River, due out on Sept. 9. And as the title and lyrics suggest, it’s Mr. Sheff’s farewell to an era: he saw the departure of several longtime band members, and witnessed the death of his beloved grandfather. Then he wrote his new batch of songs in seclusion in the Catskills, and recorded the album with musicians from the experimental and new-music scenes in New York. This song, wry and wistful, makes it clear that he’s still writing from a place of barbed interiority and confessional misdirection. But it also works as a teaser for the new album, in slightly crooked fashion. “We’ve got a big chance coming,” Mr. Sheff sings in a plaintive deadpan. “A big chance coming now.” N.C.

Few indie-leaning rock bands take the art of the music video more seriously than Yeasayer. For “Silly Me,” a buoyant, Afropop-tinged track from the band’s fourth album, “Amen & Goodbye,” the video suggests a psychedelic journey through the underworld, and maybe the creative subconscious. Directed by Mike Anderson, it’s a gorgeous mini-film using a combination of handmade sculptural forms and state-of-the-art digital animation. And in its final frames, it sets up a bridge to the band’s previous video, for “I Am Chemistry.” You’re invited to follow the trail, and see where it leads. N.C.

Some of the best dark, minimal and immersive electronic music — post-techno, post-dub, post-everything — has been made by Raime, the English duo of Joe Andrews and Tom Halstead. Its second record, “Tooth,” is to be released by Blackest Ever Black on June 10, and this week on YouTube it released the second streamable track from it, called “Glassed.” It’s halting and mysterious and wary, drawn tight by an elegantly stuttering rhythm and a precise, repetitive guitar figure. It is its own atmosphere. B.R.


