


INTERNATIONAL

A map on March 1 with the Cape Town Journal article, about the post-apartheid gentrification of the historically Muslim Bo-Kaap neighborhood of Cape Town, located the neighborhood incorrectly. It is closer to the shoreline of Cape Town than shown. The map was corrected online shortly after the error was pointed out, but editors failed to follow through on this print correction.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Tuesday about Mayor Bill de Blasio’s budget proposal for New York City’s Health & Hospitals, using information from the mayor’s office, described incorrectly the increase in the amount of money in the proposed budget for the city’s public health system. The mayor’s proposed budget, which would bring total city funding for Health & Hospitals to $2 billion annually by fiscal year 2020, would be a $700 million increase in the annual allocation compared with the amount of city funding when Mr. de Blasio took office in 2014. It does not represent a $700 million increase over fiscal year 2016.

•

An article on Monday about a festival in Manhattan celebrating the 100-year anniversary of the Easter Rising rebellion in Ireland misstated the relationship between Patrick Rooney, who attended the event, and Sean Connolly, who may have fired the first shot in the rebellion. Mr. Connolly was his great-uncle, not his grandfather.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Friday about start-ups offering improved menstrual products omitted two people who helped found Thinx, an underwear company. Besides Miki Agrawal, the founders include Radha Agrawal and Antonia Saint Dunbar.

SPORTS

An article in some editions on Friday about the Rangers’ 5-0 loss in Game 4 of their N.H.L. playoff series against the Pittsburgh Penguins misstated the position of the Penguins’ Ben Lovejoy. He is a defenseman, not a forward.

THE ARTS

An article on Wednesday about upheaval at the Pennsylvania Ballet misstated the circumstances of the departure of the principal dancer Lauren Fadeley, one of at least 17 dancers who will not be returning next season. She quit, she was not “let go.”

•

A report in the “Arts, Briefly” column on Tuesday about Broadway box-office grosses misstated the opening date of Cirque du Soleil’s “Paramour,” which took in just over $1 million last week during previews. It is scheduled to open May 25, not May 26.

SCIENCE TIMES

Because of an editing error, a report in the Observatory column on Tuesday about Methuselah, a very old tree in California, misstated, in some editions, the surname of a spokeswoman for Inyo National Forest. She is Debra Schweizer, not Schweitzer.

•

Picture captions on Tuesday with an article about police departments around the country that are turning to crisis intervention training to deal with people with mental illness referred incorrectly to the credentials of two officers from Portland, Ore. Officers Michael Hastings and Brad Yakots have received crisis intervention training; they are not members of the police force’s Behavioral Health Unit.

STYLES

A picture caption last Thursday with the Browsing column, about new jackets for the workplace, misidentified one of the jackets. It was by Joseph, not Zara.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Saturday about the guitarist and singer Lonnie Mack misidentified the magazine for which the music historian Richard T. Pinnell wrote about Mr. Mack’s record “Memphis” in 1979. It is Guitar Player, not Guitar World. The obituary also misstated Mr. Mack’s contribution to the Doors’ recording of the song “Roadhouse Blues.” While he did play bass guitar on that song, he did not also play lead guitar.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


