


A suspect who had been sought by investigators for nearly seven months was charged on Friday in connection with the shooting deaths of three men last year at a public housing complex in Brooklyn, the authorities said.

Acting on an anonymous tip, investigators traced the suspect, Allen Cooper, 32, to North Carolina. He faces three counts of murder and criminal possession of a weapon from a shooting in September at the Ingersoll Houses, a New York City Housing Authority complex in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn that had once been considered one of the city’s most violent.

The Ingersoll Houses, which include 20 low-rise buildings with about 4,500 residents, had a substantial drop in crime in recent years as the city invested in anti-crime measures there. The complex had not seen a homicide since 2013.

On Sept. 20, 2015, at about 2 a.m., a man approached two men on Fleet Walk and opened fire, hitting Lacount Simmons, 39, and Calvin Clinkscales, 43, the police said. Both men were struck in the head and died at the scene. A third man who was nearby, Herbert Brown, 76, was hit in the abdomen and was taken to a hospital where he was pronounced dead.

The shooting was the deadliest in a string of homicides across the city that September weekend, leaving at least seven people dead in separate episodes in Brooklyn, the Bronx and East Harlem in Manhattan.

Using surveillance camera footage and witness accounts, investigators identified Mr. Cooper, a resident of the Ingersoll Houses who was known as Pike. In January, the authorities announced that he was wanted in connection with the shooting.

This month, the authorities received an anonymous tip that Mr. Cooper had fled to Fayetteville, N.C., where he was found by the police. He was taken into custody for violating the rules of a probation sentence, the authorities said, and brought back to New York.

Mr. Cooper was being held at Rikers Island, awaiting an initial court hearing, the authorities said. No information about a lawyer was available.


