


Ascap, the music licensing agency, has agreed to pay $1.75 million to settle an investigation by the Justice Department that found that some of the group’s licensing deals had violated its longstanding regulatory rules.

Ascap, whose full name is the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, represents songwriters and music publishers and collects royalties from radio, television and other outlets.

Under the terms of its 75-year-old consent decree, which settled an antitrust investigation by the federal government, Ascap may represent those performing rights only nonexclusively, meaning that its publisher members can still negotiate with outside parties.

But the Justice Department announced on Thursday that Ascap had violated that rule by entering into exclusive deals in “approximately 150 contracts” with composers and publishers, starting in 2008. In its settlement, Ascap did not admit wrongdoing but said it would not make any more exclusive deals. The settlement is subject to approval from the federal judge who oversees Ascap, Denise L. Cote of United States District Court in Manhattan.

“By blocking members’ ability to license their songs themselves, Ascap undermined a critical protection of competition contained in the consent decree,” Renata B. Hesse, the principal deputy assistant attorney general for the Justice Department’s antitrust division, said in a statement.

Ascap and its rival, BMI, are both asking the Justice Department to make changes to their consent decrees, which the organizations both say need to be updated for the digital age.

To resolve what the Justice Department called a conflict of interest in Ascap’s management structure, the organization also agreed that the publisher members on its board — which is split evenly between publishers and composers — would not be involved in licensing talks.

Two years ago, Judge Cote found that there had been “troubling coordination” between the organization and its most powerful publishers during negotiations with Pandora over licensing rates.


