


They call Doug Pojeky the bird whisperer.

And now that photos of Mr. Pojeky, 40, being hugged by an owl have been shared thousands of times on Facebook, “they” have expanded from a small group of rescue workers to people around the world.

“My phone has never rang so much,” said Mr. Pojeky, who is retired from the United States Navy and volunteers for the nonprofit Wild at Heart Rescue in Vancleave, Miss., northeast of Biloxi. “It’s really rewarding in a sense because we work really hard at what we do.”

What the organization does entails answering hundreds of calls every day, but usually about an animal in need. Mr. Pojeky said Wednesday that the call about the owl, dubbed GiGi because of her gigantic size, came from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in May.

GiGi, a great horned owl, had a concussion and two types of infections — and she was unable to stand up.

“She was knocking on death’s door,” Mr. Pojeky said. “Of all the animals I’ve rehabbed, I did not think she was going to make the recovery.”

Days after GiGi came into the group’s care, Mr. Pojeky left to visit his home state, Michigan. The now internet-famous hug happened upon his return.

“The first morning I was back, I got the bird out, and instead of kicking and trying to scratch, she kind of just curled her feet up and went into my chest really easy,” Mr. Pojeky said.

She danced a little bit, bobbing around, before nuzzling her head into his shoulder and draping her wings around him.

Missy Dubuisson, the group’s founder, snapped the photo.

“It was pretty cool,” Mr. Pojeky said. “It’s a bond. I’m not saying that I tame it for a pet, but the bond is that the animal trusts me enough to put down its defenses so I can help it.”

Mr. Pojeky said he was not sure what it was about him that had such a calming effect on birds of prey. But whatever it is, it has earned him the “bird whisperer” nickname.

“Bird-of-prey whisperer,” Ms. Dubuisson clarified. “That’s what we’ve called him for years and years.”

* John E. Parks, the founder and director of the Cornell University Raptor Program, had some doubts about whether the bird was displaying an affinity for its handler.

“My understanding and experience with great horned owls is, if it’s an adult bird, which it appears to be, the older they are, the more recalcitrant they are,” Dr. Parks said. “They can be very stubborn and difficult.”

An owl may spread its wings around its young to shelter them, or if it’s overheated, he said.

“I would be surprised if it had anything to do with its reaction to its handler,” Dr. Parks said.

But Ms. Dubuisson said Mr. Pojeky just had a gift for handling birds of prey.

“He is the only person that can handle them in the way he does,” she said. “It’s crazy to see.”

Soon after the photos were taken, GiGi was released near where she was found in Seminary, Miss., about two hours north of the rescue center. She circled a little bit and glanced back at her rescuers before flying off into the woods, Mr. Pojeky said.

Many of the animals released by Mr. Pojeky and Ms. Dubuisson tend to look back before heading back into the wild, he said.

“In our minds, that’s them saying thank you,” he said.


