


In an instant, less time than it took American Pharoah to pull away from his rivals in the homestretch at Belmont Park last year, 37 years of agony and heartbreak gave way to ecstasy and jubilation.

Employees leapt onto one another’s backs, reporters cheered and cried, and fans danced and howled late into the night, stopping only to snap selfies and capture the moment when American Pharoah became the 12th Triple Crown champion and the first since Affirmed in 1978.

American Pharoah’s normally loquacious trainer, Bob Baffert, however, was rendered speechless. “I was just enjoying the call and the crowd, the noise, and everything happening,” he said after American Pharoah won the mile-and-a-half race by five and a half lengths.

A year later, that pure intoxication has evolved into a mild hangover as the Belmont Stakes is set to go off Saturday without a Triple Crown on the line or even a showdown between the Kentucky Derby winner, Nyquist, and the Preakness Stakes victor, Exaggerator.

Gordon Edes, the historian of the Boston Red Sox, who won the World Series in 2004, ending an 86-year drought, and then added titles in 2007 and 2013, can relate.

“In 2004, you saw such an outpouring of emotion — I mean, Bill Simmons made the title of his book ‘Now I Can Die in Peace’ — and you read over and over about these personal stories of people going to visit their parents’ graves to celebrate the World Series,” Edes said. “But with any state of ecstasy, it runs out at some point; it has an expiration date. I think there’s a sense that maybe people don’t live and die with this club quite the same way as they might have in the past.”

Yet horse racing has plenty of excuses to keep basking in the American Pharoah afterglow. The announced attendance at the Kentucky Derby last month was 167,227, just under the record of 170,513 in 2015, and Preakness officials announced a record crowd of 135,256, a bump up from last year’s 131,680.

To capitalize on American Pharoah’s Belmont victory, which was named Sports Event of the Year by Sports Business Journal, the New York Racing Association put tickets on sale in January. Nearly 10,000 general-admission tickets were sold before the Preakness, officials said, and a total of more than 46,000 had been sold for the Belmont as of Friday.

NBC Sports’ coverage of the Derby averaged 15.5 million viewers, behind the 16 million in 2015, but viewership peaked at 17.9 million as Nyquist crossed the finish line — the same as when American Pharoah did so in 2015. The Preakness averaged 9.4 million viewers, up from 8.9 million viewers in 2015. News media credentials for the Derby totaled 2,200, compared with 2,000 in 2015.

As of April, bettors had placed $3.4 billion on races in the United States this year, a 4 percent increase from the same time in 2015. Wagering from all sources on the Derby program was the second highest in history, totaling $192.6 million, 1 percent off the record set in 2015; the total handle on the Preakness program was a record $94.1 million, about $100,000 more than the previous mark, set in 2005.

Horse sales by Keeneland and Fasig-Tipton have produced returns mirroring the trend seen throughout recent sales seasons: steady results indicating marketplace stability combined with selectivity among buyers who place emphasis on quality.

There are other, less obvious ways to measure the American Pharoah effect. The Kentucky Derby Museum, which opened in 1985 and had never experienced a Triple Crown, has seen a 23.9 percent increase in attendance since September, and the overall revenue, from October through April, is up 42 percent. Sales of American Pharoah merchandise, compared with California Chrome items the year before, increased by 744 percent.

An American Pharoah exhibition opened at the museum the Sunday before the Derby, and 1,300 people, up from about 400 the year before, attended. They were treated to a question-and-answer session with Pharoah’s connections, including Baffert and his wife, Jill, the owner Ahmed Zayat and his son Justin, and the jockey Victor Espinoza. The museum had more than $50,000 in revenue that day (lifted by the sale of limited-edition American Pharoah bottles of Maker’s Mark bourbon for $89.99 each). That total was up from about $9,500 the year before.

“The connections have worked very hard to share this horse that we have been waiting for for 37 years,” said Patrick Armstrong, the president of the museum.

The museum also offers tours of American Pharoah’s new home, Coolmore’s Ashford Stud, in conjunction with Mint Julep Tours and Horse Country, a nonprofit organization developed 18 months ago by farms, clinics and a feed mill in Kentucky to support fan development in thoroughbred racing.

There are 37 member organizations, with 19 giving tours, and patrons have included people from 49 states and five countries.

More than 10,300 tickets have been sold this year, according to Horse Country’s executive director, Anne Hardy, and of those, about 30 percent have been visits to Coolmore, which hosts one tour a day. Each visit is limited to about 25 people, and the last group of June and July dates sold out in about 45 minutes.

“We’re still feeling the love in horse country and hope that people will fall in love even more with our members, and their horses, through their visits,” Hardy said.

The National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., redid its Triple Crown gallery to include American Pharoah; the debut at its 2016 Derby viewing party attracted about 350 people, compared with 200 at the 2015 event. The museum’s annual trip to the Belmont sold out last year at 55 people and was on pace to sell out this year as well.

Two television contracts announced in recent weeks have also made a splash, with NBC landing a multiyear agreement to broadcast the Royal Ascot meet from Britain in the United States, beginning in 2017, and Fox Sports securing a multiyear deal to broadcast more than 80 hours of live coverage from Saratoga Race Course on FS2.

“I love Saratoga, and to me Saratoga is Augusta National, it’s Fenway Park, it’s Lambeau Field, it’s a chance for us to showcase one of the iconic places in American sports,” said Michael Mulvihill, the senior vice president for programming and research at Fox Sports.

This year, NBC devoted more resources to horse racing, including experimenting with virtual reality and ultra-high-definition cameras and adding figures from other sports broadcasts, like Rutledge Wood of Nascar.

“Our commitment to horse racing has been very strong for quite a while, and I think if anything, American Pharoah shined a bright light on just how much we do,” said Jon Miller, the president for programming at NBC Sports, who added that interest had increased so much this year that 100 affiliates ran Derby and Preakness promos more than 300 times.

American Pharoah is living the good life as a stallion in Kentucky, and times have changed for his connections as well. Baffert and Espinoza said signing autographs and posing for pictures were part of their daily routine.

“I hear people say, ‘I will never forget the Triple Crown,’” Espinoza said. “I’m sure there are little kids who don’t know anything about racing, but they know the Triple Crown. I’ve been to New York twice since then, and I can’t even go out on the street.”

Even though Saturday’s Belmont is missing the Derby winner and a chance for a historic sweep, the memories of last year are sure to feel fresh. Then another drought will begin anew.

“It was, bar none, the greatest sports event I’ve ever been to,” Mulvihill said. “And, having the job that I have, I am lucky enough to have been to over 10 Super Bowls, 20 World Series, a lot of the great events in American sports. But I don’t think I’ve ever been to anything more exciting than American Pharoah winning the Triple Crown.”


