


Elizabeth Marie Walsh, a daughter of Dr. Marie B. Walsh and Michael S. Walsh of Baton Rouge, La., was married May 21 to Michael Reid Simon, the son of Margo L. Reid and Gregory C. Simon of Bethesda, Md. The Rev. Andrew D. Sutton, a friend of the couple and a minister of the First United Methodist Church of Lafayette, La., officiated at the Carnegie Institution for Science in Washington.

Ms. Walsh, 26, is keeping her name. She is the associate director of product management at Evolent Health, a health care technology and services company in Arlington, Va.

Her father is a partner in Taylor, Porter, Brooks & Phillips, a law firm in Baton Rouge. Her mother is the director of the Louisiana Local Technical Assistance Program at the Louisiana Transportation Research Center on the campus of Louisiana State University. The program finances highway safety improvements in Louisiana.

Mr. Simon, who is also 26 and is known as Reid, works in Reston, Va., as a software development consultant with Microsoft.

His mother is a Bethesda-based consultant to arts and environmental organizations, including, most recently, the Glen Echo Park Partnership for Arts and Culture, the former amusement park in Glen Echo, Md., that is now an arts center. His father, who works in Washington, is the executive director of the White House Cancer Moonshot Task Force led by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.

Ms. Walsh and Mr. Simon met in September 2008 during a pre-semester convocation at the University of Pennsylvania, from which they later graduated, she with two bachelor’s degrees, in international relations and political science, and he with a bachelor’s degree in systems science and engineering.

“In the brief time that we spoke, I found her to be smart, sassy and very confident,” Mr. Simon said.

They soon realized that they lived a floor apart in the same dormitory. “It wasn’t really where the cool kids were,” Mr. Simon said. They became fast friends.

“He was very kind and very smart, creative and inclusive,” Ms. Walsh said. “He had all the qualities you would want in a friend, especially when you’re trying to make other friends.”

In July 2009, he flew to visit her at her family’s home in Baton Rouge, where he stayed for three days, leading their families to “start becoming skeptical about our so-called friendship,” as Mr. Simon put it.

“I distinctly remember my mom being suspicious,” she said. “Moms just know.”

When she returned the favor by visiting his family for Thanksgiving, “nobody believed that we were just friends anymore,” Mr. Simon said.

By December, they were dating steadily, and were still dating in January 2011, when Ms. Walsh, now in her junior year, went on a five-month study-abroad program to Cape Town. In March, Mr. Simon boarded a plane for Cape Town.

“Getting together in South Africa was a sign of our deep commitment,” he said. “We were both very ambitious and very driven people who, by that time, felt very comfortable around each other.”

After graduation, both landed jobs in Washington, and last October, he proposed on a frigid, blustery day at Shenandoah National Park in Virginia, where they went hiking. As they began their descent in the face of fierce, cold winds, Mr. Simon suddenly dropped to one knee and pulled out an engagement ring.

“He was so nervous about dropping the ring that he was not willing to let it out of his hands,” she said, laughing. “I had to kind of fight him for it, and I finally managed to take it away and slip it on my finger.”


