


After a week of canvassing matzo factories, cheesecake bakeries, hot-dog stands and pizza shops, the presidential candidates put local delicacies aside on Monday and told New Yorkers what they were really hungry for: votes.

The five remaining contenders sought to leave nothing to chance the day before New York’s primary, dashing across the city and state to make their final pitches while assailing their rivals as unelectable and incompetent. With the Republican and Democratic races becoming extended delegate battles, the spotlight on the state is unusually intense, with Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump both desperate to avoid disappointing performances in a place where they have deep roots.

Polls show Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump holding wide leads in New York, but that did not mean the pressure was off. Senator Ted Cruz continues to peel Republican delegates away from Mr. Trump at state conventions across the country, and Senator Bernie Sanders, the democratic socialist who has sharpened his tone against Mrs. Clinton, has defied the odds before.

Mrs. Clinton’s campaign events took her to a veritable United Nations of voters around New York City, where her campaign has left hardly any ethnic group unturned ahead of the primary.

“You know, I never count any chickens before they hatch,” Mrs. Clinton told reporters after stopping in for a bubble tea at Kung-Fu Tea at the Queens Crossing’s food court in Flushing, when asked if a big victory on Tuesday would mean that she had locked up the nomination. “I’m not taking anybody or anything for granted.”

And Mr. Sanders showed no signs of easing up either. The Vermont senator spent most of the sunny Monday face-to-face campaigning, an unexpected shift for a candidate who has spent most of his days holding mega-rallies before thousands of supporters. Mr. Sanders shook hands on sidewalks across the city, visited a public housing complex in the Bronx, hosted a round table with local community leaders, and stopped to eat a B.L.T. sandwich in Queens. He also hit the streets, walking 14 blocks through Midtown and speaking to striking Verizon workers.

“I just want to say a word to thank all of you for the courage to stand up for justice and against corporate greed,” Mr. Sanders said through a megaphone as the strikers chanted his name. “We will not tolerate large profitable corporations sending jobs to low-wage countries, throwing American workers out on the street, cutting back on health care benefits, and then paying their C.E.O. $18 million a year.”

As Mr. Sanders courted union workers, Mr. Trump was across town trying to improve his standing with members of minority groups.

At Trump Tower, he gathered with select members of a recently formed “diversity coalition,” the brainchild of his company adviser, Michael Cohen, who drew on longstanding relationships with some black pastors to form an umbrella group meant to rebut questions about Mr. Trump’s attitude about race and criticism that he appeals only to white voters.

There was confusion around the meeting, which was expected to draw about 40 people but mushroomed into a crowd of more than 100. Mr. Trump’s guests all entered by the Trump Bar on the ground floor of the building, then were shepherded downstairs by the Secret Service and screened for weapons before they went down the escalators. Reporters and attendees jostled for position.

Mr. Trump eventually descended from his office and offered brief remarks, expressing cautious optimism about the Tuesday election results and hitting his Republican opponents as New York pretenders.

“We love the city — you look at the other folks running, they couldn’t care less about New York,” he said. “We care about New York a lot.”

Mr. Trump then went to Buffalo for a campaign rally.

Although they appeared to be long shots in New York, Mr. Cruz and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio continued to pound the Republican front-runner from afar. Mr. Kasich, who has won only his home state, held town hall events near Syracuse and in Schenectady, pressing his positive message and lamenting Mr. Trump’s tone.

“He feeds into their anxieties and their fears,” Mr. Kasich said. “Does he have any solutions for how he’s going to deal with it? I don’t think so.”

Mr. Cruz, who squeezed in a campaign stop in Maryland between two private events in New York City and national television appearances, also hammered Mr. Trump for offering empty solutions on the economy and foreign policy. On ABC’s “Good Morning America,” the Texas senator warned that Mr. Trump would be crushed by Mrs. Clinton in a general election and suggested that he was nothing more than a vapid celebrity candidate.

“He’s always interesting to watch,” Mr. Cruz said. “He’s a fun entertainer. But Donald has no real solutions.”


