


BOSTON — Alex Rodriguez has a theory about run production for a major league offense, a theory based on his 22 years of pumping out hits and runs in the American League.

It is a fairly simple notion, which Rodriguez admits is not backed up by any scientific analysis on his part. Nor are there any guidelines on how to make it happen.

Rodriguez said a team should strive to score five runs every game, regardless of the pitching matchup, the ballpark, the weather conditions or the time of day.

It is more a self-imposed directive, like an N.F.L. team aiming for 28 points on a Sunday.

“There’s no computer or anything that says it,” Rodriguez said before the Yankees’ game against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park on Sunday night. “It’s just that, generally, when I’ve had conversations with my teammates, regardless of what is going on with anything else as an offense, I feel like our responsibility is to go out and try to score five runs. Anything over that is a bonus, anything under it is just not good enough.”

For example, the Yankees won the World Series in 2009 after averaging a healthy 5.64 runs per game in the regular season.

This season, the team scored 3.63 runs per game in the first 22 games, one of the lower averages in the American League.

“And that’s why the record is what it is,” Rodriguez said.

The Yankees were 8-14 entering Sunday. They had not scored a run in 131/3 consecutive innings and had scored two or fewer runs in their last four games (1.25 per game, all losses) and also in nine of their previous 14 games.

Trying to avoid a series sweep, Manager Joe Girardi tinkered with the lineup for Sunday’s finale against the Red Sox. Carlos Beltran was given the night off against Boston starter David Price, a left-hander, as were two left-handed hitters, catcher Brian McCann and shortstop Didi Gregorius. They were replaced by Austin Romine and Ronald Torreyes.

Aaron Hicks, who took an .087 batting average into the game, was in right field for Beltran. Third baseman Chase Headley, who was batting .150 before the game, was moved up to the No. 6 spot in the batting order because he was 8 for 19 against Price, including two doubles and a triple.

Rodriguez’s five-run theory does not specify a surefire way to score the runs. The way the Yankees have been playing, they might have to be satisfied with four. They have won the five games in which they have scored at least four runs.

“Every team I’ve ever been on, I just thought five runs was a great goal to have,” Rodriguez said. “You’re not going to reach it every night. Some nights you’re going to go above. But if that is your target every night, it kind of keeps you focused in one direction.”

After Saturday’s game, which the Red Sox won, 8-0, Yankees left fielder Brett Gardner said a key problem was that he and center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury had not done a good job of getting on base at the top of the order. If the offense begins with them, he said, their lack of success is making it difficult for the rest of the lineup.

“The way out of it is not to try and do too much,” Rodriguez said. “Take the base hit. Hit the ball the other way. Think small. And then do the little things. If there is a guy on second, get him to third. If there is a guy on third with less than two outs, try to bring him in. Those things add up after a while and put the pressure on.”

In the last three seasons that the Yankees did not make the playoffs, they averaged fewer than five runs per game. In 2008, they averaged 4.87; in 2013, they averaged 4.01; and in 2014, it was down to 3.90.

The last-place Yankees were six games under .500 for the first time since Girardi took over in 2008. The last times they were that far under .500 were in 2005 and 2007, under Manager Joe Torre, and in both seasons, they rallied to make the playoffs.

“One of the things that Joe Torre always advocated in our clubhouse — and I think about this often — is, think small and big things will happen,” Rodriguez said. “That’s, I think, where we are today.”


