


LONDON — Oscar Pistorius, the South African Olympic star convicted of murdering his girlfriend in 2013, “has to pay for what he did,” the victim’s father told a judge on Tuesday, while emphasizing that he and his wife had forgiven the athlete.

In tearful testimony that was broadcast live across South Africa, the father, Barry Steenkamp, said that the death of his daughter, Reeva Steenkamp, had plunged him and his wife into an abyss of grief, and contributed to his having had a stroke.

Mr. Steenkamp, 73, who is diabetic and uses a cane, said the pain from his daughter’s murder had been so severe that he would use his insulin syringe to hurt himself. “I would take the needle and shove it into my stomach and my arms to see if I could feel the same type of pain, but no,” he said, weeping.

Many others in the courtroom cried, including Mr. Pistorius, who pressed his head into his hands.

Ms. Steenkamp, a law school graduate, model and aspiring reality-television star, was 29 when Mr. Pistorius fired four shots through a locked bathroom door in their Pretoria home on Feb. 14, 2013, killing her. Mr. Pistorius, at the time a gun enthusiast, said that he thought an intruder had broken into the home and that the killing was an accident.

In September 2014, Judge Thokozile Matilda Masipa of the High Court in Pretoria found Mr. Pistorius not guilty of murder, but she convicted him of culpable homicide, a charge equivalent to manslaughter. He was sentenced to five years in prison and, after serving one year, was released last October to serve the remainder of his punishment under house arrest and under correctional supervision.

Prosecutors appealed Judge Masipa’s ruling to South Africa’s top appeals court, the Supreme Court of Appeal in Bloemfontein. In December, the court convicted Mr. Pistorius of murder, finding that Judge Masipa had misinterpreted the legal concept of dolus eventualis. Under that principle, the appellate court found, Mr. Pistorius was guilty, because he knew that firing through the locked door would kill whoever was inside — even if he did not believe it was Ms. Steenkamp.

The court referred the matter back to Judge Masipa for sentencing. The proceedings began on Monday, and a decision is expected this week. On Monday, a psychologist for Mr. Pistorius’s defense team said Mr. Pistorius was unfit to testify because he had depression and anxiety, among other disorders.

Mr. Steenkamp’s testimony revived strong emotions in South Africa. The country suffers from high rates of violent crime. Sentencing guidelines suggest a minimum of 15 years in prison for Mr. Pistorius — as prosecutors have recommended — but the judge could conceivably issue a lighter sentence.

“I don’t really go to church, but I’m a Christian,” Mr. Steenkamp said, alternating between addressing Judge Masipa and Mr. Pistorius. He said his wife, June, frequently awakened with nightmares. “June has forgiven. She feels it’s right in her heart to forgive Oscar,” he said. “But then you must understand why forgiving like that — it still does not exonerate you from the crime that you committed.”

Mr. Steenkamp declined to specify how much time in prison he thought Mr. Pistorius should get. “We will go by the decision that the court hands down to Oscar,” he said. “But he has to pay for his crime. I don’t want to say that he has to go to the maximum or whatever it is, but he has to pay.”

Mr. Steenkamp said he was haunted by the thought that his daughter had suffered in her final moments. “What she must have gone through in those split seconds — she must have been in so much fear and pain,” he said. “That is what I think of all the time. I can see it myself. It must have been absolutely and utterly awful.”

In addition to Mr. Steenkamp, Judge Masipa heard on Tuesday from Charlotte Mashabane, a health official at the prison where Mr. Pistorius served part of his sentence for manslaughter. That testimony focused on Mr. Pistorius’s occasional outbursts of anger toward the staff, and on the question of whether he might have had illegal prescription drugs in his cell, as the prosecution has argued.

The court also heard from two defense witnesses: Ebba Gudny Gudmundsdottir, an Icelandic woman who has a son with a disability similar to Mr. Pistorius’s, who she said had been inspired by the defendant; and Mr. Pistorius’s pastor, the Rev. Marius Nel. Prosecutors are expected to call a final witness to testify on Wednesday.

Gareth Newham, a criminal justice researcher at the Institute for Security Studies in Pretoria, South Africa, said, “The Pistorius trial has not been seen so much along racial lines as about wealth and class, that if you have lot of money you can afford to buy justice.”

He added: “I think most South Africans believe in retribution for crimes. We do have a crime problem, and most South Africans do support strict sentencing. Now that he’s been found guilty of murder, the public are generally expecting that he’ll receive at least 10 years.”


