


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

I binge-watched too much this week. Not in how much I watched, which is never enough for me personally, but in how I watched it. My lizard brain still tries to sense what day it is based on what I watched the night before — a Monday morning teed off by “The Sopranos,” or a Friday feeling extra peppy because of the previous night’s “Friends.” I watched seven and a half hours of ESPN’s O.J. Simpson documentary yesterday. Not only can I not sense what day it is, I’m barely sure what year it is.

Thanks to all of you who wrote in to tell me about what new (or new-to-you) shows you’ve tried based on this newsletter. I’m happy to welcome so many new members to the “Terriers” club. If you have a TV question you’d like to see answered here, let me know. Or if you too have accidentally removed yourself from the normal groundings of time because of a binge-watch and would like to commiserate, I am as always here for you: watching@nytimes.com.

“Still the King” (Sunday, 9 p.m., CMT)

Watch if you like “My Name Is Earl,” easy comic pacing and don’t care too much about acting.

Billy Ray Cyrus stars as a washed-up pop singer turned Elvis impersonator who finds himself back in his hometown. And, through a series of calamitous coincidences, he pretends to be a minister. (If it sounds a little like TV Land’s “Impastor,” it is. And congratulations on being the only other person besides me who watches that show.)

There’s an amiability to the show that charmed me, to my enormous surprise, and little asides like the local restaurant being called Tepid’s Lukewarm Grill help keep everything afloat. Cyrus is just so-so in the role, but solid supporting performances, including Joey Lauren Adams as his ex, almost make up for it. “King” is not about to set the world on fire with its greatness, but its loose style and tender regard for its characters are appealing.

USA Gymnastics’ “Made in America” (Watch on YouTube)

Watch if you like American women’s gymnastics since 2001, or victorious patriotism.

The web series (not to be confused with this week’s other “Made in America”) kicks off with a 40-minute episode, but the other installments are each around seven minutes long — not a huge commitment. It’s more or less an infomercial about how great American female gymnasts are, with spotlight episodes about Carly Patterson, Shawn Johnson and Nastia Liukin, but there are interviews with less famous but still decorated athletes, too. We’re going to be inundated with so much stuff like this once the Rio Olympics begin in earnest in August, and the truth is I cannot wait. I wish there was a channel of just human interest sidebars.

The Tony Awards (Sunday, 8 p.m., CBS)

Watch if you like awards shows, “Hamilton” or James Corden.

The Tony Awards are, generally, less boring than the Oscars and snazzier than the Emmys. (This 2013 opening is still the best awards show opening I’ve ever seen.) Host James Corden, himself a Tony winner, is clearly enthusiastic about the gig, but of course the big story is that “Hamilton” is likely to win a boatload of awards. Don’t be the “and Peggy” of Sunday.

“O.J.: Made in America” (Part I, Saturday, 9 p.m., ABC; Parts 2-5, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 9 p.m., ESPN)

Watch if you like best-in-its-class documentary programming.

Even if you think you’re O.J.-ed out after “American Crime Story,” give this a try. The context explained and the depth achieved over the doc’s five episodes is extraordinary, particularly in the first and the final installments — which cover race and racism in Los Angeles, and the aftermath of the trial. It’s some of the best narrative nonfiction TV I’ve ever seen.

While Ryan Murphy’s scripted drama served as a sort of pinhole camera, capturing so much about our society through just depicting one case, “Made in America” is more like a prism, with dozens of ideas refracted through the case and dispersing outward.

“Scandal” Season 5 (coming to Netflix on Saturday)

Watch if you like big monologues, Shondaland soaps that go to 11 and political thrillers with a lot of shouting.

Don’t bother trying to follow every thread on “Scandal” anymore. It’s not worth it — the show has gotten so extreme, and yet so repetitive (how many times can Fitz and Olivia break up and make up?) that close examination just ruins everything.

Instead, let the grandiosity of it all just wash over you; let the wine and the pouting be your armor against the cruelties of the world; let Olivia’s jacket wardrobe be your North Star as you search for a better way to live; let Mellie’s wigs inspire you to be who you dreamed you’d be; let Cyrus’s vocal affectations remind you that anyone who would treat you badly doesn’t deserve your love.

“The 2013 film ‘The Conjuring,’ about a possessed farmhouse in Rhode Island, was one of the better horror movies to come along in a while,” Neil Genzlinger writes. “And ‘The Conjuring 2’ does everything you want a sequel to do. It’s as well made as the original, but the location and the story are different enough that it’s not just the same thing all over again.” (In wide release.)

• Read the full review

• Rent the first “Conjuring” on iTunes

• Or rent it on Amazon

Greta Gerwig, Ethan Hawke, Julianne Moore — this film by writer-director Rebecca Miller has a wonderful cast. And its plot, handled differently, could fall into romantic comedy territory: A young who woman wants to have a child, plans to be artificially inseminated, but then falls in love with a handsome older writer-professor. But, as A. O. Scott writes, “‘Maggie’s Plan’ is a modest movie, reluctant, like its heroine, to make large claims or excessive demands. But it is also cleareyed, generous and funny.” (Expanding to more screens.)

• Read the full review

“The Real O’Neals” star Noah Galvin is extremely forthcoming in this Vulture interview. Extremely forthcoming.

Variety examined the gender and racial breakdown for showrunners for network shows making their debuts this fall and found that “women, who constitute 51 percent of the American population, will run 22 percent of the new shows. That’s not much better than the state of affairs in 1997-98, when 18 percent of the shows on the broadcast networks had women creators.” Oof.

This isn’t TV related, but it’s a powerful long read about emotional and physical abuse on and offstage at one of Chicago’s storefront theaters.

‘The Great British Baking Show’ Will Return on July 1 to PBS

Season 6 of the series, whose most recent finale was the most-watched show in Britain last year, will be the third season to air in the U.S.

• Read The New York Times article


