


Lawrence P. O’Dea III, the police chief in Portland, Ore., and a group of friends took a hunting trip last month to the rural eastern part of the state. But instead of bagging squirrels, the chief accidentally shot one of his friends in the back and then apparently tried to cover it up, police officials said Wednesday.

The friend, whose name has not been released, was not seriously injured.

Once news of the shooting became public, Charlie Hales, Portland’s mayor, suspended Chief O’Dea, 53, pending the results of investigations into the shooting and the chief’s subsequent actions.

During a period in which several big-city police chiefs have been forced out after the emergence of videotapes showing officers shooting or abusing unarmed African-American boys and men, Chief O’Dea’s problems have little to do with policing.

“I’m very thankful that my friend is O.K., and I’m tremendously upset this happened,” Chief O’Dea said in a statement, which called the episode the result of a “negligent discharge.”

News of the shooting comes as the police bureau in Portland, a city of 630,000 people, faces a number of difficulties, including meeting the terms of a 2014 settlement agreement with the Justice Department related to the police bureau’s treatment of the mentally ill, its training and its use-of-force policies. The department also has a shortage of police officers.

Sara Hottman, a spokeswoman for Mr. Hales, said Wednesday that despite the tumult, the bureau’s attempts to transform itself would continue.

“The bureau is on a positive trajectory with reform,” Ms. Hottman wrote in an email. “Mayor Hales will ensure that the acting chief and bureau leadership supports that progress and his effort to institutionalize new bureau cultures around de-escalation, use of force, and community relationships.”

But others fear the reforms could stall given the uncertainty at the top of the department and a new mayor being in place next year.

“There is a concern that change hasn’t happened quickly enough and that they could drag their heels even more,” said Dan Handelman, a founding member of CopWatch, a group that documents instances of police misconduct.

Chief O’Dea, who is on administrative leave pending the outcome of at least three city and state investigations, has been barred from speaking about the case by the police bureau. He could not be reached for comment Wednesday. The mayor has appointed Donna Henderson, an assistant chief, to be the interim chief.

While the facts surrounding the hunting trip remain murky, officials in Portland and Harney County, in eastern Oregon, said Wednesday that Chief O’Dea had traveled to Harney County on a hunting trip with at least five other men in late April. The group had gone to hunt squirrels on a remote tract of land some 80 miles south of Burns, the county seat.

On April 21, the officials said, Chief O’Dea fired a round from his .22-caliber rifle that struck his friend in the lower left side of the back. The victim, 54, was airlifted to a trauma hospital, according to a police dispatch record. The man did not require surgery and has been released, officials said.

But Dave Ward, Harney County’s sheriff, said the hunters told sheriff’s deputies that the bullet wound had been the result of “a self-inflicted accidental shooting.”

Four days later however, Chief O’Dea told Mr. Hales that he had unintentionally shot his friend, according to the mayor’s office.

Word of the shooting did not become public until local reporters broke the story on Friday.

Before suspending the chief late Tuesday, Mr. Hales had been supportive.

“Larry O’Dea is a great chief,” the mayor said in a statement, “who is heartsick over hurting a friend.”


