


Rosé is the hardest wine to make well, said Sacha Lichine, who is perhaps the most prominent rosé winemaker in the world. But, he added, smiling, it is the easiest to sell.

It wasn’t always that way. Mr. Lichine, who owns Château d’Esclans in Provence and is credited with making a strong contribution to the robust growth of rosés, was in New York a few months ago for tastings and visits to some of the restaurants he supplies. Wearing one of his 20 signature pink shirts, he remembered the time before the rosé craze.

In 2008, he said, when he was getting started, he sold just 3,500 cases of the rosé made on his estate. Now, he’s selling more than 200,000 cases, 50,000 of them in New York alone. Owners of prestige wineries in Bordeaux, Burgundy and elsewhere are making rosés; some are flocking to Provence to snap up wineries.

“In Paris today, rosé is bigger than white wine,” Mr. Lichine said. “I think the potential in the United States for rosé is just getting started.”

The total market for rosé wine in the United States increased by 56.4 percent last year over 2014. Rosés from Provence, considered some of the best, accounted for more than half the total.

But back in the beginning, Mr. Lichine said, he was simply “looking to do something different.”

“I thought about making dry, elegant rosés, and they’ve turned out to be the new wave,” he said. “I wanted to make a difference in the industry.”

He sold Château Prieuré-Lichine, the fourth-growth estate he had inherited from his father, the esteemed winery owner and writer Alexis Lichine, and decamped from Margaux to Provence and Château d’Esclans.

What distinguishes today’s rosés from the often-candied “blush” bottles of the past, he said, is finesse. They are light yet floral, he said, with some richness, and the paler the better, a style that has conferred prestige.

A popular rosé de Provence, Château Pigoudet, is nearly colorless; it could be mistaken for white wine. There’s even a California rosé called Summer Water.

But tint is no indication of flavor.

This month in the village of Gordes in Provence, I conducted a tasting of eight rosés from the region for participants on a New York Times trip to Provence. We sampled the wines blind and rated them. They ranged from barely blushing to petal pink, and from bland to floral and fruity. That Château Pigoudet was the favorite, preferred for its scent of jasmine and citrusy richness. Maison Saint Aix, showing a delicate color but big and spicy on the palate, also did well.

Many of these wines seduce with alluring bouquets of fraises des bois, tart blood orange and cherry blossoms before giving way to lean delicacy with an underpinning of complexity on the palate.

When Mr. Lichine was in New York, he sipped his top-of-the-line Garrus and said, “I couldn’t make a rosé like this 25 years ago.” He credits new technology, advanced sorting equipment that allows the pale fruit to be separated from the dark skins faster, and conditions that prevent oxidation.

His portfolio of rosé wines, Garrus, Les Clans, Rock Angel and Whispering Angel, some in dramatic, oversize bottles, range in price from around $10 to more than $100.

He was quick to point out that sparkling rosé Champagne has long been accepted by connoisseurs, usually demands high prices and is suitable all year. “Why not still wine?” he asked.


