


Newcastle moved out of the English Premier League’s relegation zone after a superb free kick in the second half by midfielder Andros Townsend gave the Magpies a 1-0 win at home over Crystal Palace on Saturday.

Townsend’s strike flew into the top corner from over 25 yards out, giving his team an important win as it bids for survival.

Karl Darlow saved a penalty by the former Newcastle player Yohan Cabaye after a handball from Papiss Cisse.

Newcastle is now in 17th place, which places the team provisionally out of the relegation zone.

The team was 1 point above Sunderland and 2 points above Norwich after the three teams finished their matches on Saturday.

Crystal Palace remained 16th.

A win by Norwich would have bumped Newcastle back into the relegation zone, but a second-half goal by the Arsenal substitute Danny Welbeck kept Norwich in 19th place, and Arsenal won at home, 1-0, on a day of protest and division among the home fans.

Welbeck scored in the 59th minute after Olivier Giroud headed a cross for him in the center of the area.

Before that, Norwich had the clearest chances in the match, with midfielder Nathan Redmond missing three first-half opportunities.

Several hundred Arsenal fans held up signs in protest in the 12th minute to signify anger and disappointment that it had been 12 years since the London club won a league title.

Arsenal provisionally moved into third.

Earlier, a Jermain Defoe penalty at the end of extra time rescued a valuable point for visiting Sunderland in a 1-1 draw with Stoke.

In Birmingham, West Ham kept its top-four hopes alive by downing West Bromwich Albion, 3-0. West Ham moved provisionally into fifth place, ahead of Manchester United. West Brom was 14th.

Aston Villa was condemned to a club-record 11th consecutive loss when Watford scored two late goals to win, 3-2, at home.

EVERTON ENDS DROUGHT Leighton Baines’s first goal in nearly two years gave Everton Manager Roberto Martinez a much-needed home victory as the Toffees beat Bournemouth, 2-1, before an emotional crowd at Goodison Park in Liverpool.

Martinez was under pressure after a run of seven games without a win in the league was followed by a loss to Manchester United in an F.A. Cup semifinal last weekend. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)

BARCELONA CLOSES IN Barcelona scored two second-half goals to defeat 10-man Real Betis, 2-0, on the road and move closer to the Spanish league title.

The victory put Barcelona back in first place after earlier victories by Real Madrid and Atlético Madrid.

Real Madrid defeated Real Sociedad, 1-0, on the road with a late winner by Gareth Bale, and host Atlético topped Rayo Vallecano by the same score with a goal by the French striker Antoine Griezmann.

Wins against Espanyol and Granada in the final two rounds of league play would secure Barcelona’s second consecutive title. (AP)

AROUND THE BUNDESLIGA Bayern Munich was held to a 1-1 draw at home by Borussia Mönchengladbach as Borussia Dortmund kept the Bundesliga title race alive with a 5-1 rout of Wolfsburg.

Bayern, the defending champion, would have claimed its 26th German title with a win.

The team got off to a great start when Thomas Müller scored in the sixth minute, but it paid for a lackluster performance when Andre Hahn tied the match in the 72nd. (AP)


