


INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 12 about a study of handwriting on pottery dating to 600 B.C. that was found in Arad, Israel — and could shed light on a long debate over when the main texts of the Bible were composed — misidentified the alphabet used in the handwritten texts. It was paleo-Hebrew, not Aramaic.

•

Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Feb. 28 with an article about proposed legislation in Italy that would lower the penalties for counterfeiting in the commercial olive oil business referred incorrectly to the bottles of olive oil shown at the Colli Etruschi cooperative in Blera. They were awaiting labeling, not filling. Editors were alerted to the error immediately but failed to follow through on a correction. (The Italian Parliament approved the measure on March 1.)

•

An article on Feb. 27 about the sentencing of a Protestant pastor in China to a long prison term on corruption charges — part of a campaign in Zhejiang Province meant to limit the influence of Christian churches and groups — referred incorrectly to interactions between Zhang Kai, a Christian lawyer who has helped defend churches in Zhejiang, and Gu Yuese, leader of the Zhejiang Christian Council, which opposes the province’s practice of removing crosses from churches. The two did not discuss the possibility of suing local officials last year over the cross removals. While the error was promptly corrected online, editors failed to follow through on this print correction.

NEW YORK

The About New York column on Wednesday, about the long history of corruption in New York City misstated, in some copies, the name of a Manhattan hotel where a wholesaler testified in the 1920s that he had to pay $2,000 to a bagman in order to secure the return of 56 cans of cream that had been seized. It is the Hotel Pennsylvania, not the Pennsylvania Hotel.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Thursday about European Union antitrust charges against Google misstated the process though which Google receives revenue related to its Android operating system. Google earns revenue from, among other sources, advertising generated from services like mobile search that are included in the software. It does not receive fees from device makers.

•

An article on Thursday about rancor at ABC over the move of the morning-show host Michael Strahan to “Good Morning America” rendered the name of his current show incorrectly. It is “Live With Kelly and Michael,” not “Live: Kelly and Michael.” The error also appeared in an article on Wednesday announcing the shift.

THE ARTS

A music review on April 14 about a program in the annual MATA Festival, at Scandinavia House in Manhattan, misstated the given name of the composer of a piece that was performed, “Bubbles.” He is Neil Luck, not Nick.

WEEKEND

A Critic’s Notebook article on Friday about “An Early Clue to the New Direction: Queer Cinema Before Stonewall,” a series presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, misstated the number of short films in the series, which also has 23 feature films. It is 25, not 28.

•

An article on Friday in the Gallery Guide about art galleries on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, including the James Cohan Gallery, where a video from the collective the Propeller Group is being shown, misidentified the city in Vietnam where some members of the group are based. It is Ho Chi Minh City, not Hanoi.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


