


Walking on water isn’t an activity associated with ordinary humans. Don’t be surprised, however, to see children doing just that on Saturday at Lehman College in the Bronx.

Religious miracles won’t play a role in this feat — just a shallow pool of cornstarch-filled water.

If you try to stand on its surface, “you will sink,” said Brian Greene, a professor of mathematics and physics at Columbia University. But if you walk briskly across it, “the motion of your feet causes the liquid to momentarily solidify, and you won’t sink.”

This demonstration of what is known as a non-Newtonian fluid will be among about two dozen exhibits at the first City of Science, a World Science Festival satellite event. The annual world festival, founded in New York in 2008 by Dr. Greene and Tracy Day, always culminates in a free street fair at Washington Square Park. City of Science, which is presented by Con Edison and is also free, takes that fair’s highlights indoors and outside Manhattan.

“These major exhibits will travel to each borough,” said Ms. Day, the festival’s chief executive, who is married to Dr. Greene. (The World Science Festival is June 1 through 5; the City of Science dates for Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island haven’t been announced yet.)

“Kids are amazing,” she added. “They want their hands on things, and they want a bunch of wows, and that’s when you get to explain the science.”

Experts will do that, discussing how the displays illustrate phenomena that aren’t readily visible. The astroblaster, or seismic accelerator, for instance, consists of a 26-foot-high vertical stack of balls threaded onto a cable; each ball is smaller than the one beneath it. If the whole stack is allowed to fall at once, energy transfer will send the top ball rocketing to an astounding height. “In many ways, it’s the physics of a supernova explosion,” Dr. Greene said.

Another exhibit, the space-time simulator, uses simple materials like spandex, a circular frame, a large weight and marbles. It neatly illustrates the theory of general relativity without Einstein’s equations.

But the show won’t be all physics. Aspiring neurosurgeons can dissect sheep brains there, and fans of zoology can expect a large “petting zoo,” with creatures like mealworms, rose-hair tarantulas and Madagascar hissing cockroaches.

The idea, Dr. Greene said, is that “you feel that you’re being drawn into a magical world, but one that’s being governed by the deep laws of science.”

(10 a.m. to 4 p.m., the APEX, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, Gate 7, Bedford Park; worldsciencefestival.com/city-of-science.)


