


SINGAPORE — A jewel-laden brooch of a flying phoenix, holding a briolette-cut yellow diamond of 96.62 carats, welcomes visitors to “Van Cleef & Arpels: The Art and Science of Gems,” at the ArtScience Museum in the Marina Bay Sands hotel.

No one could miss the mythical bird, the exhibition’s emblem, on billboards and banners displayed around this island nation. “It’s the perfect icon,” said Catherine Cariou, Van Cleef’s heritage director and one of the three curators. “The jewels of flora and fauna are part of our DNA — the bird of paradise is an Asian design and in its beak is an incredible gem.”

The yellow diamond, worn as a pendant in the 1930s by the Polish opera singer Ganna Walska, became a baby bundle when Van Cleef was commissioned to create the brooch in 1972 for a child’s birth. In keeping with the jewelry house’s tradition of transformability, the piece separates into earrings, a diamond pendant and a clip.

It is one of 430 pieces of jewelry and 250 minerals, displayed in a twin narrative about jewelry making and mineralogy. “We wanted to link the creation of the earth itself with story of gemstones,” said Honor Harger, executive director of the ArtScience Museum, also a curator.

The exhibition has seven sections: Couture, Abstractions, Influences, Precious Objects, Nature, Ballerinas and Fairies, and Icons. Each was paired with an element of gem formation: Pressure, Temperature, Transport, Water, Oxygen, Life and Metamorphism.

Influences, for example, showcases Van Cleef’s fascination with Asian and Egyptian motifs, including a gem-studded platinum bracelet that it created after the 1922 discovery of Tutankhamen’s tomb. And in Icons, there is jewelry owned by Elizabeth Taylor, Maria Callas, Princess Grace of Monaco and Princess Faiza of Egypt.

Visitors also see a 1,765-pound quartz, the largest crystal ever found in the Alps, and a four billion-year-old rock, said to be the world’s oldest. “Our big challenge was to avoid a one-to-one relationship,” said Bruno David of the French National Museum of Natural History, the third curator. “We wanted to escape making the presentation too simple.”

To that end, the exhibition, which runs through Aug. 14, also offers its own app, children’s activities, videos of artisans at work and a hologram of a 1938 bouquet clip hovering in midair. “We want to take people’s breath away,” Ms. Harger said.


