


What in the World offers you glimpses of what our journalists are observing around the globe. Let us know what you think: whatintheworld@nytimes.com

If you want to visit Mount Everest, you had better be pretty adventurous — and not just for the climb. Getting to the mountain usually means flying into Lukla, Nepal, home of Tenzing-Hillary Airport, one of the scariest airstrips in the world.

It’s just a short flight to Lukla from Kathmandu, the capital, but it’s plenty challenging for pilots, who have to guide 19-passenger turboprops through rugged mountain terrain where the wind often swirls at 30 to 40 miles per hour and thick fogs can form. Not much weather data is available for conditions along the way, so pilots have to rely on reports from previous flights before deciding whether to take off.

Midway through a recent flight, as passengers fumbled to take photographs of the Himalayas, the plane ran into turbulence, dropped sharply and pivoted left. The pilot told passengers not to worry, and one trekker laughed through his teeth.

“You can’t train on weather,” said Capt. Pawan Singh Nagarkoti, 31, who flies the route regularly. “You can fly the aircraft, you can master the aircraft, you can be one hell of a good pilot in the aircraft, but weather, it has always been a problem.”

Then you get to the airport itself. The runway is short, about 1,700 feet, or just one-fifth the shortest runway at Kennedy International Airport in New York. And it isn’t level: It was built on a mountainside with a slope of about 12 percent, making one end about 200 feet higher than the other.

Planes land headed uphill, so the slope helps them brake in the short space available. But it also creates an illusion of distance for pilots. Clouds often appear suddenly and impair visibility (the cause of a 2008 crash), and guesthouses cluster close to the runway. Pilots have just one chance to get it right.

For takeoff, planes barrel downhill toward the edge of a cliff, with the slope helping them pick up the necessary speed. But the margin for error is no better: There are boulders on one side, a 2,000-foot drop on the other.

“If you lose your engine on Lukla, you will not come out of that,” Captain Nagarkoti said. “We are told in those moments, if anything happens, apply brakes, apply max power, try to stop on the runway, use whatever means to stop on the runway.”


