


Israel’s internal security minister ordered the police on Tuesday to stop giving the bodies of Palestinians killed while committing attacks against Israelis to their families for burial, after online video appeared to show a large crowd at the funeral of a man who killed a rabbi last year.

The order by the minister, Gilad Erdan, contradicted an announcement this month by the Israeli authorities that they would follow a recommendation from the country’s Supreme Court to return the bodies of nine Palestinians to their families before the start of Ramadan, which begins in June.

Mr. Erdan announced the decision in a Facebook post in response to the video made on Monday at the East Jerusalem funeral of Alaa Abu Jamal, a Palestinian who was fatally shot by the police in October after he rammed a car into a group of civilians and then killed a rabbi with a meat cleaver. The video appeared to show a crowd chanting anti-Israel slogans at the funeral.

Mr. Erdan said the number of people visible in the video violated an agreement made by Mr. Abu Jamal’s family to restrict the number of mourners to 40 and to ensure that the event did not become politicized.

“I just saw the outrageous photos from the funeral overnight in East Jerusalem which violated the police stipulations given to the family of the terrorist, who held a funeral with a large number of attendees and calls for violence and support for terrorism,” Mr. Erdan wrote, according to a translation published by The Jerusalem Post.

“The families of terrorists lied to the High Court when they vowed to adhere to the police stipulations and it’s a shame that the High Court believed them, and exerted pressure on the police to return the bodies in time for Ramadan,” he continued.

In an interview with Haaretz, another Israeli newspaper, Mohammed Mahmoud, a lawyer for Mr. Abu Jamal’s family, said that the family had not violated its agreement with the government because the crowd had gathered at the local mosque — a public place — and not at the funeral.

“The mosque is in the middle of the village and people can’t be prevented from going there,” Mr. Mahmoud told Haaretz. “The family was responsible for ensuring that no more than the number agreed entered the cemetery.”


