


Track and field’s world governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations, still has a very long way to run before earning back our trust. Its former president, Lamine Diack, faces charges of corruption in France. Its new president, Sebastian Coe, who received Diack’s electoral stamp of approval, is back to answering prickly questions about what he knew and when he knew it.

But at least Coe and his fellow I.A.A.F. council members did the right thing on Friday: ruling unanimously that they would not lift the ban on the Russian federation in time for its athletes to compete under the Russian flag at the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.

“I think it was institutional necessity,” said John Hoberman, a professor at the University of Texas who is a sports historian and doping expert.

But even if Coe needs every clear break with the past that he can muster, maintaining Russia’s ban was also justified.

The Russians have no monopoly on doping, as those of us from the land of Lance Armstrong and Marion Jones must acknowledge. But the breadth and depth of Russia’s top-down doping culture has still been shocking at a stage when international sports have seen enough scandals and fallen angels to turn even Pollyannas into cynics hunched over their coffee and the smoldering butt of a Gauloise in a dark corner of the global internet cafe.

It takes something special — and not in a good way — to get a whole national team banned from the Olympics, an event that still likes to bill itself as a refuge from politics and exclusion.

There is plenty of propaganda in that. In the 120 years since Baron Pierre de Coubertin, a French aristocrat, revived the Greek games in 1896, there have been bans and boycotts. Professionals were long barred from competing. Women were long restricted to shorter distances and lesser billing. South Africa was kept out — and rightly so — for its racist apartheid policies.

But there has never been an exclusionary moment quite like Friday in Vienna. Until now, no country has had its athletes banned from an Olympics for doping — not even East Germany, whose shameful and state-sponsored system was not fully revealed until the country ceased to exist.

“The politics of doping in the ’70s and ’80s were nothing compared to what they are now, and the rest of the Olympic nations were essentially helpless with regard to cleaning up the East Germans,” Hoberman said. “It wasn’t even imagined. There was no leverage and the evidence base was patchy.”

Friday’s ruling is likely to be definitive, although the International Olympic Committee will meet next week to consider the I.A.A.F. decision. It would amend it at its peril in light of the reports that show Russia’s continuing resistance to true reform.

“I think we need to be clear here,” Coe said in Vienna. “The eligibility of athletes to compete in international competition is entirely a matter for the I.A.A.F.”

There are also the excellent arguments being made by federations and athletes from other nations: Even Russian dopers who might be cleaning up their act now are still potential beneficiaries of past doping.

“After investigation it was found that the Russian federation cheated on the most egregious level,” said Jenny Simpson, the former women’s 1,500-meter world champion from the United States. “How the I.A.A.F. acts on this case communicates to the sport and the world that there are either going to be consequences for cheating or not. For me, it’s that simple.”

The repercussions are far from straightforward, however. The pity and injustice is that the ban on Russia for now applies only to track and field. The system in place that fostered a culture of doping clearly involved other sports, particularly those whose athletes were based largely in Russia and subject to its dubious safeguards.

That is a procedural issue, linked to the fact that the investigation by the World Anti-Doping Agency that led to the suspension last November was restricted in scope to track and field. The scope has since widened, with another WADA inquiry now looking into a New York Times report that the Russian authorities manipulated drug-testing results at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi.

That investigation, headed by Richard McLaren, was set to deliver its findings in mid-July, shortly before the Rio Games begin. They could be damning, with McLaren confirming his preliminary findings on Friday that the Russian Ministry of Sport was involved in instructing the Moscow antidoping laboratory not to report positive sample results before, during and after the 2013 world track and field championships there.

Even so, it will require quite a leap — in terms of due process and timetable — to ban Russia’s Olympic team as a whole from Rio.

There also is an opening for Russian track and field athletes to compete, although not under a Russian flag. “The very tiny crack in the door is they have to be subject to a reliable drug-testing regime outside of Russia,” said Rune Andersen, the chairman of the independent task force appointed by the I.A.A.F. to monitor Russia’s federation.

That very tiny crack could create some very loud legal debate in the less than two months that remain before the opening ceremony, even if Andersen made it clear that “there won’t be many athletes who will manage to get through.”

One of them could be Darya Klishina, a Russian long jumper based at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla. One of her coaches there is Dwight Phillips, the 2004 Olympic men’s long jump champion from the United States, who has been an outspoken advocate for tough antidoping measures.

For Phillips, the I.A.A.F. taking on a country and its system is “much more impactful” than taking on individuals. But he also believes Klishina deserves a chance at the Olympics.

“I see the blood, sweat and tears,” he said. “You have to raise your eyebrows when athletes are training in Russia, but when you have athletes training abroad and undergoing the same rigorous testing program as our Americans or Europeans, I think we need to take a look at that. It just doesn’t seem reasonable to ban everyone when you do have innocent people who are doing things the right way.”

Innocents suffer all the time in sports: See relay team members stripped of their medals because a teammate tested positive or would-be champions of the past who missed their Olympic moment because of boycotts.

The challenge this time is how to determine, on very short notice, precisely who is doing it the right way without undermining the strong message sent by the ban. Phillips is correct about the impact. Penalizing a country, even at the risk of politicizing the process, seems a much more effective method of ensuring rapid and enduring change.

But Russia, however culpable in this instance, is a pillar of global sports and the Olympics.

As in the Soviet era, Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, has used sports as a promotional tool for the state. He also has formed strong connections with many sports leaders, including the I.O.C. president, Thomas Bach. And the World Cup finals in soccer are still set to be staged in Russia in 2018. Such deep ties might once have been enough to avert a blanket ban such as Friday’s, but the paper trail and the current climate were too hot this time.

Though Russia and its track and field program are hardly the only parties at fault in a global sports chain full of weak links, the I.A.A.F. deserves credit for bringing the hammer down. Not too much credit, though.

“I hope,” Simpson said, “that immediately following their announcement, they went back to work.”


