


INTERNATIONAL

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Wednesday about an accidental leak of confidential memos meant to temper news media criticism of the Egyptian government misstated the surname of a journalist who said the memos suggested that the government did not want to be held accountable. He is Mahmoud Elmamlouk, not Mahmoud El Mamluk Heba Habib. The article also misidentified Mr. Elmamlouk’s employer and his job title. He is the editor in chief of Innfrad, not a reporter for Youm7.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on March 23 about survivors’ accounts of the Brussels terrorist attack misstated the day it occurred. It was on Tuesday, March 22 — not on Thursday, March 17. Although the error was promptly corrected online, editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Tuesday about a second lawsuit filed by the former professional wrestler Hulk Hogan against Gawker Media misstated part of a claim in the suit. The suit contends that Gawker tried “to gain access to video and/or audio footage” of Mr. Hogan’s use of racial slurs, not that it had obtained that tape. (Gawker denies ever possessing it.)

•

An article on Wednesday about the growth of outside financing for law firms misstated the amount of capital held by Burford Capital, a litigation lender. It recently added capital, bringing its investment total to $1 billion. It does not have roughly half that of Gerchen Keller Capital’s $1.4 billion in assets. The article also misstated the position of Christopher P. Bogart, the chief executive of Burford, when he was at the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore. He was an associate, not a partner.

SPORTS

A report in the N.B.A. roundup last Thursday about a meeting between Phil Jackson and David Blatt to discuss the Knicks’ coaching vacancy misstated the surname of the team’s general manager in some copies. He is Steve Mills, not Mill.

•

The Keeping Score column in some editions on Friday, about the performances of the Mets and the Yankees 20 games into the Major League Baseball season, misstated, in some copies, the Mets’ E.R.A. entering last Thursday’s games. It was 2.91, not 2.41.

•

A Sports of The Times column on April 26 about a court ruling affirming N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell’s broad authority to administer discipline to players like Tom Brady misstated, in one instance, the name of the court that made the ruling. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, it is the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, not the United States Circuit Court of Appeals Second District.

ARTS

A report in the “Arts, Briefly” column on Wednesday about the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival this summer referred incorrectly to Patti Smith’s opening-night performance. She is headlining a double bill with Mariachi Flor de Toloache as the opening act; she is not being “honored.” The report also referred incorrectly to the salsa duo Richie Ray and Bobby Cruz, who will also appear at the festival. They perform songs; they are not dancers.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Monday and in some editions on Sunday about the Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan, the Jesuit priest and antiwar activist, misstated the year the movie “The Mission,” in which he had a small role, was released. It was 1986, not 1989.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


