


If you’re playing a game of word association, and someone mutters the phrase “fried chicken,” it is probably unlikely that the next word you will blurt out is “Germany.”

But Frank Castronovo and Frank Falcinelli, the two chefs behind Prime Meats, a seven-year-old spot in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, that specializes in carefully executed beer-hall fare such as schnitzel, sausage and spaetzle, are determined to change your mental reflexes.

For a few months now, the Germanish restaurant has been serving a $36 menu item identified only as “crispy Guinea hen.” Unless you grew up in a region of the country settled by German immigrants, you may be inclined to skip over that menu item. Doing so would be a mistake. The dish, a half-bird that comes to the table crackly from hot oil and slathered with what the two men describe as a “chicken-skin caramel,” takes its place as a curveball rival to fried-chicken contenders, even those hailing from Tennessee and South Korea.

The idea for the dish emerged last summer when Mr. Castronovo took a family trip to Berlin. While there, he asked people for restaurant recommendations. He was urged to go to a place referred to simply as Henne, meaning hen, and instructed to get the signature dish. He did so. “The hen was out of this world,” he recalled. “I couldn’t believe it. I was like, ‘This has got to go on our menu.’”

Yet trying to replicate that Berlin specialty turned out to be a challenge back in Brooklyn. The two Franks spent weeks testing out different techniques and birds. “The simplest thing in the world sometimes takes the most work,” Mr. Castronovo said.

Eventually they settled on a juicy Guinea hen from D’Artagnan that is crisped up in a bath of oil (without any batter or coating) before being strafed, as it comes out of the fryer, with a rust-colored spice mix that includes paprika, cumin, Aleppo pepper and sugar. The mix sticks to the bird, going all melty and gooey on contact.

Some customers expressed a tang of puzzled resistance, at first. Now they do not hesitate to order the hen and tear into it with their fingers. Regardless of its origins, fried chicken always plays well with others. As Mr. Castronovo said, “It goes great with a beer and a bratwurst.”


