


Mount Everest, a prolific killer, collects its victims in a number of ways.

It subsumes them in avalanches, or sends them tumbling down a crevasse. But most often, its victims are taken by the thin mountain air.

That is what appears to have happened to three climbers — a Dutch man, an Australian woman and an Indian man — who died in succession over recent days while making their way down from the summit.

Pasang Phurba Sherpa, an official at Seven Summit Treks confirmed the deaths of Eric Arnold of the Netherlands and Maria Strydom of Australia, who were on the same expedition, and said both had been caused by altitude sickness.

“All of the team together, they tried to help them, but they couldn’t save their lives,” he said in an interview on Sunday from Kathmandu, Nepal’s capital.

On Monday, The Associated Press reported that a third climber had died, Subhash Paul of India. Like the others, he was overcome by altitude sickness as he was descending the mountain, a trekking company official told the news agency.

The expedition was the fifth time that Mr. Arnold, 35, an alpinist from Rotterdam, had tried to reach the summit, and on Friday he finally made it. But he was suffering from frostbite on his fingers and eyes, and complained on his blog about feeling weak. That night, while resting at Camp IV, the uppermost of four camps on the route to the summit, he died, Pasang Phurba Sherpa said.

The Australian woman, Ms. Strydom, was a 34-year-old lecturer on finance at Monash University in Melbourne and an experienced mountain climber. She succumbed to illness Saturday afternoon somewhere between Camps IV and III, Pasang Phurba Sherpa said.

More than 250 people have died trying to climb Everest since the first recorded ascent in 1953. Researchers have found that they most often die during the descent, after being ravaged by low pressure, oxygen scarcity and severe cold in what is called the death zone, above 26,000 feet. Victims commonly show symptoms of high-altitude cerebral edema, a fatal swelling in the brain.

Favorable weather this climbing season, which runs from March through May, has allowed hundreds of climbers to reach the summit of Everest, after two years of tragedy on the mountain.

In 2014, an avalanche killed 16 Nepalese. Then, in April 2015, a series of earthquakes in the country killed nearly 9,000 people, including at least 18 who were at the mountain’s base camp. Climbing expeditions were canceled, and last year not one climber scaled Everest.

Pasang Phurba Sherpa said on Sunday that the rest of the Seven Summit Treks team on the mountain, which is being led by a Dutch climber, Arnold Coster, was still making its way down. They would assess later how to retrieve the two bodies, he said.

In an article about Ms. Strydom’s love of climbing, published in March on the Monash Business School’s website, she said that she felt well prepared for the Everest climb, and that after the attempt she would take a hot shower and then “turn to the next adventure.”

Her mother posted a picture on Facebook on Saturday of herself and her daughter on a cruise ship, smiling and holding cocktail glasses. “I’m just too devastated to communicate, sorry,” she wrote.

Mr. Arnold said in an interview in February on a Dutch radio program that he understood the risks in challenging the world’s tallest peak.

“It isn’t a death wish, but a kind of zest for life,” he said of his desire to make the climb. “For me, it lies in the mountains. And, apparently, getting a bit closer to the edge of life makes life even more beautiful for me.”


