


NEW YORK

An article last Sunday about the Coast Guard’s rescue of seven fishermen aboard the Carolina Queen III, a scalloping boat that ran aground on Rockaway Beach on Feb. 25 amid gusting winds, misstated, in some copies, the amount of ice that had been loaded onto the boat. It was 20,000 pounds, not 20,000 tons. The article also misstated the name of the muscle in the scallop that is eaten. It is the adductor, not abductor. And the article referred incorrectly to the helicopter that the Fire Department had planned to use during the operation. It is owned and operated by the New York Police Department, not by the Fire Department.

SPORTS

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions last Sunday about the Rangers’ 4-2 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins in Game 2 of their N.H.L. playoff series misspelled, in some copies, the surname of the Rangers player whose stick struck goaltender Henrik Lundqvist in the right eye in Game 1. He is Marc Staal, not Stall. The article also misspelled, in some copies, the surname of a Rangers defenseman who missed the game with an injury. He is Dan Girardi, not Giradri.

•

A Sports of The Times column last Sunday about the financing used to build Yankee Stadium misidentified the position in state government once held by Richard Brodsky, who issued a report on the public subsidies for the stadium called “The House That You Built.” He is a former member of the New York State Assembly, not a former state senator.

REAL ESTATE

Because of an editing error, a caption this weekend for two pictures with a cover article about older apartment buildings in New York that are adding amenities to stay competitive omits the description of the top photograph. It shows Monica Goel and her husband, Donal Burke, in the new bike room of the Carlton Regency, a co-op on East 36th Street.

•

A cover article last Sunday about people who live in small spaces referred incorrectly to Glenn Coleman and Vicki Behm, who live in a 350-square-foot apartment in Greenwich Village. They moved to New York in 1996, not 1986.

•

Two pictures with the “Residential Sales Around the Region” chart last Sunday were reversed. The picture of the Tudor-style house is in Short Hills, N.J, and the two-story stucco house is in Greenwich, Conn.

ARTS & LEISURE

An article last Sunday about the artist Kay WalkingStick misidentified the location where she was raised. It was in Syracuse, not New Jersey.

SUNDAY STYLES

A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the increasing number of celebrities who feature pictures of their young children on their social media accounts misidentified the woman and child shown in a photograph projected behind Mark Zuckerberg as he gave a speech at a Facebook conference earlier this year. They are not his wife and son.

•

An article on April 10 about the rise of sororities on Ivy League campuses misidentified the college affiliation of Blair Wilson, one of the students interviewed. She is a sophomore at Columbia, not Barnard.

SUNDAY BUSINESS

An article last Sunday about the Berggruen Institute, the think tank operated by the billionaire investor Nicolas Berggruen, misstated, using information from the institute, the number of scholars it is currently funding. There are six scholars, not five.

BOOK REVIEW

An illustration caption on April 10 with a review of “John Quincy Adams: Militant Spirit,” by James Traub, misstated the number of candidates in the presidential election of 1824. There were four, not three. (In addition to Adams, the candidates were Andrew Jackson, William H. Crawford and Henry Clay.)

A credit with the illustration misstated the surname of the 19th-century cartoonist who depicted the candidates in a foot-race. He was David Claypoole Johnston, not Johnson.

•

A review last Sunday about “Ghetto: The Invention of a Place, the History of an Idea,” by Mitchell Duneier, misidentified the Michigan city that was the site of a debate between Democratic presidential candidates in March. It is Flint, not Detroit.

TRAVEL

The Surfacing column last Sunday, about the Central City neighborhood of New Orleans, misstated part of the name of an organization investing in the neighborhood. It is the New Orleans Redevelopment Authority, not the New Orleans Redevelopment Association.

SUNDAY REVIEW

An opinion article last Sunday about the use of biotechnology to protect biodiversity described black-footed ferrets incorrectly. They are members of the order Carnivora; they are not rodents.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


