


Uganda has agreed to cut all military and police ties with North Korea, depriving the North of a crucial base for arms and other exports in Africa, the office of President Park Geun-hye of South Korea said on Monday.

President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda made that promise in a summit meeting with Ms. Park on Sunday during her visit to Africa, her office said.

In the meeting, her office said, Mr. Museveni agreed to comply with United Nations sanctions aimed at limiting North Korea’s capacity to earn foreign cash for its banned nuclear and missile program.

“We are disengaging the cooperation we are having with North Korea, as a result of U.N. sanctions,” Sam Kutesa, Uganda’s foreign minister, told the Ugandan broadcaster NBS Television.

Col. Shaban Bantariza, a spokesman for the Ugandan government, said his country was simply “disengaging from military cooperation” and not cutting diplomatic ties with the North Koreans, The Associated Press reported.

Instructors from North Korea have been in Uganda for years, training its police in weapons use and in other areas, according to South Korean officials and a United Nations sanctions report. Uganda was also believed to be a crucial buyer of rifles and other small arms from North Korea.

Under economic pressure from international sanctions, North Korea has relied on the exports of weapons and the deployment of military instructors abroad as a source of foreign currency.

The United Nations vowed to crack down on these income sources in its latest sanctions, imposed after the North’s nuclear test in January.

North Korean officials have been visiting Uganda since the days of Kim Il-sung — grandfather of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un — who cultivated ties with African countries when he was president.

Mr. Museveni, in power since 1986, visited North Korea in 1987, 1990 and 1992 and met with Kim Il-sung. When he visited South Korea in 2013, he surprised officials by greeting them in Korean; he said he had learned it from Kim Il-sung, the South Korean news agency Yonhap reported.

In 2014, he received a North Korean delegation led by Kim Yong-nam, the No. 2 man in the North’s hierarchy. But that year, his government declined to receive an International Kim Il-sung Award that the North offered to Mr. Museveni, Yonhap reported.

The Park-Museveni agreement, if put into effect, would be a coup for Ms. Park, who supports aggressive enforcement of United Nations sanctions against North Korea. During her current three-nation tour in Africa, she has tried to rally support for the sanctions, offering aid packages as incentives.

During her visit, Uganda and South Korea signed 10 cooperation agreements in areas like defense, health, rural development and communications technology, both governments said.

South Korea has exported $350,000 worth of helmets, bulletproof jackets and grenades to Uganda in the last three years, according to South Korean government data.

For decades, South Korea and North Korea have tried to undercut each other’s influence in Africa. The visit by Ms. Park was the first state trip to Uganda by a South Korean president since the two nations established diplomatic relations in 1963.

On Tuesday, North Korea launched a missile, but the test ended in failure, the South Korean military said. It was the latest in a recent string of test flops that have embarrassed Kim Jong-un, who has positioned his country’s missile and nuclear programs as his key achievement.

The North launched the missile from a site east of Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, the South Korean military said in a statement. It said the test was a failure, but it provided no further details, like the type of missile used, pending further analysis.


