


More than 2,700 years ago, Chinese astronomers observed a night in which “stars fell like rain.” Today, we call this celestial display the Lyrid meteor shower. The annual light show began Saturday, peaks this Friday, and ends April 25.

The Lyrid meteors streak through space at about 107,000 miles per hour and explode about 55 miles in the sky. But even during its peak, we’ll barely see a drizzle.

“This year’s not a good viewing time for Lyrids,” said Bill Cooke, an astronomer with NASA’s Meteoroid Environment Office. “The moonlight is going to wash out many of the meteors.”

The moon is waxing and on Friday, it will be full. Most years, you can see 15 to 20 meteors blaze across the sky every hour, but this time, we will likely see only one or two an hour, Dr. Cooke said.

Compared with other annual showers, the Lyrids puts on a moderate show. That’s because its source, Comet Thatcher, typically leaves behind less debris than other comets do as it orbits the sun.

Comets are often described as dirty snowballs. As they voyage through the solar system, they spew specks of ice and rock. The dusty trails linger in space long after the comet leaves, only to burn ephemerally when Earth passes through the stream, creating a meteor shower.

Comet Thatcher makes its journey around the sun roughly every 415 years. Its last trip was in 1861 and it will make its next rendezvous in 2276. According to Dr. Cooke, when we see a Lyrid shower, we are seeing debris that fell from the comet not during its 1861 orbit, but from its previous one, around 1446, or even an earlier one. “Because the comet’s orbit does not intersect Earth’s,” he said, “the debris must have time to drift away in order for us to run into it.”

Some of the sparks we see during a shower come from cosmic crumbs no bigger than a pebble. It’s not the size that determines how bright it will be, Dr. Cooke said. Rather, it’s the speed at which its particles pierces the sky. But, again, don’t expect to catch many shooting stars this week.

As a consolation prize, the Perseids shower in August will be extra strong, according to Dr. Cooke, sending out 200 to 250 flares an hour — a meteor monsoon.


