


This article originally appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 16, 1998.

Cameras were clicking inside United Nations headquarters yesterday afternoon when Secretary General Kofi Annan presented the Greatest, Muhammad Ali, with the Messenger of Peace honor. This was mostly a photo opportunity: the Secretary General presented Ali with a framed citation and a lapel pin in the form of a dove. Ali and his wife, Lonnie, presented the Secretary General with a pair of boxing gloves. This was a relationship filled with deep, longstanding mutual admiration.

The boxer and the Secretary General shared a sports background. Annan had been a sprinter and soccer player at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota. Ali, of course, is the three-time heavyweight champion of the world, the greatest of all time. Each man has devoted his life to the pursuit of peace, Annan as a diplomat, Ali as an unofficial ambassador.

Annan established the Messenger of Peace honor as a way of recognizing that peace is not the mere province of governments but hinges on the willingness of individual citizens to use their gifts to inspire good will. Ali became the second former athlete to receive the honor. Magic Johnson was honored as well.

“People like Muhammad transcend national boundaries,” Annan said. “Some people transcend their environment and their profession. Some of the skills they learned in athletics, the discipline, the art of competition, having compassion for those you defeat, working with groups and working as a team and being part of a team; knowing that you cannot achieve much without others.

“Recognizing that you need to rely on others, just as they rely on you; regardless of how brilliant you are. Playing with others without jealousy. There are certain qualities that great athletes pick up that eventually can stand them in good stead in life. These are lessons these athletes can pass on.”

Shortly after Annan was named Secretary General in January 1997, he initiated the Messenger of Peace honor to recognize a commitment to peace, honor and human dignity. Annan recalled one of Ali’s visits to the United Nations when he drew a picture with the inscription, “The rent we pay here on earth is service to mankind and to other people.”

Annan first met Ali in 1979 when Ali, at the request of Richard Lapchick, a U.N. employee at the time and now the director of the Center for the Study of Sport in Society, requested that he address the Special Committee Against Apartheid. Annan, who was born in Ghana, had admired Ali from afar for decades.

“I admired him first as an athlete, an outstanding, unique boxer,” Annan said. “I also followed his own travails and difficulties and saw the way he handled himself and how he became a stronger and a better man. That’s quite an achievement. Not all of us who go through traumatic experiences are able to pick up the pieces and move on stronger and better men, and Muhammad did that.”

After the ceremony in Annan’s office, Ali walked through the United Nations corridors and became the magnet he has been for three decades. Employees stopped; tourists snapped pictures. The Russian delegate, the delegate from Poland, a delegate from the Republic of South Korea all shook Ali’s hand. Ahmed Kamal Khan, the Pakistani delegate, warmly greeted Ali and told of the time he visited Ali in the champion’s home in 1982. Ali gave him a copy of a book of prayer and signed it.

“He is not a boxer or an athlete,” Kamal Khan said. “He is a complete man.” On the U.N. Plaza, 200 children waited and cheered as Ali arrived. One hundred of them had walked from Harlem to meet the champ, some of them weren’t born, their parents may not have been born when Ali recorded his great triumphs.

Ali smiled and walked among them, accepting handshakes and requests for photos with children.

Before the Secretary General excused himself, he offered one final image to put Muhammad Ali in proper perspective. He compared Ali to the wise farmer.

“The farmer knows instinctively that if you take something from the earth today, you have to put something back to be able to return tomorrow to harvest,” Annan said. “Muhammad understands that.”


