


Onstage, George Carlin was a rebellious performer who delighted in reminding audiences that as much as we try to keep our lives organized, the universe is ultimately a chaotic place.

Behind the scenes, however, Mr. Carlin was a surprisingly methodical person. Over a career that spanned almost a half-century, this pioneering stand-up saved countless artifacts, including notes, set lists, scrapbooks, tickets and clothing — even the signs he liked to steal from the theaters where he played.

In time, Mr. Carlin’s trove will be shared with a wider audience: His daughter, Kelly Carlin, is donating these materials to the National Comedy Center, an as-yet-unopened attraction in Jamestown, N.Y., that aspires to be a premier destination for fans, artists and historians.

Since her father’s death in 2008, Ms. Carlin has regarded these items as mementos of Mr. Carlin and the fruitfully contradictory nature of an artist with an anarchic spirit and a diligent approach to his work.

“He was a very humble man, in the sense that he would never presume that he was important to the world,” Ms. Carlin said in a telephone interview.

And yet, she said, this collection showed that “it was obviously important to him to tell his story to himself.”

The donation of Mr. Carlin’s archives to the National Comedy Center was announced officially on Tuesday night during an event at the Paley Center for Media in Manhattan.

For Ms. Carlin, this gift relieves her of what she said was “the honor and the burden” of holding onto these possessions, which she estimated filled about “eight to 10 steamer trunks.”

For the National Comedy Center, the acquisition of Mr. Carlin’s archives is a crucial shot of authority for this still-developing institution, which is scheduled to open late next year.

“It gives the whole thing a lot of credibility that it otherwise might not have,” said Kliph Nesteroff, the author and stand-up who will be the curator of the center’s museum.

“Without that kind of sanctioning, it would just be another dead-end project,” Mr. Nesteroff added.

Just as the Baseball Hall of Fame has helped make Cooperstown, N.Y., a tourist haven, the founders of the National Comedy Center are hoping their project will draw visitors to Jamestown, a onetime hub for furniture manufacturing about 400 miles northwest of New York City.

The National Comedy Center, a nonprofit organization that has received more than $3.5 million from New York State, has sought to capitalize on Jamestown’s status as the birthplace of Lucille Ball. The center’s parent company already owns and operates the Lucille Ball Desi Arnaz Museum in that city, as well as its annual Lucille Ball Comedy Festival.

Ms. Carlin participated in last year’s festival (including a performance of her one-woman show based on her memoir, “A Carlin Home Companion: Growing Up With George”) and in a groundbreaking ceremony for the National Comedy Center.

Over the years, she said, she had been thinking about the ideal place for her father’s possessions.

Giving them to, say, the Smithsonian Institution, would “fill my ego up a little bit,” but then, “most probably, all his stuff would end up in a crate,” she said.

“If you remember the end of ‘Raiders of the Lost Ark,’ it would disappear into a warehouse,” she added.

Ms. Carlin said that she had been approached by others hoping to create organizations that would celebrate comedy and its history, but these endeavors did not seem plausible to her.

“I’ve had a lot of lunches with a lot of people that have ideas for the Comedy Hall of Fame, and the Comedy Museum and the Comedy This or the Comedy That,” she said. “It has never gone past a lunch.”

Mr. Nesteroff, author of “The Comedians: Drunks, Thieves, Scoundrels and the History of American Comedy,” said he was similarly skeptical when the National Comedy Center asked him to be a curator.

“I said: ‘It sounds stupid. It just sounds corny. And every person that’s attempted to do it has failed,’” he recalled in a telephone interview.

But after a recent visit to Jamestown to see the renovations to the former train station that will be home to the National Comedy Center and to hear the plans of its founders, Mr. Nesteroff said he was won over.

“It’s not a stodgy museum where things are on the wall, and you read the description and you keep walking,” Mr. Nesteroff said. “It’s much more interactive and involved. Everything they said about comedy rang true.”

Along with other planned facilities (including a club that will present virtual performances by dead stand-ups of past eras), Ms. Carlin said the National Comedy Center will have a permanent exhibition of materials from her father’s archives.

“Some of these things, I love living with them, but I’m really ready to move on and let my dad have his place outside of my house,” she said.

With a laugh, she added, “They need a home — besides my home.”


