


BALTIMORE — The Baltimore police officer whose manslaughter trial in the death of Freddie Gray ended with a hung jury returned to court on Monday — but this time as a witness in the murder trial of a fellow officer who drove the police van in which Mr. Gray suffered the spinal injury that killed him.

Speaking calmly, if at times reluctantly, Officer William G. Porter, whose retrial is scheduled for September, told the court that although Mr. Gray asked him for help, he did not initially believe Mr. Gray was truly injured. He took a long pause when the prosecutor, Michael Schatzow, asked whether there had been an opportunity to put a seatbelt on Mr. Gray.

“I guess so,” Officer Porter said, testifying for the prosecution in the trial of Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., the van driver.

The death of Mr. Gray, a 25-year-old black man, set off riots, arson and looting here in April 2015, prompting the governor to call in the National Guard to secure the streets and putting this city squarely at the center of the national debate over race and policing. The announcement of charges against six officers — three black and three white — calmed the city, but prosecutors have been unable so far to secure a conviction. Officer Porter’s trial ended with a mistrial in December, and another police officer, Edward M. Nero, was acquitted last month of four charges relating to Mr. Gray’s initial arrest.

The case against Officer Goodson is the prosecutors’ most ambitious: They contend that Officer Goodson, a veteran police officer who is also black, committed second-degree depraved heart murder by intentionally giving Mr. Gray a so-called rough ride in the police van while he was not secured by a seatbelt. They have also alleged that Officer Goodson failed to obtain medical help for Mr. Gray when he asked for it. They considered Officer Porter a material witness against Officer Goodson because he could tell the court what the two discussed about Mr. Gray’s condition during the van ride.

Mr. Gray was arrested by police officers after he fled from them in the blighted neighborhood of Sandtown and was eventually placed, shackled and handcuffed, into a police wagon. With Officer Goodson at the wheel, the van made several stops throughout West Baltimore — including one when Officer Porter responded to help Officer Goodson check on Mr. Gray, which was a major focus of Officer Porter’s testimony Monday — before he was discovered unresponsive in the van at the Western District police station. He died a week later of a broken neck.

Much of Officer Porter’s testimony was familiar from his own trial. He said that Mr. Gray asked him for help getting up and that, when he asked Mr. Gray if he wanted medical attention, Mr. Gray said he did. But Officer Porter said he did not think Mr. Gray looked unwell.

Still, he said, he suggested that Officer Goodson take Mr. Gray to the hospital, calling Mr. Gray’s request for medical attention “the magic words.”

“If someone says they want to go to the hospital, they automatically reject them from central booking,” Officer Porter said.

Officer Porter’s testimony was the second time that one of the six officers charged in Mr. Gray’s arrest and death has taken the stand against another, compelled to do so by an unusual ruling from the state’s highest court that bars prosecutors from using their testimony against them in their own trials. That ruling has caused delays in the already complicated prosecution.

One key question has been exactly when Mr. Gray suffered the fatal injury. Prosecutors contend that it occurred between the second and fourth stops made by the van and that the officers could have done more to save Mr. Gray; defense lawyers say that it happened between the fifth and sixth stops and that there was nothing to be done.

Officer Porter said Mr. Gray looked “lethargic” at the fifth stop — a description that an expert witness called by the state, Dr. Morris Marc Soriano, said would be a symptom of the opening moments of Mr. Gray’s spinal injury.

Faster medical attention, Dr. Soriano said, “would have been lifesaving for him.”

But on cross-examination, a defense lawyer, Amy Askew, pressed Dr. Soriano to admit that he did not know exactly when the injury occurred and could not say exactly how long it would have taken to get to a hospital.


