


NASA will try again on Saturday morning to inflate a new room for the International Space Station.

During the first attempt on Thursday to pump air into the module known as the Bigelow Expandable Activity Module, or Beam, the bulbous, balloon-like structure did not expand as much as expected. Beam is a test of technology to construct soft-sided space habitats with walls made of fabric instead of metal.

This fold-up, blowup approach would help solve the problem of how to build something spacious that can be packed into the narrow payload confines of a rocket. Beam was taken to the space station last month on a Falcon 9 rocket launched by the Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, or SpaceX. The module was then attached to one of the station’s docking ports, and it remained folded up until Thursday.

The first steps of closing valves, cutting straps and releasing bolts went without a hitch. But as the crew tried to inflate it, Beam moved out only five inches toward the fully expanded length of 73 inches. The diameter reached 103 inches, but fully expanded, Beam’s diameter is meant to be 127 inches. The process was halted as engineers took a closer look.

“We ran into higher forces than our model predicted,” Jason Crusan, NASA’s director of advanced exploration systems, said in a telephone news conference on Friday.

Officials at NASA and Bigelow Aerospace, the company that built Beam at a cost of $17.8 million, said there were no concerns about the module itself. Still, they said they wanted to take a slow, methodical approach to ensure that the module does not pop out suddenly, potentially shaking and twisting the rest of the station.

They said the snag was most likely caused by friction between the layers of fabric. The launching of Beam was delayed after the loss of an earlier SpaceX cargo flight, and the additional months spent in the folded-up configuration may have added to the friction.

Overnight, Beam expanded a bit more, adding another inch in length and eight inches in diameter.

On Friday, air was taken out of the module, to be pumped back in on Saturday. Coverage by NASA Television on the web will begin at 8:45 a.m. Eastern time.

If it runs into another snag, deployment would likely be delayed to late next week, as astronauts on the space station tend to other tasks like deploying small satellites known as CubeSats.

Officials said that there was no rush to get Beam inflated, and that they were confident they would eventually succeed. “We have plenty of time to work this,” Mr. Crusan said. “Beam doesn’t expire. It’s perfectly safe.”

Once inflated, it will be tested for leaks. Astronauts will then install sensors inside the module to measure its performance during the next two years. After that, Beam is to be detached and disposed, burning up in the Earth’s atmosphere.

On Friday, SpaceX launched another Falcon 9 rocket, this time not for NASA but to put the Thaicom 8 communications satellite in orbit.

Once again, SpaceX was able to successfully land the booster stage of the rocket on a floating platform in the Atlantic. That is the fourth time SpaceX has recovered the booster, part of efforts to cut the cost of launches by reusing rockets.

The launch was postponed from Thursday because of a glitch with the second-stage engine.

“Probably not a flight risk, but still worth investigating,” Elon Musk, SpaceX’s chief executive, reported on Twitter.


