


BEIJING — People’s Daily, the main newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party, has broken the general official silence about the 50th anniversary of the start of the Cultural Revolution. A commentary in the newspaper on Tuesday urged Chinese citizens to accept the party’s longstanding verdict on the Cultural Revolution, the traumatic campaign that Mao Zedong began in 1966 in an effort to purify and rejuvenate the communist revolution.

Here are some excerpts from the first half of the commentary. The second part urges people to rally around President Xi Jinping and his policies:

The Cultural Revolution was a major setback for the progress of our party and country. How should we understand the “Cultural Revolution”? In August 1980, Deng Xiaoping twice met the Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci and answered her questions about how the Chinese Communist Party evaluated Comrade Mao Zedong and the Cultural Revolution, which at the time were of great concern at home and abroad. The Sixth Plenum of the party’s 11th Central Committee approved the “Resolution on certain questions in the history of our party since the founding of the People’s Republic of China,” which gave correct conclusions on a succession of major historical issues since the founding of the new China, and thoroughly negated the Cultural Revolution and the “theory of continuing the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat.” It factually evaluated the historical status of Comrade Mao Zedong, and fully expounded on the great significance of Mao Zedong Thought as the guiding ideology of the party. The political definition and analysis of the causes of the Cultural Revolution in this Resolution have withstood the test of experience, the test of the people, and the test of history, and they possess unshakable scientific truth and authority.

The Cultural Revolution was wrongly launched by the leaders and exploited by a counterrevolutionary clique. It brought the grave disaster of internal turmoil to the party, country and people of every ethnicity, and the harm it created was comprehensive and severe. History has amply demonstrated that the Cultural Revolution was totally wrong in theory and practice. In no sense was it, or could it have been, revolutionary or socially progressive.

Our party has always taken a solemn approach to errors and mistakes, including those by its leaders, first by having the courage to acknowledge them, second by giving a correct analysis of them, and third by resolutely correcting them. Thereby, these errors and mistakes, together with the party’s successes, become a precious historical lesson. The “Resolution on History” made a distinction between the Cultural Revolution as a period and the Cultural Revolution as a political movement, and it separated out the mistaken theory and practice of the Cultural Revolution from the total history of this decade, vigorously counterattacking the mistaken viewpoint that would use negating the Cultural Revolution to negate the history of the party and negate the leadership of the party and the socialist system. Precisely because we have this correct stance, our party awoke from its setbacks, reaffirmed an ideological line based on seeking truth from facts, achieved a shift in the focus of work [to economic development], laid down the party’s fundamental line of the preliminary stage of socialism, established the road of socialism with special Chinese characteristics, achieved a great historic transformation, and pioneered a new journey of reform and opening up. After more than 30 years of reform and opening up, our country has become stronger by the day, the living standards of the people have massively improved, the socialist democracy and legal system have constantly improved. The road we are taking is increasingly broad, and will not be, nor will we ever allow a re-enactment of a mistake like the Cultural Revolution.

History always advances, and we sum up and absorb the lessons of history to use it as a mirror to better advance. “The remembrance of the past is the teacher for the future.” We must firmly fix in our memories the historic lessons of the Cultural Revolution, firmly adhere to the party’s political conclusions about the Cultural Revolution, and resolutely prevent and resist meddling from the left and the right that focuses on the problems of the Cultural Revolution. We will not take the old path that is closed and stultified, nor will we take the errant path of changing our banner. Rather without any wavering we will take the path of socialism with special Chinese characteristics.


