


FORT McMURRAY, Alberta — Aside from the complete lack of children, everything at first looks fine outside École Boréal, a French language school in Fort McMurray’s Abasand neighborhood. But a closer inspection showed signs of danger, and a hasty retreat from it: a fallen lamppost, a cooler bag abandoned in a student drop-off zone.

Immediately across the street the devastation that the great fire brought to this city is grimly apparent. Behind a charred chain-link fence, the blackened frames of two children’s bicycles nestled beside the remains of an adult’s mountain bike. Of the townhouse where their owners once lived, little remained but a battered air-conditioning unit.

Contrasts abounded during a brief tour of the city, where 88,000 people fled as flames and smoke advanced on May 3. The power of the forest fire, which continued to grow on Monday as it swept through the hub of Alberta’s oil sands region, is unmistakable.

Much of the city remains intact, an eerie ghost town of abandoned cars and darkened storefronts. Following a tour of the area, Rachel Notley, Alberta’s premier, said that 2,400 buildings had been destroyed but about 25,000 remained standing.

The path the flames took was obvious. Southwest of the city, a burned-out bus sat at the Flying J service station, which exploded as residents drove down Highway 63, the only escape route to the south. About two blocks north, the attractive stone and wood sign at the entrance to the Beacon Hill neighborhood remained unmolested by flame, as did a Shell gas station across from it. But just past that, at the top of a rise, a panorama of destruction unfolded.

Beacon Hill was one of Fort McMurray’s oldest and most popular areas. Built during an oil sands boom in the 1970s, its houses and yards were larger than those in the developments that followed, after real estate prices shot up.

Beacon Hill was the first residential area destroyed by the expanding fire. Without exception, its once-prized homes have all been reduced to basements filled with charred rubble. The highest remaining points on many lots are the twisted metal pipes that once supported electricity meters.

On the blackened front lawn of one house, garden hose lay melted.

Darby Allen, the fire chief, said that a lack of personnel and poor water pressure forced his crews to quickly abandon Beacon Hill and focus on saving the downtown and other parts of the city. Despite that, the neighborhood’s strip mall, its liquor store still firmly shuttered, and two schools suffered little or no damage — thanks to a change in the wind’s direction. Cars parked on Beacon Hill’s streets appeared largely unscathed, although the plastic grill of one pickup truck had sagged from the heat. Pools of molten aluminum trickled down driveways from cars that had been left next to homes.

At the bottom of the black swath left by the fire as it departed Beacon Hill, a trailer park was incinerated except for about six homes. The area had recently been rebuilt after a flood.

An adjacent fire station still stood, thanks mainly to its array of sprinklers. Even now, fires still flare up in the city. Several smoldering blazes could be seen along the highway. Yet on Monday the situation had eased to the point that some firefighters were outside a fire station washing black soot off two of their trucks.

The black line of destruction abruptly veered west just before reaching Fort McMurray’s hospital and downtown. Firefighters had focused their defenses there, Chief Allen said. The fire instead headed toward Abasand, passing near a sign for a Mother’s Day craft fair, complete with face painting, which was never held.

With each minute the fire had become more potent, expanding its reach by heaving flames before it. The results were cruelly random. In a section of Abasand built as housing for employees of Syncrude, the oil sands mega project of the 1970s, blocks of total ruin faced untouched houses just across the street.

As one townhouse burned and collapsed, its kitchen stove ended up in the entrance of an underground parking lot. The half-dozen cars inside the lot fared no better than the stove.

In one yard, an all-terrain vehicle, popular in Fort McMurray, was shorn of all its plastic and rubber.

In another area, the gas pumps and convenience store of an Esso service station remained intact. But its sign and “touchless” carwash were melted, charred ruins.

The destruction, while not as severe as many had feared, appeared to have overwhelmingly struck homes. Whether by luck or design, civic and industrial buildings fared better. At an industrial park near the airport, the fire’s charred line stopped in front of a yard filled with rental construction equipment.

Something similar seemed to have happened at the Oil Sands Discovery Center, a museum for the tourists who make the long drive to Fort McMurray. The fire went right to an excavator from the early days of the oil sands development, but left the dinosaur-sized machine untouched. The museum building, surrounded by a large parking lot, seemed to have escaped serious damage.

In addition to the homes lost, much work remains before Fort McMurray can start to rebuild. Sections of the city, even within the spared downtown, appeared to be without power. Aside from emergency workers, the largest presence in the city were utilities crews, on hand to assess damage and replace burned-out poles, wires and cables.

Chief Allen said his downtown apartment survived the “beast of a fire.” For those who were not so fortunate, he asked that they understand that firefighters “gave it their all.”

He added: “It was like a fire I’d never seen in my life.”


