


As Desa Boskovic stepped into the shadow of the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Sava in Manhattan on Sunday afternoon, her mind grew clouded with memory. It was there that she sought refuge as an immigrant from Serbia in 1973, hopeful for some sense of familiarity in this alien city. Its grand gothic arches have welcomed her every Sunday since, framing her family as they observed baptisms, weddings and funerals. Now she wept as she beheld the scorched skeleton of the cathedral that a week earlier had gone up in flames, generations of devotion reduced to rubble.

“This is the place that kept our culture alive here in New York,” said Ms. Boskovic, 59. “Without it I’m just lost.”

Her fears were echoed by scores of parishioners displaced by the fire that engulfed St. Sava last Sunday, mere hours after the conclusion of Easter services. For years, the brownstone cathedral on West 25th Street had served as the anchor of Serbian life in New York, but this week’s services began for its stalwart congregants in a home not their own. As a measure of solidarity, the leadership of the Episcopal Diocese of New York offered to house services for the congregation in their churches. At 10 o’clock on Sunday morning, nearly 200 still grieving parishioners mounted the steps to Calvary Episcopal Church on Park Avenue South and East 21st Street.

“We are to resurrect with our church in all her beauty and all her glory,” said the Rev. Djokan Majstorovic, the church’s priest, who has led St. Sava for nearly 18 years and whose apartment looks out over the ruins. He added, “Please, brothers and sisters, stay together, pray together and cry together.”

Fire officials have yet to determine the cause of the blaze. Francis X. Gribbon, a Fire Department spokesman, said that fire marshals were exploring whether candles in the rear of the church had not been fully extinguished when a caretaker stowed them. Members of St. Sava’s board, however, said they believed that the candles were properly put out.

Lidija Nikolic, a board member, said that despite the damage, the building’s structure was intact and that they would try to rebuild it. She noted that the church was insured and had received around $8,000 a day in donations since the fire, but that those amounts would cover only a fraction of the rebuilding costs. The church had only recently completed a renovation of its roof and walls that cost around $4.5 million, Ms. Nikolic said. Rebuilding will take years, she said, and until it is complete, the congregation has been invited to meet at St. George’s Episcopal Church on East 16th Street, which is a part of the same parish as Calvary Church.

The Episcopal Church and the Serbian Orthodox Church have an affinity that dates back over 150 years. The first Orthodox worship service in the United States is said to have taken place in 1865 at Trinity Episcopal Chapel, which nearly 80 years later was sold and became the home of St. Sava. And so it seemed fitting that it was the Episcopal Church that comforted and housed St. Sava when its home was ravaged.

The sanctuary was unfamiliar, but the prayers remained the same.

“It’s not our church but it’s a holy place,” said Jelena Salom, 87, surveying the stained-glass windows. “Wherever we go, God will be with us.”

As children lined the aisle for communion, Tamara Simonjenko bowed her head in her hands, unable to bring herself to watch. For decades, Ms. Simonjenko, 90, and Ms. Salom sat side by side in the familiar pews of St. Sava, in the second row off the right aisle. On Sunday, they clasped hands as they adjusted to their new surroundings.

“It’s beautiful, but it’s not the same,” said Ms. Simonjenko. “This is not our home.”

For Zorka Milich, who first joined the St. Sava choir as a girl in the 1940s, the story of Easter provided an apt and buoying symbol for the community. “It was more than a building; it was a place of life and history and it will rise again,” said Ms. Milich, 86. “This community will not just let it die.”

As the service unfolded, the attention of the worshipers was clearly focused several blocks away. When the formal prayers ended, they left the building, grateful for the borrowed space but eager to return to St. Sava. Together they crossed Park Avenue South, heading north and turning west on 25th Street, a mass of souls in need of consolation.

Holding her 4-year-old son, Dimitri, in one arm, Olivia Grimpas gazed up at the burned out hull of the cathedral in disbelief.

“I know I should remain positive but there’s just so much uncertainty,” she said, her face wet with tears, which Dimitri dutifully wiped away.

As Father Majstorovic led the congregation in song and prayer, two men held up a painting of Sava, the patron saint of the church, dressed in white robes with red crosses on his shoulders. The icon had hung in the office of the priest in the back of the church, and was among the only items left unmarred by the flames and the deluge of water that quenched the fire.

To the members of the church, the painting was a miracle, a sign that their congregation, too, would survive this trial.


