


A historic Serbian Orthodox church in Manhattan that plays an important role in New York’s Serbian community was gutted by flames on Sunday, just hours after parishioners had filled its pews for Easter services.

The New York Fire Department said it received the first report of the blaze at the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Sava, on West 25th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas in the Flatiron district, shortly before 7 p.m. It grew to a four-alarm fire that took 168 department personnel to tame, fire officials said.

It was not clear if anyone was at the church when the fire started, officials said. The priest had left before the blaze began to go on a bicycle ride after an Easter luncheon that stretched into the late afternoon and capped several busy days of religious celebrations, officials said. A caretaker who arrived after the fire started was treated for smoke inhalation but was not hospitalized, they said.

Frank Gribbon, a department spokesman who was at the scene on Sunday night, said the blaze did not appear to be suspicious. He said the department would investigate the cause, but cautioned that the amount of damage could complicate that effort.

“There is so much damage you can’t find the point of origin,” he said, adding, “The whole roof is a wooden truss. It’s gone.”

The blaze tore through the 19th-century building quickly, and within an hour onlookers were posting photos and videos on social media showing a column of smoke rising over Manhattan and the flames engulfing the church.

The Fire Department joined in, sharing a video on Twitter that showed flames climbing up the church’s pitched roof and fire and smoke pouring out of windows that had held ornate stained-glass panes.

Herman Tulp, 60, a tourist from the Netherlands who came upon the burning church before the firefighters arrived, said he saw a man who was clearly distressed admonishing camera-wielding people in the gathering crowd.

“There was a man who was hysterical because it was his church,” Mr. Tulp said. “He was shouting, ‘This is my church! This is my church! Why are you filming?’”

Less than two hours before the department received word of the blaze, St. Sava staff members had posted pictures of the Easter services on the church’s official Facebook page. The photos showed priests and well-dressed parishioners smiling over baskets of colorfully dyed eggs.

On Sunday night, distraught parishioners gathered near the smoldering ruins of the church, where smoke and the acrid smell of ash hung for hours in the air. Dejan Dex Lipovic, 24, wept as he recalled attending the services just hours before.

“It is hard to look at,” he said. “There were over a thousand people there. It is a beautiful church.”

Orthodox churches like St. Sava use the older Julian calendar, which is one reason why they often celebrate Easter later than Western churches, which use the Gregorian calendar, the standard in much of the world.

The church, which has served for decades as the backbone of New York’s Serbian Orthodox community, was previously known as Trinity Chapel, an Episcopal church that was sold to its current owners in 1943. Attempts to reach church officials on Sunday night were unsuccessful.

The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1968, the same year that the city’s Landmarks Preservation Commission gave it landmark status. At the time, the commission wrote of the church that “its special character, historic significance, and aesthetic interest and value of the development, heritage, and cultural characteristics of New York make it irreplaceable.”

Jovana Djurdjevic, 22, another parishioner, said the church was a vital institution in the life of many Serbian-American New Yorkers.

“I basically grew up there,” she said. “I was baptized there, I’ve seen every one of my friends get married there, I’ve been to funerals. I was there almost every Sunday. I went to Sunday school and learned Serbian there.”


