


The photographs were Polaroids, taken between the 1970s and the 2000s. Zun Lee bought them at flea markets, at garage sales or on eBay. Most of them depicted African-Americans: people wearing stylish clothes, relaxing in the yard, celebrating birthdays. A few depicted people in prison uniforms. All the photographs had somehow been separated from their original owners and had become what Lee calls “orphaned Polaroids.”

Found photographs have long been important to artists like Lee. Photos taken by amateurs can sometimes acquire new value on account of their uniqueness, their age or simply the knowledge that they were once meaningful to a stranger. As part of a group, they can evoke a collector’s sensibility or tell us something about a historical period in a way professional photographs might not. For Lee, collecting found photographs of African-­Americans — a project he called “Fade Resistance” — had an additional and deeply personal meaning.

Lee was raised in Germany by Korean parents. In his 30s, his mother told him that the man who raised him was not his biological father. But because her relationship with that man, who was black, had been fleeting, she refused to tell her son more about him. This revelation, at once momentous and limited, changed Lee’s life. To make sense of his personal loss, and to explore his connectedness to black America, he took up photography. I became friends with Lee around the time he began making pictures of black fathers and their children in the Bronx and elsewhere; that project led to a book, “Father Figure,” for which I wrote a preface. Later, Lee began to collect the Polaroids — thousands of them — that ended up in “Fade Resistance.”

Who took these photos? Who do they depict? The basic contextual details we would usually expect from snapshots are missing here. The absence of this information is bittersweet: We are bewildered, but we are also ferried over from imagery into imagination. In Lee’s case, the story of his orphaned Polaroids took a surprising turn. When he uploaded some of them to Facebook, the social network’s facial-recognition technology immediately began to match them with real people. Lee was not sure who was doing the tagging. Intrigued and wary, he sent a message to one individual who was tagged in several of the pictures. There was no response. Then, several weeks later, he got a message from the same man: a curt request that he take the pictures down.

I, too, collect found photographs, but my collection is in the dozens, not in the thousands. I buy not with any idea that I might show them to anyone, but because I like the way certain pictures look. A few years ago, I bought a cache of photographs from a thrift store in Brooklyn, 35 or so pictures that I selected out of a pile of hundreds. There was a photo of a group of well-dressed Asians in a restaurant, with Westerners in military uniforms. There were pictures of babies, and pictures of blurred landscapes.

Twenty-two of the pictures I bought that day featured the same woman at different stages in her life. She was sometimes alone and sometimes with family. But there she was, in picture after picture, from as far back as the late 1930s until at least 1980. She was dark-haired (was she Italian?) and had an unmistakable, toothy smile and cheeks that rose high on her face. A few of these photos had inscriptions, in pencil or pen, on the back or along the white border on the front. “Rock of Gibralter [sic] — Margaret, Kate & myself.” “Lake Huntington, May 1939.” I felt I was somehow rescuing these pictures from the anonymity of the pile. I named the woman Mrs. X.

I didn’t put my images of Mrs. X online, in part because I didn’t want anyone to recognize her. I also felt a little guilty: “my” images of Mrs. X? I had the sense that my possession of these pictures was not their ideal posterity. They should be in the keeping of people who knew this woman, who cared about her. (Imagine your own most precious family photos permanently in the hands of a complete stranger.) And yet, despite my doubts, I was also happy to have the pictures. Here she is in 1939 in her bathing suit, here she is with her husband (?), her son (?). Here she is abroad. We have color pictures now. Then she’s noticeably older, and the husband (?) is no longer there, but there are friends (?) and relatives (?). I looked at each of the photographs through a mesh of question marks, sustained by Mrs. X’s absolutely distinctive smile. From time to time, returning to the pictures, I am aware that I am touching a photograph that Mrs. X also touched. Is this woman still alive? It’s possible, but I doubt it.

The photos Zun Lee collected, digitally scanned and put out in public, have had a different life from the photos in my collection. He wrote back to the man who was tagged in some of them and suggested meeting. After all, he did not consider himself the owner of the photos, only their custodian. Perhaps, Lee offered, he might fly to Los Angeles and hand the photos over in person. The man said no. Lee was disappointed but sympathetic. He said he’d already been thinking about how databases and tags are not neutral, how they can wind up being hostile toward communities of color. “I completely understood,” Lee told me. “This man was saying, ‘We are not willing participants.’ The black body is used as a commodity, as something that is surveilled. The man was telling me, ‘No, you’re not welcome, this is not art, get the hell out of our lives.’ And I understood it.”

People have a right to be skeptical about the encounter between the analog experience of life and the futuristic algorithms that often prioritize what is possible over what it desirable. Already there are reports of churches scanning worshipers’ faces to determine who attends regularly, the better to know whom to ask for donations. Shops match your face to a database so that they can greet you by name — or identify you as a potential shoplifter. Black people in particular, against the historical backdrop of surveillance and state hostility and corporate disregard, have a right to doubt these technologies. There was a recent report of Google’s photo app automatically tagging a photo of two black people as “gorillas” — another instance of machines replicating the nastier prejudices of their human teachers.

Lee’s pleasure in the Polaroids he bought was also shadowed by questions: Why had so many families lost their things to secondhand dealers and estate sales? Behind these photos of bell-bottoms, Afros, birthday parties and interiors rich with period detail lay the invisible stories of evictions, dispossessions or separations. The Polaroids were evidence of joy, but the fate of the photographs themselves was unhappy. Lee acceded to his interlocutor’s request and took the tagged photos down.

In my collection, there is a picture from the late 19th or early 20th century, an image I think about as much as the entire series of Mrs. X pictures. This seated woman wears a long dark skirt, dark stockings and polished dark shoes. Her hair is a neatly parted mass of black, almost an Afro. She wears a pale jacket and is seated outside, next to a door and a brick wall. She looks off to her right. Below, not on the white border of the photograph but directly on the photograph itself, someone has written, in ink, the single word “nigger.”

I doubt that the person responsible for this vandalism knew this woman personally. Perhaps it was written decades later. The word, after all, has been with us a long time, as has the spitefulness with which it is deployed. But whenever the defacement occurred, I feel it has something in common with both a contemporary form of aggression and a very old one. Black Americans, for most of their time in this country, were named, traded and collected against their will. They were branded — physically tagged — both to hurt and to control them. The woman in my photograph has been tagged, too, semantically. The written slur is like a brand.

Lee sent me a screen shot of his Facebook page as it looked while he was uploading a batch of Polaroids. Several of the images are of men in prison. There are white rectangles framing the faces, and there is an instruction above each picture: “Click Anywhere to Tag.” That mild directive — an automated instruction from Facebook — suddenly seems sinister. What if these people don’t wish to be tagged? What are their rights? These doubts have led Lee to focus more on an offline display of these images. I faced the more immediate conundrum of illustrating this column and decided not to show the faces of the people in my collection.

American history has long struggled to believe the joys and intimacies of black American life. Social media, fortunately, makes those human realities visible to a much larger swath of the population than ever before. But there’s also a paradox: To make intimacy public is often to render it less intimate. For all of us, but especially for those in communities of color, being digitally tracked does not solve the conundrums of inequality. Whatever else the machines learn, they’ll have to learn about our sense of privacy too, the human necessity of leaving some things untagged and undeclared.


