


OSSINING, N.Y. — In a setback for the state corrections agency’s campaign to crack down on brutality in its prisons, a Sing Sing guard whose repeated punching of an inmate was captured on a security video was found not guilty on Friday of criminal assault.

The guard, Lavar Thomas, had testified during the trial here in Town Court that the beating — which included five punches to the head and six thrown while the inmate, Daniel Hyers, was prone on the floor — was warranted because he feared Mr. Hyers might spit on him.

Officer Thomas was acquitted despite testimony from Michael Capra, the Sing Sing superintendent, who told the jury that the guard’s violent response was “absolutely not” justifiable. “We don’t strike anybody in the face because we think he’s going to spit,” said Mr. Capra, who had reported the May 6, 2015, episode to the internal affairs unit of the New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision.

The four-day trial was the latest round in a battle that has been playing out, mostly behind the scenes, between the corrections department and the powerful 20,000-member union that represents officers.

The verdict, which the jury rendered after deliberating for about two hours, was a testament to the difficulty that prosecutors face in pursuing cases against prison guards accused of brutality, even with strong evidence like security video.

The union paid for Officer Thomas’s legal defense, and two to three dozen officers, many of them assigned to nearby Sing Sing, filled the courtroom throughout the trial. Michael Powers, the union president, had urged officers in a memorandum to attend the proceedings to show unity against a department that “continues its blistering and full-frontal attack on its own proud, uniformed staff.”

The officers in the courtroom cheered when the verdict was announced.

The ruling came a year and a day after another prisoner, Samuel Harrell, died during a violent encounter with nearly two dozen guards at Fishkill Correctional Facility. Mr. Harrell’s case and the beating of an inmate at Attica Correctional Facility by three officers were first reported by The New York Times; both are being investigated by federal prosecutors.

The corrections department tried to fire Officer Thomas last summer, but under the union’s collective bargaining agreement, an arbitrator, not the commissioner, has final say on disciplinary actions. After losing in arbitration, the internal affairs unit, which has been expanded and reorganized over the last two years, referred the case to the Westchester County district attorney’s office.

Mr. Capra, the Sing Sing superintendent, indicated during his testimony that brutality by guards was a persistent problem. Asked how often he had referred such cases to internal affairs during his four years running the prison, he responded, “Many times, unfortunately, many times.”

The cases typically come down to the word of officers versus that of inmates, who tend to be viewed as unreliable witnesses. But in the case of Officer Thomas, a lengthy video showed him reacting violently without apparent resistance from Mr. Hyers.

Neither Officer Thomas, nor his lawyer, Joey Jackson, challenged the video’s accuracy. Instead, Mr. Jackson focused on Mr. Hyers’s criminal history; the dangers faced by guards in a maximum- security prison housing murderers, rapists and pedophiles; the unreliability of an inmate witness who kept changing his story; and Officer Thomas’s fear of being spit on.

“Officer Thomas refused to be spit on by a killer,” Mr. Jackson said during his opening statement.

When Mr. Jackson asked Mr. Hyers about the murder that had led to his imprisonment, Mr. Hyers described getting into an argument with his stepfather, and said that “things went a little too far” and that he had shot him three or four times in the head. Mr. Hyers, in handcuffs and leg shackles during his testimony, also said that at one point he had been a member of the Aryan Brotherhood gang.

Mr. Hyers testified that he was in a bad mood on the day of the encounter with the guard, and that during recreation, which Officer Thomas was supervising, he kicked a ball over the fence.

He said that when he and the other prisoners came back inside and lined up against a wall to be searched, Officer Thomas was angry and asked Mr. Hyers whether he had a problem. Mr. Hyers said he never threatened to spit, but at that point, Officer Thomas began punching him.

When Officer Thomas testified, he said that while bending down, frisking Mr. Hyers, “I hear a gurgling sound, he’s looking down.”

Officer Thomas explained that at the prison, if an inmate spits in a guard’s eyes, the guard must take a regimen of pills to prevent infection. “Who wants to be put on a thing like that?” he said. “I’m fearful for my life.”

During cross-examination, an assistant district attorney, Berit Huseby, walked Officer Thomas through the video, punch by punch, asking him repeatedly to describe what he saw. The first two punches came while Mr. Hyers was facing the wall.

“One right hand, one left hand to the face, ma’am,” Officer Thomas said.

Ms. Huseby asked why, if he was so worried about being spit on, he had hit the inmate in the head, risking cuts on his hand that could be infected with saliva. “That’s the method I chose, ma’am,” he answered.

Officer Thomas said he had thrown three more punches just before Mr. Hyers fell because the inmate was not complying with a command to put his hands behind his back for cuffing.

As the video played in court, the prosecutor and the officer together counted six punches thrown while the inmate was on the ground. Officer Thomas explained that Mr. Hyers had kept his hands under his body, rather than behind his back for cuffing as instructed.

As her final question, the prosecutor asked why, once Mr. Hyers had been handcuffed, Officer Thomas had not asked that a spit mask be placed over the inmate’s face. “He didn’t actually spit,” the officer said. “There was no need for a spit mask.”

In a statement released on Friday after the verdict, Anthony J. Annucci, the corrections department’s acting commissioner, said that Officer Thomas “remains suspended pending the outcome of litigation involving the department and his bargaining unit.”


