


Noah Masterson, a web marketing manager in Austin, Tex., is like the Marie Kondo of Twitter. He keeps it tidy. “I just unfollowed about 20 people to get down to an even 400,” he said. “It felt really good.”

For Mr. Masterson, 43, the value of social media is that it brings together all sorts of voices and opinions that he may not otherwise hear. But if he decides one voice is too shrill, too self-promotional or too dull, he will declutter. “It’s a party, and I get to select the guests,” he said. “I can just eject someone if they’re not being a good guest.”

Maggie Cassidy works at a nonprofit in Chicago and is similarly inclined to vote with her fingers.

“Unfollowing is the best,” said Ms. Cassidy, 31. “I think that social media is so pervasive in our everyday life that it can be easy to forget that it is entirely optional. You can get into a cycle of being irritated and not remember that you don’t have to participate.”

She recently unfollowed a political journalist on Twitter, not because she objected to his tweets, but because she didn’t like the vitriolic debates those tweets sometimes incited. “It got a little ugly over there,” she said, “and I didn’t have to participate. Anyone who seems to be using their Twitter handle to pick fights, I’m not interested.”

In any political season (but let’s be honest, in this one especially), there is a certain agony in listening to or reading or having your eyeballs assaulted with other people’s certainty, their rightness, their righteousness, their links. The current pull to unfollow and unfriend may be stronger than ever.

But there are so many awkward dynamics that can arise, because rarely is the severing of these social ties a stealth act. Those who have landed on your cutting-room floor can learn of the shunning in any number of ways. That’s why the subtler function of muting someone, offered by Facebook and Twitter, is popular: Mutees have no way of knowing they’ve been tuned out. The posters keep posting and posting, having no idea that they are trees falling in the forest without anyone there to hear the thud.

Not surprisingly, there are dozens of apps and digital products that can help you keep track of who your real friends are. I plugged into the Unfollow for Twitter app, which, according to its creator, Andrew Saubert, of Hamburg, Germany, has logged some 30 million user sessions. The app informed me who, among those I follow on Twitter, doesn’t follow me back. The purpose of this service is to let me know whom I should unfollow out of spite.

Can you believe that grown-ups with, presumably, all the worries, stresses and responsibilities of adult life could allow themselves to be bothered for even one second by the notion that someone (most likely a virtual stranger, if not a literal one) would opt to avoid their tweets?

People are so ridiculous.

Peter Kafka, a senior editor at Re/code, unfollowed me on Twitter more than two years ago, and I’m really starting to feel much better about it.

Peter and I have socialized in large groups and are digitally friendly, though not necessarily in-real-life friends. When I happened to notice that he was no longer following me on Twitter, I sent a public message across the tweety transom to ask him why.

He replied, “I get all the photos of your kids and yoga that I need on Instagram.”

I’d argue that there could never be enough of that, but that’s not the point.

The point is that I now think twice before unfollowing and unfriending people, because I am concerned about hurting the feelings of people I don’t know and who may actually just be bots.

Not so Roberto A. Ferdman, 28, a reporter who covers food, culture and economics in Wonkblog for The Washington Post. This political season, he is muting and unfriending without guilt or remorse.

“Certain people seem to pop up on my newsfeed more than others, even though I’m not close to them,” he said, “and in the election season, it’s particularly frustrating.” Especially galling is the stridency espoused by random high school and college classmates whose opinions are no more informed than anyone else reading — thanks to social media — the same articles as everyone else. And the repetition. “Bernie Sanders is a very inspirational person,” he said. “It’s not a matter of my liking or disliking or wanting to vote for him or not. It’s just that I could really do with less Bernie Sanders in my face.”

Katie Notopoulos, a senior editor for BuzzFeed, has given this unfollowing business a lot of thought. A few years ago, she decided to comb out of her Twitter feed every man she was following. And then, to further her social experiment, she suggested to readers that they #UnfollowAMan. Her goal was less about shutting out all the men (though in certain instances that was a nice side effect) and more about testing the social dynamics.

“You feel like you’re breaking this fake friendship, and that can be really awkward because on Twitter especially, people really do become friendly,” Ms. Notopoulos said. “A social contract develops, kind of like, if someone invites you to their wedding, you have to invite them to yours even if you don’t like them that much. It’s easy to start wondering, ‘Am I being a jerk for unfollowing them?’ In those cases, I find the mute button a godsend.”

Speaking of God, a few weeks ago, I encountered a new conundrum. Is it ever O.K. to unfollow the pope? I became an e-disciple of Pope Francis on Twitter (handle: @pontifex) about a year ago. Though I don’t follow the pope religiously (I’m Jewish), I do so electronically. I find his tweets inspiring and hopeful, a voice of peace in a nasty cyberworld. So as soon as I heard that the Pope had joined Instagram in March, I began to follow him there as well (handle: franciscus). But the photographs posted on the pope’s account are not as compelling to me as his tweeted word. Also — and I am quite likely to be stricken by lightning for writing this — I feel a bit like the pope overposts on Instagram. Yet I haven’t unfollowed him. Because he’s the pope.

In the papal spirit of the reconciliation and understanding, I called Peter Kafka recently to let him know that I wanted to forgive him for unfollowing me on Twitter and to learn more about his general philosophies. “I can’t remember what specifically prompted me to unfollow you,” he said. “Usually it’s, you’re incredibly boring or the conference you’re at is incredibly boring or you’re overtweeting.”

I tried to interrupt, but Mr. Kafka was on a roll. “There is the ‘I can’t stand you or your success or the stupid things you say’ unfollow or the ‘There is something about you that just really, really annoys me’ unfollow,” he said. To assuage my feelings, he told me that had the mute function been available (Twitter rolled out the feature in May 2014), he would have used it. “I love muting,” he said.

Mr. Kafka is a funny guy. But don’t take my word for it. Follow him.


