


Gérard Depardieu plays a longtime mayor battling for his legacy in “Marseille,” Netflix’s new French-language series. A delightfully dysfunctional family tries to hold itself together in “Flowers.” And it’s a mini-reunion of “The West Wing” on “Mom.”

MARSEILLE on Netflix. Sex, drugs, corruption, betrayal, jewelry heists and mafia warfare — no vice seems left unturned in Netflix’s first original French-language series. A sneering Gérard Depardieu stars as Robert Taro, the longtime mayor of Marseille now facing a re-election campaign against Lucas Barres (Benoît Magimel), his merciless former protégé. “It’s clear that you represent the past, and I represent the future,” Barres threatens in an intriguing, subtitled trailer, which is all that was made available to watch before the Thursday premiere. “I’ll snatch Marseille from your grasp, and you’ll end up alone, all alone, with nothing.” To which Taro responds: “I am a crocodile. Ready to bite, eat, kill.” Consider it fair warning. (Image: Mr. Magimel, left, and Mr. Depardieu)

FLOWERS on Seeso. Maurice Flowers (Julian Barratt), a children’s book author, and Deborah (Olivia Colman of BBC America’s “Broadchurch”), his music teacher wife, try to hold their dysfunctional marriage together amid her suspicions that he is in a relationship with his illustrator (Will Sharpe, the show’s creator). And as their family crumbles, so goes their creaky old house, populated by Maurice’s ailing mother (Leila Hoffman) and the couple’s 25-year-old twins (Sophia Di Martino and Daniel Rigby), who both have eyes on a neighbor (Georgina Campbell).

MOM 9 p.m. on CBS. Bonnie (Allison Janney) fantasizes about a career in politics — O.K., she wants to be president, with Richard Schiff as her chief of staff — in this homage to Ms. Janney’s past life on “The West Wing.”

JUNEBUG (2005) 9:55 p.m. on Starz Cinema. A worldly Chicago art dealer (Embeth Davidtz) travels to rural North Carolina to meet the parents of her golden-boy husband (Alessandro Nivola) and receives a chilly if courteous reception. Ben McKenzie plays the younger brother who misinterprets a helping hand as something more. Amy Adams earned an Oscar nomination as his pregnant wife, who sees a star in the family’s midst. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called Phil Morrison’s film “wise, bittersweet, beautifully acted.” (Image: Ms. Davidtz, center)

THE CATCH 10 p.m. on ABC. We’re more invested in this series now that Alice (Mireille Enos) has once again succumbed to Ben (Peter Krause). But there’s still that pesky problem of Agent Dao. (Image: Ms. Enos)

LIP SYNC BATTLE 10 p.m. on Spike. The N.B.A. all-star Chris Paul wagers New Edition’s “Candy Girl” against Snoop Dogg’s performance of “Could You Be Loved” by Bob Marley and the Wailers.

BUILDING OFF THE GRID: BIG SKY RANCH 10 p.m. on DIY. Jon and Etta Smith live out a city slicker’s dream, mostly, by building a self-sustaining house, corral and livestock feeding system on their bear- and rattlesnake-infested bison ranch in northwestern Montana.


