


In her dressing room at the Helen Hayes Theater, Jayne Houdyshell keeps two pages from her diary enclosed in a silver frame. The entry, from April 1969, describes a high school production of “Blithe Spirit,” in which the 15-year-old Ms. Houdyshell played the elderly medium Madame Arcati. After a brief appraisal of the show (“I was completely satisfied with my performance”), the entry ends, in jubilant capitals, “OH I LOVE TO ACT. OH I LOVE THE THEATER.”

The theater loves Ms. Houdyshell, too. She has just received her third Tony nomination, for the role of Deirdre Blake in Stephen Karam’s “The Humans.” (Her earlier nods were for “Well” in 2006 and “Follies” in 2012.)

An office manager from Scranton, Pa., Deirdre has driven into Lower Manhattan with her husband, elder daughter and mother-in-law to enjoy and endure Thanksgiving dinner with her two daughters and one of their boyfriends. Though troubled by her children’s unsettled lives, her mother-in-law’s dementia and her own financial worries, Deirdre perseveres, with the help of her Catholic faith and the occasional blueberry doughnut. Ms. Houdyshell’s Deirdre is staunch and frustrated, acerbic and tender, a fully realized and immediately recognizable woman rather than some mere stage creation.

As an autograph seeker outside the stage door told her, “The whole time you were up there, I was thinking, ‘My mom would say that, my mom would do that.’”

“She is kind of the universal mom,” Ms. Houdyshell said as she signed his program.

But if Ms. Houdyshell, 62, is best known on Broadway for her mothers — Deirdre in “The Humans,” Ann in “Well,” Gloria in “Fish in the Dark” — her actorly range is far wider. In the past decade, she has starred as a spirited 11-year-old in “Coraline,” as an imperiled secretary in “The Receptionist,” as a scheming headmistress in “Wicked,” as a brassy former chorine in “Follies.” If anything connects these roles, it is the unswerving honesty that Ms. Houdyshell brings to each portrayal.

“She’s profoundly authentic,” said Reed Birney, her co-star in “The Humans.” “She is unfailingly real and persuasive.”

She is pleasantly forthright in person, with a natural sweetness, a natural firmness and a deserved confidence in her abilities. She politely declined the cast’s invitation to celebrate Cinco de Mayo at Sardi’s, citing the noise level, and initially refused a drink or a meal elsewhere. “I’ve just eaten,” she said. “Thanksgiving dinner. Eight times a week.” Still, she admitted that after so many months Off Broadway, where “The Humans” originated at the Roundabout’s Laura Pels Theater, and now on Broadway, the cast doesn’t really eat much of the turkey and stuffing. “As the run goes on, the bites get tinier and tinier,” she said. So she consented to a bowl of soup at a nearby restaurant.

In a playful polka-dot top and a statement necklace, Ms. Houdyshell seemed very much at ease at a table in the back of a French bistro, but it has taken her several decades to settle into a life in New York.

The youngest of four daughters born to a haberdasher who had once tried to break into vaudeville and a homemaker mother who later worked as a secretary, she grew up in “a big, old, drafty, kind of awful farmhouse” in a rural area outside of Topeka, Kan. As a child, she took refuge in books and her own imaginative games. “I just would totally immerse myself in other people,” she said. “I didn’t have a name for it. I didn’t know it was acting necessarily.”

In high school, she devised her own curriculum, which included directing, dialects and theatrical makeup. She went on to study at the Academy of Dramatic Art, a short-lived conservatory program just outside of Detroit. On her cellphone, Ms. Houdyshell keeps a couple of pictures from those years. They show her with wide eyes and a pert mouth, devilish and innocent at once.

After graduation, she made the rounds of Midwestern dinner theaters, children’s theaters and the like. While playing summer stock in the early ’80s, she met the director Joe Mantello, who would go on to direct her in “Wicked” and “The Humans.”

Mr. Mantello remembered those performances vividly. “She was in everything — drama, musicals, mysteries, comedies,” he said by telephone. “And she was extraordinary in each.”

In her mid 20s, after the breakup of an early marriage, Ms. Houdyshell spent a couple of miserable years in New York. “I was very intimidated by the city,” she said. Unable to break into the business, she switched her focus to regional theater, living out of a suitcase for more than two decades and enjoying herself tremendously until quite suddenly, she said, “the itinerant life felt very sad to me.”

In her late 40s, she returned to New York, eager for more stability and the chance to originate new work. She got it when Lisa Kron saw her in an Off Broadway show (Ms. Houdyshell was dressed in a leather jacket, giving a speech about sadomasochistic sex) and encouraged the director Leigh Silverman to cast her in an early workshop of “Well.”

Both Ms. Kron and Ms. Silverman expressed how fully and immediately Ms. Houdyshell became Ann Kron, a community activist who experiences debilitating exhaustion. Despite programs that included Ms. Houdyshell’s name and biography, many in the audience couldn’t separate the actress from the role. People would come up to her afterward and “ask Jayne how it felt to be in a play,” Ms. Silverman wrote in an email. “That is how deeply they believed she was really Lisa’s mother.”

Ms. Houdyshell has prodigious actorly skills — colleagues praised her timing, her flair for comedy, her sophisticated understanding of a script. But as Mr. Mantello said, “when you watch her, it’s nearly impossible to catch her acting.” Despite her distinct looks — lively eyes, flyaway gray hair, sturdy build — she can disappear into any role. As Ms. Silverman wrote, “She seemingly … changes her metabolism, her vocal cadence, her gait, posture and her center of gravity with every role.”

Larry David, who wrote “Fish in the Dark,” recalled hearing Ms. Houdyshell play his mother during a first read-through and thinking: “Who is this woman? She’s not even Jewish!”

“She was perfect,” Mr. David added. “I couldn’t believe it.”

But Ms. Houdyshell is trying to bring something more than technical perfection to Deirdre, a part she described as a “once in a lifetime role” and “deeply personal.” In creating Deirdre, she drew deeply on the experiences of her own mother, who “really had a hard life on some level” yet never revealed that to her daughters, Ms. Houdyshell said. She brings her mother’s stoicism and cheer to Deirdre, also contributing one of her mother’s recipes to the play’s Thanksgiving table, a salad concoction called Orange Easy and Delicious, which relies on Cool Whip, cottage cheese, mandarin oranges and Jell-O powder. “Yummy,” Ms. Houdyshell said.

Her goal has been to represent the character in all her sorrow, exasperation and affection. During early previews, when she felt that Deirdre’s lines were drawing too many chuckles, she made subtle alterations to discourage them. “You could tell the audience wanted to put Deirdre in a corner, the crazy mom corner,” said Mr. Karam, the playwright, speaking by telephone. “Jayne wouldn’t allow it. She’s the only actor I know worried about getting too many laughs.”

If Ms. Houdyshell so often plays mothers — crazy or otherwise — she is not a mother herself. Never having married again, she shares her Harlem apartment with two cats. She recalled that during her years in regional theater, she had pitied older actresses “who weren’t married, who didn’t have children, who inevitably they had a cat or two in their little apartments,” she said. “It seemed so lonely to me.”

But Ms. Houdyshell has many close friendships, loving relationships with her two surviving sisters, and a palpable and warranted joy in her work. “Now I’m that woman, and I’m anything but lonely,” she continued. Just as she had predicted at 15, a life in the theater sustains her. “I feel so insanely happy,” she said. “I love my life.”


