


In another blemish on New York City’s troubled jail system, two Rikers Island correction officers and a cook accepted bribes from inmates to smuggle in contraband such as scalpels, synthetic marijuana and tobacco, officials said on Thursday.

The city employees were among 17 people, including six inmates, who have been indicted in three smuggling operations uncovered at Rikers since September. The indictments, which were made public on Thursday, were the result of a monthslong inquiry by the New York City Department of Investigation and the office of the Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark. Mark G. Peters, the commissioner of the Investigation Department, called it “the largest contraband smuggling takedown in more than a decade at Rikers Island.”

Criticism of Rikers Island has intensified in recent years as a spate of slashings, stabbings and beatings among inmates and correction officers has highlighted what many see as a culture of violence and corruption at Rikers, the city’s main jail complex. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, and other critics have called for the closing of Rikers, which consists of nine operating jails that house a total of about 8,000 inmates.

Ms. Clark, who has made overhauling the sprawling complex a top priority, said that “these alleged schemes fed the climate of danger and fear that makes Rikers Island notorious for brutality, and they reveal the true scope of corruption that goes far beyond its shoreline.”

Norman Seabrook, the president of the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association, the union that represents correction officers, said on Thursday that the investigation showed “the dangerous environment we work in every single day.”

“We have no tolerance for anyone who jeopardizes the safety and security of our brother and sister officers and the people we are charged with supervising,” he said. “We have enough problems maintaining security as it is; we don’t condone anyone who makes it worse.”

Joseph Ponte, the commissioner of city’s Correction Department, noted that the department had taken aggressive steps to stem the flow of contraband into city jails, including investing in more X-ray machines, expanding canine searches, revising officer recruitment and screening policies, and dedicating a group of staff members to more effectively monitor inmate phone calls. “We have zero tolerance for any illegal behavior in our jails, and we are confident that our ongoing reforms are yielding more capable officers and safer jails,” he said.

The investigation began with the arrest in November of Kevin McKoy, now 31, a correction officer who was assigned to the Anna M. Kross Center at Rikers, on charges that he tried to smuggle in concealed scalpels, a form of synthetic marijuana known as K2 and strips of Suboxone, an opioid. He is accused of having received a total of at least $10,000 in bribes, according to city officials.

The day he was arrested at the jail, Mr. McKoy had seven scalpels tucked into a leg of his long johns, officials said. Nine more scalpels were found at his home in Brooklyn.

The investigation revealed that inmates would tell their relatives and friends to give contraband and cash to Mr. McKoy, whom they referred to using the nicknames the Plug and Ticks-and-Fleas.

Cary London, a lawyer who represents Mr. McKoy, declined on Thursday to comment. Mr. McKoy, who is free on bail, has been suspended from his job pending the outcome of his trial, officials said.

In February, a second correction officer, Mohammed Sufian, 25, was arrested at Rikers after he tried to smuggle tobacco into the jail in his socks in exchange for $1,000. Mr. Sufian, who was a probationary employee, was dismissed in April.

If convicted, Mr. McKoy and Mr. Sufian face up to seven years in prison on the most serious charge, bribe receiving, officials said.

The cook, Darnell Wilson, 27, was also arrested in February and was found with synthetic marijuana and tobacco concealed in his shoes, officials said. Mr. Wilson, who has been suspended from his job, stated after his arrest that he had received $200 a week since the summer of 2015 to smuggle in those substances, officials said.


