


Despite the sunshine and balmy breezes, movies released in the summer are often no vacation. From “On the Waterfront” in 1954 to “Rosemary’s Baby” (1968) to the first “Hangover” in 2009, some of the greatest cinematic struggles and calamities (the mob, a co-op full of conspirators, Mike Tyson’s stray tiger) have occurred in films released between Memorial Day and Labor Day. Maybe it’s primal? Do moviegoers secretly crave to be reminded each easeful season that life can be a hard scrape lest we become defenseless creatures of leisure? Here are a few films that give the lie to the lyric “summertime and the livin’ is easy.”

The Tribulation A 25-foot, three-ton rogue white shark attacking bathers off Amity Island, Mass.

The Solution Not the local bureaucrats, dependent on the tourist dollar for their survival and reluctant to close off the beaches. And amazingly, not entirely the red-faced Mr. Quint, who’s got kill notches on his belt and makes his own liquor. But rather the reluctant new police chief (Roy Scheider), the hippie oceanographer (Richard Dreyfuss), some compressed air, a rifle and a toothsome smile.

Summer Bummer Mourning and clad in black, a mother confronts the chief. Slap! “My boy is dead,” she sobs.

Fun Fact “Amity, as you know, means friendship.” So explains the sleazy mayor.

The Tribulation A Chicago orphanage faces closure unless the nuns can pay $5,000 to the Cook County assessor’s office.

The Proposed Solution Former denizens of the orphanage, “Joliet” Jake and Elwood Blues (John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd) want to help by stealing the sorely needed money. But “The Penguin,” the sister who raised them, won’t allow that.

The Real Solution God.

What, Like, a Mission From God? Yes. Specifically one that requires putting “the band” back together and raising the money by performing.

Summer Bummer The soul queen Aretha Franklin, playing a waitress, serves up a rendition of her ’68 classic “Think.” But it isn’t enough to keep her man, Matt “Guitar” Murphy, from rejoining the band. (“The Blues Brothers? They still owe you money, fool!”)

The Tribulation On a sweltering Labor Day weekend, the insurance company workers Larry and Rich (Andrew McCarthy and Jonathan Silverman) are unaware that their chief executive, Bernie Lomax (Terry Kiser), has lured them to the Hamptons and arranged for them to be killed to cover up his crimes. When Bernie is killed instead, our boys have a corpse on their hands.

The Solution Then again, nobody but our boys realizes he’s a corpse, and they’re in the Hamptons. Figuring “he’ll still be dead Tuesday morning,” they party on.

Summer Bummer Bernie (deceased) and his mistress have the best sex of her life.

Want to Turn Away? It’s natural, but do so, and miss both the fact that Bernie remains the toast of the beach and the stinging commentary on yuppie solipsism.

Gut It Out And you will be treated to top-notch physical comedy (He’s dead! He waves! And smokes!).

Fun Fact Rigor mortis can occur less than an hour after the moment of death. Or you know … not.

The Tribulation A terrorist (Dennis Hopper) has strapped a public bus with enough explosives to “put a hole in the world” if its velocity dips below 50 m.p.h. Since this is 1990s Los Angeles, the bus driver’s been shot by a gunman not in on the hijacking and is unable to drive.

Close-ups of the Speedometer? Many.

How About the Fuel Gauge? It’s low, dude.

The Solution Enter the young officer Keanu Reeves, shorn and buff and ready to redeem the L.A.P.D. Add the adorable Sandra Bullock playing a can-do passenger whose license has been suspended for — wait for it — speeding violations. She takes the wheel and follows the mad bomber’s fairly basic instructions. Hopper’s plan is perfect, except for one glitch — but if we told you how they save everyone, it wouldn’t be worth watching, and it absolutely is. Did we mention Sandra Bullock is seriously adorable?

Summer Bummer “I wish I had some loftier purpose, but I’m afraid in the end, it’s just the money,” Hopper’s villain says. “Poor people are crazy, Jack. I’m eccentric.”

Summer Bummer The downer comes early, when Marlin (the voice of Albert Brooks), loses his wife, Coral, and all their eggs but one, the future Nemo. Did we mention he’s a clownfish? “I promise I will never let anything happen to you,” he vows when the egg hatches and Nemo arrives.

The Tribulation Fish-olescence. The maturing boy’s desire for independence leads him to challenge the old man and stray from the fold, ending up in a dentist’s crowded tank in Sydney, Australia, destined to be a gift for his fish-killing niece.

The Solution Marlin and his new buddy, Dory (Ellen DeGeneres), encounter 12-stepping sharks, a whale and stoner turtles as they ride the current in search of the young fish. Meanwhile, Nemo joins the “fraternal bond of Tankhood,” and indulges escape plans of his own.

Fun Fact Clownfish are no funnier than other fish.


