


Mike Breen has sneaked up on us — if stealth is possible when you’ve called Knicks games on radio and TV for a quarter-century and been the lead voice of the N.B.A. on ESPN and ABC for a decade.

Breen’s longevity is not a surprise. He is an easy, comfortable presence whose play-by-play is smooth and accurate, who pays attention to small details and engages his analysts — Mark Jackson and Jeff Van Gundy at ESPN and ABC, and Walt Frazier at MSG Network — as if they are carrying on a game-long discussion. He has no shtick — unless you count “Bang!” for critical 3-pointers as one.

The N.B.A. finals between the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers is his record 11th finals, two more than Marv Albert (with NBC) and Dick Stockton (CBS). And he will continue his run with a newly announced contract extension.

“I know this sounds corny and clichéd, but it’s kind of overwhelming to think about it,” he said by telephone Friday between Games 1 and 2 of the finals. “I grew up watching the N.B.A. when Marv was the man — and he’s still the man — and I listened to Stockton call all those Lakers-Celtics matchups. I’ve been blessed to have all these opportunities come my way.”

Breen might have been calling his 14th N.B.A. finals if ESPN/ABC had chosen its lead announcer more wisely when it took over N.B.A. broadcast rights from NBC after the 2002 season. ESPN picked Brad Nessler, best known for his bland college football and basketball work, but he flopped. With David Stern, then the N.B.A. commissioner, uncomfortable with ESPN’s production, Nessler was replaced temporarily by Al Michaels. Breen was hired in 2006.

Longevity has been in the news lately. Verne Lundquist decided to stop calling Southeastern Conference football games, which he has done for CBS since 2000, after the coming season. But CBS will replace Lundquist, a joyful, big-game voice, with Nessler, who lacks the ability to convey effective excitement, even in big games.

Chris Berman is reported to be nearing his end at ESPN, although nothing has been confirmed by him or the network. A crucial personality at ESPN nearly from its inception, Berman has become a caricature of his better self by failing to adjust his once-playful shtick and boisterous personality to the 21st century.

Sean McDonough recently received the biggest break of his career, promoted by ESPN to call “Monday Night Football” after Mike Tirico went to NBC, where he is a candidate to succeed Michaels on “Sunday Night Football.”

No one expects Michaels to leave soon, but Tirico is only 49. He can wait.

Breen has had his big break. He has his dream job and shares it with Jackson and Van Gundy, friends for 25 years through their Knicks connections.

“The most underrated part of our business is the continuity and comfort level we have because you know where they’re going,” Breen said. “It’s like the game — players who play together a long time just get better.”

He occasionally looks back at old games to see how he can improve and relies on friends and colleagues for guidance. (By contrast, Albert listens to old tapes of his mentor, Marty Glickman, to remind himself of how best to call a game.)

One of Breen’s advisers, the producer Ken Wolfe, once watched one of the five games Breen called in a particular week and told him he sounded uninterested in that one, a blowout. “He told me, ‘You didn’t bring the proper energy, and if that’s the only game a fan watched, he’d think this guy wasn’t very good.’”

Another friend, Mike McCarthy, a former executive at the network MSG, counseled him to build to a crescendo so that “I’m not screaming, ‘We’re tied at 10!’”

During Game 2 of the finals Sunday night, Breen brought an elevated level of excitement to a brilliant stretch of basketball by Golden State in the fourth quarter that began with a long shot by Stephen Curry.

“Four to shoot,” Breen said with an unusual amount of delight in his familiar voice. “Curry, from the 28-foot line — whoa-ho! — Steph Curry from way downtown!”

Soon after a missed shot by Cleveland — a sequence that starred Leandro Barbosa — Breen had this high-energy play-by-play: “Curry comes ahead of the pack, to Barbosa — off the glass!”

To Jackson, who earlier had discussed how the Warriors “take your will where you begin to doubt you want to fight,” Breen added: “This is one of those deflating stretches you spoke of.”

Then Breen shifted with brio to another will-sapping Golden State play: “Barbosa, with the steal — the Brazilian Blur — a 27-point game!’

It was such a dandy sequence of announcing that you didn’t want ABC to go to a break and interrupt Breen or the offensive flow of the Warriors.

During the series opener Thursday, Breen had a game-long challenge: how to call a lousy shooting night by Curry, ordinarily a 3-point master. Breen shifted his language, offering up different words for similar results. An early call — “Curry, the mismatch, Curry the 3!” — gave way to a chronicle of a 4-for-15 performance: “Missed shot by Curry,” “Curry off the glass, can’t fall,” “Curry — not that time,” and “Curry gets inside — left-handed, won’t go.”

Breen said in an interview: “Curry has a night like that every once in a while, but that wasn’t the surprise. Even Michael Jordan had some rough games. The surprise was how well they were playing without him.”


