


It’s the high season for book awards in the British Isles.

The American author Akhil Sharma on Thursday won the International Dublin Literary Award for his novel “Family Life.” It comes with a cash prize of 100,000 euros, or about $114,000. On Wednesday, the Irish author Lisa McInerney was the winner of the Baileys Women’s Prize for Fiction for her first novel, “The Glorious Heresies.” The Baileys prize, formerly known as the Orange Prize for Fiction, includes an award of 30,000 pounds, or about $43,400.

Mr. Sharma’s semi-autobiographical novel explores the consequences of a devastating accident for a family that has recently immigrated from India to New York. (Mr. Sharma was born in India and moved to the United States as a child.) The book won the Folio Prize, a £40,000 London prize, last year.

In a statement, the Dublin prize jury — which included the writers Meaghan Delahunt, Carlo Gébler and Juan Pablo Villalobos — said that readers of “Family Life” were “left with the sense that while reading you were actually at the core of human experience and what it is to be alive.”

“This is the highest form of achievement in literature,” the statement continued. “Few manage it. This novel does. Triumphantly. Luminously. Movingly.”

The award, sponsored by the Dublin City Council, has been given out since 1994. Libraries in cities across the world submit their picks for the prize’s longlist.

The shortlist for the award included 10 books by a roster of international authors, including the Marlon James of Jamaica, tapped for his Man Booker Prize-winning “A Brief History of Seven Killings,” and the American authors Dave Eggers, nominated for “Your Fathers, Where Are They? And the Prophets, Do They Live Forever?” and Marilynne Robinson, who was nominated for “Lila.”

Ms. McInerney’s comic novel tracks several troubled characters living in Cork, Ireland, including a young drug dealer and his alcoholic father. Ms. McInerney used to run the blog “Arse End of Ireland,” about an Irish housing project. Other major writers up for the award included Hannah Rothschild, Anne Enright and Hanya Yanagihara.


