


MOSCOW — A boating accident in northwestern Russia that claimed the lives of 14 disadvantaged children from Moscow was the result of criminal negligence and recklessness, investigators said in a statement on Monday.

The children, most of them 12 to 14 years old, took a boat trip on Saturday on Lake Syamozero in the Karelia region, near the border with Finland. A sudden storm caused two canoes to capsize, plunging the children into the frigid waters in the evening. Rescue operations could not begin until Sunday morning, meaning that some survivors spent up to nine hours in the water.

Before their departure, investigators said, the children asked their instructors if it was safe to take a boat trip at a time when storms were forecast with winds up to 45 miles per hour. The adult instructors, all of whom survived, did not address their concerns.

“The instructors who accompanied the children did not take necessary efforts to rescue them,” Russia’s powerful Investigative Committee, the country’s equivalent of the F.B.I., said in the statement. “They were thinking about their own lives.”

The investigators detained three instructors, along with two managers of the summer camp where the children were staying. They face up to 10 years in prison.

Moscow City Hall had selected the camp in a public call for bids as a place to send children from disadvantaged families and orphans for a summer vacation.

The camp had a bad reputation among parents, according to feedback published online. Children were allowed to smoke and drink alcohol, the parents said. Some complained about the camp to the government, but received no response.

“My intuition tells me that it was all predictable,” Vladimir I. Markin, spokesman of the Investigative Committee, said in a column published on the Life.ru news website.

“Sooner or later, the current bureaucratic procurement system that aims to save money at the cost of quality, would work as it did this time,” he wrote.

An array of Russian officials and public figures have demanded that the government punish those responsible for the episode. Many cited poor regulatory oversight as the fundamental cause of the accident.

The Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, expressed his condolences, and Monday was declared a day of mourning in Moscow and the Karelia region.


