


NORTH HUDSON, N.Y. — Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo sought on Tuesday to distance himself from a longtime associate who is now at the heart of investigations into fraud and improper lobbying.

Mr. Cuomo said the associate, Todd R. Howe, who worked for him and his father, was only a casual acquaintance whom he knew mainly though political events.

The governor also said he had no knowledge of the various legal and financial woes that Mr. Howe faced over the past decade or so, even as he parlayed his experiences alongside the Cuomo family and other political figures into a lucrative lobbying career in Albany, New York and Washington.

Mr. Howe worked for Mr. Cuomo when he was secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the late 1990s. Earlier, Mr. Howe spent a decade as an aide for Mario M. Cuomo when he was governor. Mr. Howe was also close with Joseph Percoco, Andrew Cuomo’s former executive deputy secretary and campaign manager, who is also under federal investigation.

Despite that résumé, Governor Cuomo said he knew little about Mr. Howe, including that he pleaded guilty to a felony theft in Washington in 2010.

“I wouldn’t call us close friends,” the governor said to reporters. “He worked for the state for a number of years, but I had no knowledge of his personal situation.”

The allegations against Mr. Percoco and Mr. Howe — neither has been charged with a crime — are not clear. But Mr. Cuomo repeatedly drew a circle around the two men, saying that the investigation was limited to “basically two individuals” and that his administration was cooperating fully with the inquiry spearheaded by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York. The governor has also started his own inquiry.

“I’ve said to the U.S. attorney, any way we can find out and be helpful and be cooperative, we will be,” Mr. Cuomo said. “Nobody wants the facts more than us.”

While the governor’s office has received subpoenas, Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat in his second term, said he had not been questioned about the investigation but acknowledged it could happen.

“People who worked with Joe Percoco, people who worked with Todd Howe, might have information that would be helpful,” he said. “So I might have information that would be helpful.”

Shortly after the revelations in late April about the federal inquiry, Mr. Howe was fired from his job as president of WOH Government Solutions, a lobbying firm, where his list of clients included some with ties to state projects. Four of those clients — COR Development Company, SUNY Polytechnic Institute, the developer LPCiminelli and CPV Valley L.L.C., a power company — have been linked to central figures in the investigation.

Last week, the governor, through his counsel, ordered all executive branch agencies to cease contact with Mr. Howe or anyone connected with his business.

Politico New York reported on Monday that Mr. Howe also worked as a nonpaid consultant on Mr. Cuomo’s 2014 re-election campaign, which was managed by Mr. Percoco. On Tuesday, Mr. Cuomo said that he did not know if Mr. Howe had assisted Mr. Percoco.

Asked for comment about the report, Basil A. Smikle Jr., the executive director of the New York State Democratic Party, said Mr. Howe “was never paid to work on the campaign and held no position in it.”

Richard Morvillo, a lawyer for Mr. Howe, did not return requests for comment, nor did Barry A. Bohrer, a lawyer for Mr. Percoco.

Mr. Percoco worked for Mr. Cuomo during his first five years in office, leaving in January for a job as senior vice president at Madison Square Garden. In 2014, he resigned from the administration and ran Mr. Cuomo’s re-election campaign, a nearly eight-month stretch during which he earned as much as $125,000 as a consultant for COR Development and CHA Consulting, an engineering company based in Albany. Both companies have had considerable business with New York, including several upstate nanotechnology and development projects receiving state funds.

On Tuesday, the governor said that he did not ask Mr. Percoco about these consulting deals. “The state has tens of thousands of employees,” he said. “They’re not supposed to be cross-examined to make sure they’re following the rules.”

Standing in front of a pristine lake in the Adirondacks — where he announced the state’s purchase of a swath of private lands — the governor cautioned that the public should not pass judgment until the facts are known. But he also seemed aware that the inquiry did not reflect well on his administration, saying “people need to trust the government.”“Does that mean everything the government will do is perfect? No,” he said. “Does that mean that every person in the government will do everything right? No. But it means there is an ethic and a standard when there is a whiff that there may have been wrongdoing, you do everything you can do to identify it.”


