


The runner-up in Peru’s presidential contest conceded defeat on Friday, paving the way for a former finance minister to become the country’s next leader.

In a news conference in Lima, Peru’s capital, the runner-up, Keiko Fujimori, congratulated the winner, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, saying that her party’s representatives would lead a responsible opposition in Peru’s congress.

“We democratically accept the results of the electoral commission,” said Ms. Fujimori, 41, surrounded by her brother, Kenji, and other lawmakers from her party.

The second round of the election, held Sunday, was extremely close: Out of 18 million votes cast, a mere 42,000 separated the two candidates.

In the days after the election, Peruvians watched Ms. Fujimori close the narrow gap between her and Mr. Kuczynski, 77, as votes came in from rural areas and Peruvians living abroad. One group of ballots arrived late because stormy weather had delayed a boat carrying them on the Amazon.

Both candidates had promised free-market reforms, but the election was closely watched because of Ms. Fujimori’s candidacy. Her father, Alberto K. Fujimori, led Peru from 1990 to 2000, and during that time he crushed the Shining Path rebel group, which had long terrorized the country.

But Mr. Fujimori ruled the country with an iron fist. In 2009, he was convicted of human rights abuses and sentenced to 25 years in prison.

Mr. Fujimori’s legacy cut both ways for his daughter’s standing among Peruvians.

Growing concerns about crime in the country led many to see her as a strong law-and-order candidate. But a large contingent feared that another Fujimori presidency would mean a return to authoritarianism in Peru.

During the last days of the campaign, Mr. Kuczynski, a former Wall Street banker and finance minister, trailed Ms. Fujimori by five percentage points, according to polls. But last-minute endorsements and a campaign scandal involving aides to Ms. Fujimori tipped the scales, analysts say.

Mr. Kuczynski will take office on July 28.


