


While the Jets will certainly profess happiness with their draft class, it seems pockmarked by their fruitless attempts to trade up for the top talents they truly preferred.

General Manager Mike Maccagnan was reportedly unable to climb up in hope of landing one of the two premier quarterbacks in the class or in his Thursday night scramble to land offensive tackle Laremy Tunsil to replace the retired D’Brickashaw Ferguson.

“It was an interesting first round,” Maccagnan said later.

Instead, the Jets fortified their defense. Darron Lee, a linebacker who ran the 40-yard dash in 4.47 seconds and has the sleek versatility to adapt to all downs, was chosen 20th over all. He will be joined in the linebacking corps by Jordan Jenkins, the Jets’ third-round pick.

But with the Jets still seeking a franchise quarterback, they took a risk by taking Christian Hackenberg of Penn State in the second round. Hackenberg was once a top-flight prospect, but his stock tumbled in his last two years in college.

The Jets, however, were smitten. His was the only quarterback workout Maccagnan took in, and he was joined by Coach Todd Bowles and the team’s offensive coaching staff.

“With every player you take, you take the potential and ability, but you also look at if you think they’re going to fulfill that potential,” Maccagnan said. “And we felt very, very strongly about a lot of qualities he had, we thought, would translate well to the N.F.L.”

Ultimately, this draft may be judged more on Hackenberg’s success than anything else.

DARRON LEE



Linebacker, Ohio State

The Jets were busy monitoring the trade possibilities for this first-round selection, but settled on a speedy linebacker. Lee weighs just 232 pounds and is expected to initially play inside linebacker in the Jets’ 3-4 defense. But he will probably be used in several ways as the Jets try to combat the proliferation of spread offenses around the N.F.L. “In today’s game you’re getting a lot more spread offenses and empty sets and the fullback is almost nonexistent right now,” Bowles said. “So you need a little more speed here and there.”

CHRISTIAN HACKENBERG



Quarterback, Penn State

This pick, the 51st over all, was certainly the team’s most controversial. Hackenberg, despite his pedigree, developed an uneven reputation as his production diminished as he aged. But with the incumbent starter Ryan Fitzpatrick still unsigned, Hackenberg may face scrutiny sooner than expected. “There’s a lot of upside and potential with him,” Maccagnan said. “We vetted him very thoroughly.”

JORDAN JENKINS



Outside linebacker, Georgia

In the third round, the Jets continued to try to get younger at linebacker and infuse speed into their defense. “He played a little bit of defensive end and outside linebacker in college,” Maccagnan said. “We’re projecting him as an outside linebacker for us in our 3-4 defense.” Jenkins, the 83rd selection in the draft, could start opposite Lorenzo Mauldin.

JUSTON BURRIS



Cornerback, North Carolina State

With Antonio Cromartie a free agent, and the former first-round pick Dee Milliner frequently injured and failing to meet expectations, the Jets chose Burris in the fourth round to help their undermanned secondary. The 6-foot-1 Burris, a starter for each of the last three years, has the kind of size that has become more typical at cornerback. He could find playing time in his rookie season on the outside, where he mostly played in college, opposite Darrelle Revis.

BRANDON SHELL



Offensive tackle, South Carolina

The Jets must try to fill the gap opened by the retirement of Ferguson, their stalwart left tackle. They traded for Ryan Clady this off-season and traded up in the fifth round for Shell, giving up a fourth-round pick in 2017 to Washington. He is the great-nephew of Art Shell, the former Raiders coach and Hall of Fame tackle. Brandon Shell has prototypical size for an offensive tackle at 6 feet 5 inches and 324 pounds. “We felt potentially he had the chance to be a starting-caliber player,” Maccagnan said.

LACHLAN EDWARDS



Punter, Sam Houston State

With no other punter on the roster, Edwards will probably become the starter by default. And the Jets need a makeover after last year. They finished last in the N.F.L. in net punting average and have a new special teams coordinator, Brant Boyer. Edwards, taken in the seventh round, was the third punter selected on Saturday.

CHARONE PEAKE



Wide receiver, Clemson

The Jets are certainly top-heavy at receiver with Brandon Marshall and Eric Decker, but do not have many reliable options behind them. The 6-2 Peake has speed — he ran a 4.37 40-yard dash — but he did not show much at Clemson until his senior year. But there is little risk associated with the 241st overall pick.


