


Twenty years apart, Michael Jordan and LeBron James wept unashamedly after winning an N.B.A. championship on Father’s Day.

When tears for a title flow, the heart of the game is bared, and those who form its soul become clearer in focus.

Largely in sorrow, Jordan sobbed on the locker room floor of United Center in Chicago on June 16, 1996. His father, James, had been murdered three years earlier and was missing for the first time from a triumphant aftermath, the fourth of his son’s six N.B.A. titles.

After James claimed his third title on Sunday night, he went down on his knees and cried at Oracle Arena in Oakland, Calif. He was overcome by a range of emotions after claiming a championship for long-suffering Cleveland and the Northeast Ohio region of his impoverished, fatherless youth.

Different eras, players and personal circumstances, but after the Cavaliers’ 93-89 Game 7 victory, Jordan and James are finally and forever connected by a historic cause.

Jordan’s 1995-96 Bulls punctuated their then-record 72-victory regular season by closing out the Seattle SuperSonics in six games. James’s Cavaliers punctured the Golden State Warriors’ case — after 73 regular-season victories — to stand above Jordan’s Bulls in the continuous debate on the greatest pro basketball team ever.

After a third straight James masterpiece in elimination games, a generation of committed Jordan worshipers heaved a sigh of relief as its main man Michael remained the face of the one-season standard for end-to-end excellence.

Likewise, a growing chorus of James boosters furthered its claim that he is the Jordan of his time and, at 31, still young and dominant enough to catch or eclipse the most famous No. 23 as the consensus choice for greatest of all time.

In the blur of memories, there is a tendency to paint the Jordan years with rose-colored broad strokes — to pretend he never struggled on court or off.

In contrast, James’s defenders have considered him the most scrutinized and criticized American athlete, much of the naysaying unwarranted and aggravated by the polarizing effects of social media.

But Jordan’s persona was pierced by societal criticisms — for gambling excesses and a refusal to speak out on social issues, which James has done — that went deeper than the pettiness surrounding James’s decisions on where to play, and how he played.

Jordan was typically spectacular in the finals, but he, like James, had nights when his game betrayed him, when others had to bail him out. The Game 6 title-clincher in 1996 — when he took 19 shots and made only five — was one of them.

The next season, at the climax of a tight Game 6 in the finals against Utah, Jordan anticipated the Jazz’s double team and told Steve Kerr to expect to be open for a pass.

“I’ll be ready,” Kerr told him on the bench before hitting the title-clinching jumper, a classic example of superstar trust, never easily earned at the level at which Jordan competed and — let us once and for all admit — at which James now competes.

Kerr, now the Warriors’ coach, saw his team’s bid for a repeat title snatched away by James and company. He knows better than most how the burden of superstar expectations can make a man cruelly contentious. Jordan once struck Kerr in the face during a Bulls scrimmage when Kerr had the audacity to question him.

“It was one of the best things that ever happened for me,” Kerr said a few years ago. “I needed to stand up and go back at him. I think I earned some respect.”

That was never easy for Jordan’s teammates, from the very best (Scottie Pippen) to the marginal veterans whom he nonetheless delighted with the delivery of a first championship ring.

“Almost like a father wants to provide for his kids,” Trent Tucker, a onetime Knick and a role player on the 1992-93 champion Bulls, said during that season’s finals.

It was no coincidence that the once-fragile Pippen, a reticent Toni Kukoc and a chronically disruptive Dennis Rodman all grew as performers and rose to championship moments rather than sag under the weight of Jordan’s demands.

He occasionally went too far, but they ultimately believed it was in their interests. They wanted to please him, just as these Cavaliers evolved into willing subjects of King James.

A year ago, facing elimination at home in Game 6 against the Warriors with a depleted and unimposing cast, James said he still believed the Cavaliers could win because “I’m the best player in the world.”

The punditry’s collective head exploded over his perceived conceit, but Dru Joyce II, James’s youth and high school coach in Akron, Ohio, got on the telephone and said, more or less, do you really think it is himself he needs to inflate?

“He couldn’t be afraid to say that when he is still trying to win this championship, to build on that belief,” said Joyce, one of James’s surrogate father figures.

Jordan won four of his six titles after his 30th birthday. James might have looked 30 upon entering the league at 18, in 2003, but it took him years of grappling with the concept of on-court leadership before he became the finished product on spectacular display Sunday night.

This time, James arrived in the finals with a healthy roster but after another season he called chaotic, given the title-or-bust mandate he helped create.

Could he ever coexist with a ball-dominant point guard like Kyrie Irving? Could he extract enough from the athletically challenged and somewhat strange Kevin Love?

“Follow my lead,” he shouted in the huddle before Game 3, after two disturbing blowouts in Oakland. With the Cavs trying to become the first team to rally to an N.B.A. title after trailing by three games to one, and given a break by Draymond Green’s Game 5 suspension, James led by example, by sheer will, as few have done before.

Irving responded with scoring brilliance and a title-clinching 3-pointer over Stephen Curry, whose own marksmanship had deserted him, followed by his point guard and leadership skills. J. R. Smith controlled his inner desire for disorder for James the way he never could for Carmelo Anthony in New York and cried along with James at the end.

Love grabbed 14 rebounds Sunday night, had a Game 7 plus-minus of 19 — the highest mark by far of any Cavalier — and held defensively steady as Curry frantically and foolishly launched a last-gasp 3-point attempt that did not come close.

Then Love was first to embrace James and sounded like a North Korean bureaucrat, referring to him several times as “our leader.”

James is only halfway to Jordan in championships won, but that is not the point now that he has achieved something incalculably phenomenal, almost mythically memorable: a season-closer so compelling that it was the league’s highest-rated finals game since Jordan’s last, in 1998.

Another Jordan-James connection, with the league again shedding tears of joy at the cashier’s.


