


CHARLESTON, S.C. — With a series of subdued “Yes, Your Honors,” Joseph C. Meek Jr. pleaded guilty in United States District Court on Friday to lying to federal officials and withholding his knowledge of the involvement of his friend Dylann S. Roof in the massacre of nine black parishioners during a Bible study at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church here last June.

Mr. Meek, a 21-year-old air-conditioning repairman, faces up to eight years in prison and a half-million dollars in fines for the charges: misprision of a felony, which means withholding knowledge of details of a crime, and making false statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. He agreed to testify against Mr. Roof and to take a polygraph if so requested.

“If he cooperates and the government deems he provided substantial assistance during the trial, the government will take that into account during sentencing,” said Judge Richard M. Gergel.

Mr. Meek’s cooperation is expected to help the prosecution’s case against Mr. Roof, 22, who faces 33 counts connected to the June 17 attack. The charges include hate crimes and killing people while obstructing religious freedom — a charge that could result in the death penalty.

Mr. Meek took the stand in a dark gray suit. He was clean-shaven and appeared to have lost a considerable amount of weight since the days after the slayings, when he appeared on television in a camouflage hat and a red sleeveless T-shirt. None of his family members appeared to be in the courtroom. He averted his eyes from the roughly 15 friends and family members of slain churchgoers who sat behind him.

During dramatic and blunt questioning from the judge, Mr. Meek said that he only completed 10th grade and had in the past been treated for mental illness. He revealed the depth of his attempt to conceal his knowledge of Mr. Roof’s alleged crimes.

Mr. Roof, he said, had specifically described scouting out Emanuel church for six months before the attack, and said that he would carry out the shootings on a Wednesday night during a Bible study with a .45-caliber Glock pistol in the hopes of starting a “race war.”

He also told Mr. Meek that he would carry ammunition in a fanny pack. “He said he had extra clips,” Mr. Meek said.

Mr. Meek has said that at first, he did not take Mr. Roof’s comments seriously, but later took them seriously enough to hide Mr. Roof’s handgun. Eventually, at the urging of his girlfriend, Mr. Meek returned the gun because he was on probation and wanted to stay out of trouble himself.

On the day after the shooting, Mr. Meek told several friends he had strong suspicions that Mr. Roof committed the crime, but asked them not to contact the authorities. One friend, however, contacted the F.B.I. On June 19, Mr. Meek spoke to the F.B.I. The next day, Mr. Meek admitted to lying during his earlier questioning.

After Mr. Meek’s statements, Gary Washington, the deaf son of a slain parishioner, Ethel Lance, 70, took the stand. Through a sign-language interpreter, Mr. Washington gestured forcefully and tearfully, recounting his mother’s last day and his lingering loss.

“She was always with me,” he said. “I met her that day, and hugged her and told her to be careful. I got off work at 2 a.m., I arrive home, and turn on the news and then ran to the church. I was so shocked.”

“I want you to know how we feel,” he continued, addressing Mr. Meek. “I’m deaf. It was always me and my mom. I’m miserable, and I’ve continued to suffer. This has made a mess in my family.”

Outside of the courtroom, Mr. Meek’s attorney, Debbie Barbier, said that a sentencing date has not been set, and that she did know whether or not Mr. Meek would actually testify in the pending trial. She read a statement from Mr. Meek.

“He is truly sorry for his actions,” she said. “He has asked God for forgiveness, he would like nothing better than for the families to forgive him. But he certainly does not expect their forgiveness.”


