


LAS VEGAS — Unable to shake what has become a lingering distraction for her campaign, Hillary Clinton on Thursday played down a report from the State Department’s inspector general that criticized her use of a private email server while she was secretary of state.

In an interview with ABC News, Mrs. Clinton repeated her concession that using the private email server was a mistake. But she suggested that voters had more important issues to consider when making up their minds between her and the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump.

“As I’ve said many times, if I could go back, I would do it differently,” Mrs. Clinton said. “I know people have concerns about this. I understand that. But I think voters are going to be looking at the full picture of what I have to offer, my life and my service, and the full threat that Donald Trump offers our country.”

The inspector general’s report presented to Congress on Wednesday said that Mrs. Clinton had not sought or received permission to use the private email server. The report also said that, through her lawyers, Mrs. Clinton declined to be interviewed by the inspector general.

The report gave new ammunition to Mr. Trump and threatened to bolster the perception already held by a majority of voters, according to polling, that Mrs. Clinton is not trustworthy.

In the interview, Mrs. Clinton gave little ground over the email issue, asserting that the report “makes clear that personal email use was the practice for other secretaries of state.”

Asked if using private email was an error of judgment, she responded: “Well, it was allowed. And the rules have been clarified since I left about the practice.”

She added, “Having said that, I have said many times, it was a mistake.”

Mrs. Clinton reiterated that argument in a phone interview with CNN on Thursday afternoon. “I thought it was allowed,” she told Wolf Blitzer. Asked why she declined to be interviewed for the review, Mrs. Clinton said, “I’d already said everything I could on this matter.”

In both interviews, she cited her 11-hour testimony to a House committee investigating the Sept. 11, 2012, attack on the United States mission in Benghazi, Libya, when extensive questions about her private email use came up. But unlike the Benghazi committee, an effort led by congressional Republicans, the State Department report was not partisan, a detail not lost on Mr. Trump.

“This is not a Republican group or a conservative group,” he said in an interview on Wednesday. “This is a group that is much more to her liking.”

Mr. Trump repeated his criticism of Mrs. Clinton at a news conference on Thursday, while Mrs. Clinton used her interviews to call her likely Republican rival “an unqualified loose cannon.”

“President Obama came out of meetings with our closest allies in the world and reported that they are quote ‘rattled’ by the threat Donald Trump represents,” Mrs. Clinton said on CNN.

The interviews came as Mrs. Clinton spoke in Nevada on Thursday at a conference for the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, which endorsed her in January. Later in the afternoon, she returned to California to hold a pair of rallies ahead of the California primary on June 7. Though Mrs. Clinton previously led by double digits in numerous surveys, a poll released Wednesday showed her in a tight race with Senator Bernie Sanders.

“I really don’t pay a lot of attention to polls because they are usually, and increasingly, all over the place,” Mrs. Clinton said on CNN when asked about the tightening race in California. “We are already insurmountably ahead” in the race for the 2,383 delegates needed to clinch the nomination, she added.


