


BEIRUT, Lebanon — The Syrian government allowed hundreds of students to leave two besieged areas near Damascus to take their year-end exams over the weekend, even as other suburbs of the capital came under fierce attack.

The government is eager to show that it is still providing services, salaries and pensions amid a devastating war, including to areas it does not control.

On Saturday and Sunday, government forces allowed about 360 students from the rebel-held Damascus suburb of Moadamiyeh, and 68 students from the rebel-held town of Madaya, to travel to government areas to take their high school exams, according to activists and state media.

Both Moadamiyeh and Madaya are besieged by government forces, who have allowed relief groups only limited access, despite reports that civilians have died from starvation and lack of medical care.

The ninth graders from Madaya who went to the nearby government-held town of Rawda on Saturday were searched by soldiers at the first checkpoint outside the town, said Wafiqa Hashem, a teacher at the Mohammad Nassif secondary school in Madaya.

Eighty percent of students in Madaya have missed stretches of class in the last school year because of hunger or cold weather, Ms. Hashem said. She said that during the worst periods of the siege only five or six students would attend class at a time. Doctors Without Borders reported 16 siege-related deaths in Madaya in January alone.

“They were fighting for their lives, but they will make all efforts” to pass their exams, Ms. Hashem said.

Schools also struggled with power cuts and other shortages.

Since the government began allowing aid into the town this year, the health of students has improved. “They are playing sports again,” Ms. Hashem said. But teachers have not had time to catch up on their curriculums.

The United Nations and international relief organizations are calling on the government, the Islamic State group and rebels to allow sustained and unfettered access to the nearly half a million people — mostly civilians — trapped in besieged areas around the country.

Syria’s education minister, Hazwan al-Wuz, hailed the first week of exams as a “rejection of the ignorance that the nation’s enemies are striving for,” according to state media. The state media reported that rebels in eastern Aleppo prohibited students from crossing into government-held western Aleppo to take their finals.


