


He had been very respectful, he said. He had testified for nearly four hours and had answered many questions. The facts were clear. Yet his opponents still wanted to play political games. Well, he said, he would no longer play along.

Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat seeking to extend mayoral control of New York City’s schools in the face of a Republican-controlled State Senate that appears intent on thwarting him, reached on Thursday for one of his default political strategies: When outgunned, claim the moral high ground.

“I wish this was about the substance,” Mr. de Blasio said in an interview on WNYC of the Senate’s reluctance to act on mayoral control. “I wish it was about our children and parents. I’m having trouble seeing how it is.”

Mr. de Blasio made his comments to justify his decision to skip a Senate hearing on the matter on Thursday. He and the schools chancellor, Carmen Fariña, traveled to Albany two weeks ago to testify at an initial hearing for several hours. The session on Thursday was in Manhattan, opposite City Hall. Nonetheless, Mr. de Blasio said on Wednesday that he would not testify. Ms. Fariña attended and testified.

The mayor’s decision did not appear to be driven by scheduling conflicts, as he spent the morning sitting for three radio interviews. Instead, he seemed to have chosen, as he has when stymied by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, that rather than negotiating, he was better off publicly accusing his foe of putting politics above the needs of the city’s residents.

“When you look at facts like that, and the fact that there’s no alternative, there’s no third way here that’s been proposed, it suggests to me that the substance is not the primary consideration here,” Mr. de Blasio said on WNYC.

“I hope the State Senate Republicans are listening to all those facts, and they’ll make the right decision here in the name of the kids of our city,” he added. “That’s really what it should be about.”

In a statement, Austin Finan, a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio said, “The mayor met his commitment to the Senate when he testified earlier this month and laid out a clear case” for mayoral control.

Two years ago, Mr. de Blasio mounted a major push to wrest control of the Senate from the Republicans by electing a Democratic majority. The effort was unsuccessful, and state and federal authorities are now investigating whether he and his allies violated limits on political contributions by using county committees to direct large donations to candidates.

Senate Republicans repaid Mr. de Blasio last year, in part, by ensuring that he got only a yearlong extension of mayoral control, an embarrassing defeat that forced him to return this year to request another renewal.

The risks in the mayor’s current strategy were evident on Wednesday when the Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan, issued a statement in which he said he was “extremely disappointed the mayor doesn’t believe this hearing is significant enough to attend.” Senator Flanagan, a Long Island Republican, himself did not attend the hearing; he also missed the first one.

Several other senators chastised Mr. de Blasio at the hearing on Thursday, with one suggesting that he should put his ego aside on an issue that concerned the welfare of children.

Outside the hearing, two groups opposed to Mr. de Blasio’s education policies held rallies at which they mocked him for not showing up.

“Mayor de Blasio is like a kid unprepared for a test,” said Darlene Boston, an organizer with StudentsFirstNY, an advocacy group that supports charter schools and stricter teacher evaluations and tenure policies. The group’s donors financed a political action committee that spent $4.2 million in 2014 to help Republicans keep control of the Senate.

Later in the day, a charter school principal who had testified at the hearing issued a statement accusing Mr. de Blasio of using mayoral control as “a political wedge against a few children” because of his opposition to lifting the cap on the number of charter schools in the city.

Mr. de Blasio suggested in his radio interviews that he was being treated unfairly, noting that the Legislature gave his predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, who was first elected as a Republican, seven years of mayoral control in 2002 followed by a six-year renewal in 2009.

While Mr. de Blasio asked for a seven-year renewal at the hearing in Albany, he now seems resigned to something shorter. On Tuesday, the State Assembly, which Democrats lead, approved a three-year extension. At a news conference at City Hall on Wednesday where an array of business leaders endorsed mayoral control, Mr. de Blasio asked for three years. Ms. Fariña did the same at the hearing on Thursday.

Speaking on WINS on Thursday morning, Mr. de Blasio was asked about his feud with Mr. Cuomo, a fellow Democrat. He connected it to the Senate’s opposition on the school control issue.

“There’s a long history of Albany not supporting the City of New York,” he said, adding: “I would like to see the maximum cooperation with the Senate, and with the governor as well. But I’m never surprised when that isn’t there.”


