


Harry Kane and Dele Alli both scored twice Monday as Tottenham crushed Stoke, 4-0, with a devastating attacking display, closing the gap on Premier League leader Leicester to 5 points with four games left.

Tottenham’s performance was an emphatic response to Leicester dropping points in Sunday’s 2-2 draw with West Ham.

Either team winning the league would shake up the established order. Leicester has never won the top flight in its 132-year history, and Tottenham’s only titles came in 1951 and 1961.

“We’re not going anywhere — we are on their tails,” Kane said of Leicester after taking his league-leading tally to 24 goals.

The striker curled in the opener in the ninth minute, but Tottenham only burst into life in the second half.

The 20-year-old Alli dinked the ball over the 39-year-old goalkeeper Shay Given to double Tottenham’s lead in the 67th but then missed an open goal.

Kane did succeed in putting the ball into an unguarded net in the 71st, and Alli arrowed a powerful volley into the net to complete the worst loss of the season for ninth-place Stoke.

This end to the season could not have been anticipated in August, when Tottenham opened its campaign by failing to win any of its first four games.

But Tottenham’s young team has steadily grown in confidence under Mauricio Pochettino during the manager’s second season.

“We show hunger and passion,” Pochettino said. “They are fantastic to work with every day.”

No team has scored more than Tottenham, and no team has conceded fewer goals.

VARDY’S BAN MAY GROW Leicester striker Jamie Vardy’s mandatory one-match ban may be lengthened after he was charged by the English Football Association over his angry reaction to a red card.

Vardy, the Premier League’s second-leading scorer, was sent off in the second half of Sunday’s draw with West Ham after being booked twice, the second time for diving in the penalty area after tangling with Angelo Ogbonna.

Vardy confronted the referee Jon Moss, jabbing a finger at him after receiving his first red card of the season.


