


Tara Elise Hagan and Thomas Whitney Malloy were married May 7 at the Myriad Botanical Gardens in Oklahoma City. Laina Vlasnik Yip, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, officiated.

Ms. Hagan, 32, is keeping her name. She is the director of business analytics in New York for the advertising agency TBWA\Chiat\Day . She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Oklahoma and received an M.B.A. from Harvard. She is a daughter of Bonnie Hagan and Doug D. Hagan of Harrah, Okla.

Mr. Malloy, 33, is the managing director of Stage Harbor Group, a financial consulting firm in New York. He graduated from Babson College and received an M.B.A. from the IE Business School in Madrid. He is a son of Jane E. Malloy and John J. Malloy of Newtown, Conn.

Ms. Hagan and Mr. Malloy met in November 2009 at the Whole Foods grocery on Bowery and Houston Streets in New York. Ms. Hagan, who was studying for the chartered financial analyst exam at one of the long rectangular tables at the in-store cafe on the second floor, noticed Mr. Malloy sitting across the same table scribbling notes into the same study guide.

“He looked so handsome and diligent and studious just sitting there playing with his little calculator,” Ms. Hagan said. “I just had to hit on him.”

But not before debating the pros and cons of such a bold move: “If I start talking to him and it bombs,” she asked herself, “will I have to relocate to another table?”

Before she could provide herself with an answer, Ms. Hagan tapped on Mr. Malloy’s study guide, showed him her guide and said, “Hey, same book.”

“I was a bit stunned, I really didn’t know what to say,” Mr. Malloy said. “Finally, I just said, ‘Yeah, same book, though it’s not my favorite.’”

They began talking and learned that they each lived on the Lower East Side and worked in finance, she as an auditor at Deloitte and he as a financial analyst for General Motors. Their hourlong chat covered a shared love of alternative music and travel, and other topics ranged from their salad ordering strategies (“Order the half-size salad, it’s three-quarters the size of the full salad but half the price,” Mr. Malloy said) to their favorite Whole Foods regulars, including, Mr. Malloy said, “The muscular man who eats a whole rotisserie chicken with his hands every night.”

They eventually parted ways, but not before Ms. Hagan “gave him every possible piece of contact information I had,” she said, laughing. “I practically threw myself at him.”

Though Mr. Malloy did not immediately reach out to her, they bumped into each other — and into the muscular chicken-eating man — several more times at the Whole Foods.

When the financial analyst exams ended in December, Mr. Malloy invited Ms. Hagan to a holiday party at his apartment. The next day, they went to brunch in Manhattan and followed that with a long walk around Times Square and then dinner at a barbecue restaurant in Harlem before walking around other areas of Manhattan.

When their first date finally ended, it was 2 a.m. “Being together just felt so easy and natural,” Ms. Hagan said. “He was so funny and super intelligent, I just loved being with him.”

Mr. Malloy was feeling much the same. “She just gives off this positive energy that makes me want to be around her,” he said.

They began dating steadily, and four months later moved into an apartment together in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.

“We still use our old financial spreadsheets to plan for road trips and backpacking adventures,” Ms. Hagan said, laughing. “And they really came in handy when we were planning for our wedding.”


