


POTENTIAL

The vocal samples on “Potential” (Domino), the new album from James Hinton, who records as the Range, were unearthed from low-view-count YouTube videos of relative unknowns and framed within house music, trip-hop, electronic soul and more. Mr. Hinton’s tastes tend toward club-influenced music — especially that of the British persuasion — in which the vocals appear to be floating somewhere above the production: Think the Streets, whose melancholy-amble rapping practically obviated the need for a beat, or James Blake, whose ghostlike singing is like a full immersion in a cloud. On this lovely, elegiac album, Mr. Hinton’s production is lush and precise, but what he’s most effective at is a sort of abstraction filter — these slow-burn songs serve as a way to feel deeply and get lost all at the same time.

COLD WAVE

Rely on Oprime39 and Superbad Solace — the brothers who make up the Queens duo Timeless Truth — for preservation of old-school New York rap values: burly formalism, gut-punch assonance, beats that sound as if they’ve been dragged under a subway line. “Cold Wave” (Different Worlds), their best release to date, moves with slow majesty and hard muscle. They have a keen ear for production — distressed, drowsy horns on “4 the Real 1s”; the mottled texture of early Wu-Tang Clan on “Pop Champagne”; a staggeringly swaggering bass loop on “40 Below” (produced by El RTNC, one of the sonic architects of vintage New York rap revivalism). As rappers, Timeless Truth are true to their influences: Solace is a surly bruiser, and Oprime39 is a raspy-voiced smooth talker. On “Gods in the Details,” he nails a particularly 1993-esque blend of tough talk and moralism:

THE VERY LAST DAY

Parker Millsap scrapes up his guitar strings like they’ve done him wrong — hits them hard and draws a big, broad, melancholy sound out of them. His second album, “The Very Last Day” (Okrahoma/Thirty Tigers), begins with “Hades Pleads,” a flamboyant, hard-country song that sounds like a bar fight spilling over into church. By the third song, “Morning Blues,” he’s settled in a bit, pulling his strings until they make melancholy teardrops. Mr. Millsap sings with spiritual fervor verging on rage — his voice ecstatic and volcanic all at once. Even his most tender songs, like “Jealous Sum,” feel as if they might shatter under the tension. But no matter how much Mr. Millsap tries to contain his urges inside a lovely melody, he’s almost always hitting those guitar strings, as if encouraging them to feel something even close to what he is.

STRUGGLE LOVE

For a decade and a half, Jaheim has been the adult in the room for an R&B world that’s increasingly juvenile. And even though the music on his latest album, “Struggle Love” (Primary Wave BMG Label Services), is grown-up, full of ornate keyboard sparkle and lite-jazz horns, he remains committedly frisky, using his luscious, honeyed voice to deceptively naughty ends. He is a soother and a seducer — and he’s not shy. At times, his songs are so literal that they verge on the comic: “Side Piece,” about the complexity of sexual adventure; “Craziest Place,” about the locations of sexual adventure; “Songs to Have Sex To,” about the soundtrack to sexual adventure.

I’M A PIECE OF _____

Regret is perhaps a strong word for what the Atlanta rapper Father is engaged in on his pleasantly wobbly new album, “I’m a Piece of _____” (Awful), but it’s close. For the past couple of years, he’s been in an off-kilter haze — a wry, happily narcotized comedian à la Steven Wright. Here, his flow is as meandering as ever, buffeted by a few intrusions of free verse from iLoveMakonnen (and one very sharp guest appearance by Tommy Genesis on “2 Girl Fantasy 2”). But instead of rambling from one debaucherous occasion to the next, doubt is creeping in to Father’s calculations: “When I’m not around, do you even long for me?/When I’m coming down, feel like you don’t belong to me,” he raps. The drugs and the sex made Father blissfully catatonic, but the existential grappling causes an even sweeter haze.


