


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Let’s start with some housekeeping. Many of you have been asking for the ability to search within your recipe box on Cooking so you don’t have to scroll through all your holdings to find that favorite recipe for three-cup chicken or French lentils with garlic and thyme. So now you can do that, using the search box we’ve placed in the top-left corner of the recipe-box screen. Thanks for the tip. Please keep them coming.

Now, how about some new recipes? We’re in love with Melissa Clark’s recipe for green garlic tabbouleh, which you could make with scallions if you can’t find the new-season stuff at the market. It’s terrific. We’re totally mesmerized by David Tanis’s idea of pairing wild salmon with savory whipped cream. Let’s cook that very soon.

And would you like a cocktail? This time of year we’re all about Rosie Schaap’s elegant recipe for gin and juice. (You know the soundtrack.) Bottoms up!

For sure we’ll be making asparagus for dinner this week; we can’t get enough of it. Maybe steam some, or grill some, or roast some (here’s how to do all that and more), and pair the spears with Julia Moskin’s foolproof recipe for lemon-garlic mayonnaise? That would make a nice springtime dinner on its own, though big eaters may wish to serve it alongside Julia’s incredible recipe for pan-roasted fish.

Need a dessert for that? Sure you do. How about lemon gelato? Or a strawberry sour cream streusel cake? Mark Bittman’s recipe for rice pudding is nonpareil.

You can find other recipes to cook all over Cooking. Take a dive into the endless scroll and see what you can find. You can rate the recipes you cook on a scale of one to five stars, and you can leave notes on them as well – either for yourself or for the benefit of our growing community of home cooks and partisans of the delicious. You can share recipes with friends and colleagues via email; you can post them to social media accounts as we do on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest. Make them your own!

But if you run into problems, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com, standing by like these guys.

Finally, let’s watch and listen as the Tee-Tones cover Miley Cyrus’s “We Can’t Stop.” We can’t stop! Have a great week.


