


Though the Prohibition-inspired speakeasy trend has cooled in recent years, the desire to drink underground hasn’t. Take Le Boudoir, a gilded cocktail den that opened this winter under Chez Moi, a casual French bistro.

The owners, the husband-and-wife pair Tarek Debira and Patricia Ageheim, modeled the subterranean chambers after Marie Antoinette’s boudoir in Versailles. It drips with gold leaf frames, red velvet couches and other louche touches. The glass tabletops are held by nude nymph statuettes. Odalisque paintings hang on the wall. The space itself is reached through a bookshelf stocked with scarlet-spined books.

THE PLACE

On a quiet corner of Atlantic Avenue and Henry Street, where the sidewalk is well worn with strollers and where gentlemen prefer sweaters. The entrance is along the left wall as you walk into Chez Moi, down a flight of candle-lined stairs. There’s a small marble bar with a bronze bust of Marie Antoinette, which serves as a tap. The action is in the cuddle-friendly booths and divans, as well as in a cavelike room in the back.

THE CROWD

Not your average Brooklyn Heights group. On a recent Saturday night, three raucous 30-something librarians in thick glasses and cherry-red lipstick swapped tales of conventions gone wild. A couple in their early 20s, in matching his-and-hers fedoras, canoodled on stools pulled close together. At a nearby table, a bored-looking 23-year-old surreptitiously checked Tinder while her date picked at frog legs.

PLAYLIST

On Mondays, small combos of jazz musicians, often French, perform. Otherwise, the soundtrack includes the chansons of Yves Montand, the classics of Serge Gainsbourg and the mm-tss house music one hears on St. Bart’s.

GETTING IN

There’s no doorman, but there is a hostess with a haughty attitude who tartly leads the way to the bookshelf. Reservations are not accepted or needed, though on weekends, the 55-seat room becomes crowded.

DRINKS

The cocktails are served in ornate silver coupes and Cristal D’Arques Longchamp glasses, and have cheeky names like Guillotine (mezcal, Scotch, banana and honey, $12) and 1793 (toasted sunflower-seed-infused rye, oloroso sherry and Demerara, $13).


