


The federal government took the unusual step of filing a discrimination lawsuit on Thursday against the New York City Education Department, accusing it of engaging in a pattern and practice of discrimination against the three black teachers who worked at Pan American International High School in Queens.

The lawsuit, filed by the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, makes it clear that the government believes that the school’s principal, Minerva Zanca, targeted the teachers with the goal of having them removed from their jobs.

Ms. Zanca once told the school’s assistant principal, Anthony Riccardo, that one of the teachers “looked like a gorilla in a sweater”; Ms. Zanca also said that she could never have “nappy hair” like the teacher, the lawsuit says.

At another point, the lawsuit said, Ms. Zanca said to Mr. Riccardo that she had difficulty not laughing at one of the teachers “because he reminded her of a Tropicana commercial where a black man ‘with those same lips’ danced down a supermarket aisle.”

The lawsuit also claims that Ms. Zanca retaliated against Mr. Riccardo for not complying with her goal of getting rid of the teachers. Once, when he refused to give an unsatisfactory rating to a lesson by one of the teachers, Ms. Zanca yelled at Mr. Riccardo, accusing him of “sabotaging her plan” and calling school security to remove from the building, the lawsuit says.

The school, in the Elmhurst neighborhood, says on its website that it serves “374 recently immigrated English language learners from Latin America.” The lawsuit claims that during the 2012-13 school year, when it says the discrimination occurred, the school had a total of 27 teachers. Three of the teachers were black, the suit notes.

Mr. Bharara, in a statement, said, “It is nearly unthinkable that, in this day and age, one of the largest and most diverse school districts in the United States would allow racial discrimination and retaliation to flourish.”

It was not immediately known whether the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan had ever brought a race discrimination claim against a school district. Discrimination lawsuits have been filed by the office in the past but most often in housing cases, a federal official said.

The lawsuit by Mr. Bharara’s office on Thursday seeks an end to the discrimination and damages for the three teachers and Mr. Riccardo.

Ms. Zanca began working in the school system in 1988 and served as the principal at Pan American from 2012 through 2015; she then retired and has since been working as a part-time guidance counselor at Frederick Douglass Academy IV Secondary School in Brooklyn, the Education Department said.

Ms. Zanca, reached by phone, said: “These are false allegations, horrible allegations. I deny them. I’m outraged that this would even be attributed to me.”

She added that as a minority herself — the Bronx-born daughter, she said, of Puerto Rican parents — she “would never tolerate this; it’s a social injustice to judge people based on their race.”

In 2013, the lawsuit notes, Mr. Riccardo and the three teachers — John Flanagan, Heather Hightower and Lisa-Erika James — filed complaints with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Later, Mr. Flanagan also sued, at which point the commission stopped processing his complaint.

But the commission ultimately found “reasonable cause” to believe that the department had engaged in discrimination and retaliation against the three others, the government’s lawsuit says. It adds that after unsuccessfully trying to reach a voluntary resolution of the matters, the commission referred the case to the Justice Department.

In describing the environment at the school, the government’s lawsuit cites an episode in which Ms. Zanca told Mr. Riccardo in fall 2012 that she intended to give Mr. Flanagan and Ms. Hightower, who were both without tenure, “unsatisfactory” ratings for lessons she had not yet seen.

After one lesson review, Mr. Riccardo said he would meet with Ms. Hightower and try “to help her improve,” because he had once taught her subject. Ms. Zanca later told him that he had better not make her “a better teacher,” the suit says.

Devora Kaye, a spokeswoman for the Education Department, said: “All employees’ work environments must be safe and supportive, and we have zero tolerance for any discrimination.” The city’s Law Department said the suit was under review.

A lawyer for Mr. Riccardo and Mr. Flanagan did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment.

Erica L. Shnayder, a lawyer for Ms. Hightower and Ms. James, said her firm would be filing a discrimination lawsuit on her clients’ behalf. “These are both highly qualified teachers,” Ms. Shnayder said.


