


LONDON — Conferences can be a little niche, but most don’t aim to stultify.

Not so the “Boring Conference,” a daylong showcase of talks on deliberately dull topics. First staged in London in 2010, the conference is set to take place here again on Saturday, May 7. According to its website, tickets are sold out.

This year’s participants include Eleanor Herring, a historian who will discuss the history of lampposts, and Jason Ward, a jigsaw-puzzle aficionado who will assemble a puzzle at the conference throughout the day.

James Ward (no relation to Jason), who works for a small public relations agency, conceived the event after the organizer of the “Interesting” conference, dedicated to interesting but nonutilitarian pursuits, announced that it would not take place in 2010.

So, James Ward, who also runs a blog called “I Like Boring Things,” posted a “knee-jerk” response on Twitter saying that he would start a boring conference, he said in a phone interview. Responses quickly began piling up, and an idea that had started out as an “idle tweet” became “something I’d have to do for real.”

As the conference’s website notes Mr. Ward, 35, is the author of “Adventures in Stationery: A Journey Through Your Pencil Case,” a book that was awarded two out of five stars by The South China Morning Post.

The conference format has evolved through the years, as Mr. Ward has aimed for the right blend of actual dullness and enigmatic intrigue.

“There’s a sort of constant refinement” of what the conference should actually showcase he said, noting that some early participants verged too far into the actual doldrums.

“Having people with genuine interests in obscure or overlooked areas” has worked best, he said. (Setting time limits on their presentations has also helped, he noted).

Past participants include Tim Steiner, a hand-dryer enthusiast who has a Dyson Airblade installed in his house, and a 7-year-old boy who likes elevators. Both lectured on their interests. Peter Fletcher, who kept a yearslong record of each of his sneezes, appeared at the first conference to discuss his project.

“He writes down the time, the date, where he was, what he was doing and a measure of strength,” Mr. Ward said of the sneeze project. “To me that’s always been the kind of archetypal boring talk.”

Technology allowing, conference organizers will livestream the jigsaw-puzzle event, Mr. Ward said. “People around the world can follow the progress of a man doing a jigsaw puzzle for seven hours, which will be very exciting,” he said, adding, “I’m sure it will set the Internet alight.”


