


I came home from work on a rainy November afternoon more than a decade ago to find a 20-foot U-Haul truck in my driveway and, behind it, a police car. My first thought was fast, clear, instinctive: Are we being evicted?

I had lived in the little rental home in Middlebury, Vt., with my wife for much of the previous year. It hadn’t been an easy year. We fought constantly, the fights escalating into ugly confrontations, and the confrontations lasting long into the night.

But that morning, I had left the house suspecting nothing. I was certainly unprepared for the scene I would encounter later that day, the wooden headboard of my bed bobbing through the front door, cradled in the arms of my father-in-law.

“What’s going on?” I asked. “What are you doing?”

He didn’t even look at me as he walked toward the truck.

“Sir,” the police officer said, suddenly very close. “We’re going to need you to step away from the residence.”

It would be another nine years before I stopped drinking, and so on that night — the night my wife left me — I blamed everyone, and everything, except myself.

I fled the house with its too-sad moving van, police and father-in-law combo, and went directly to the nearest bar, where I told everyone my story while downing pint after pint of tepid $2 Budweiser. I was not apologetic. I was not ashamed.

I barely remember stumbling back home. What I do remember is what I found when I got there. Waiting for me at the door, hungry and bewildered, were Glasgow and Seismic, our two St. Bernard dogs. On an overturned cardboard box just inside the threshold, I found a letter.

My wife explained that she couldn’t take the dogs with her. She would be moving into her parents’ house while she got her life back in order, and there wasn’t room for two 150-pound animals. Even so, she was hopeful that I would fulfill my obligations to her and to our pets as a caretaker.

The dogs looked at me. I looked at them. We began our new lives together.

That first night, I went upstairs to what had been our bedroom and, not knowing what else to do, I turned out the lights and lay down on the floor. The dogs followed. They lay down as well, one on each side of me. Glasgow, the 4-year-old female we had raised since she was a puppy, situated herself behind my back. Seismic, the male we had adopted from the Humane Society of Chittenden County, cuddled into the curl of my arm. He stank. Then again, I didn’t smell much better.

In an empty house, everything is louder. It seems like a small detail, but it was transformative; I had rented the home for nearly a year, and suddenly it was completely foreign and disorienting. Every morning, I woke up with two giant animals nuzzling me, panting in my face, demanding to be walked. I would walk them and, upon my return, I’d check the phone, hoping I had somehow missed my wife’s call saying she had changed her mind and was moving back. She never did.

I tried to carry on. I bought groceries, said hello to neighbors. I can see now that I was in shock, pretending everything would be O.K. The house deteriorated. The laundry hamper overflowed, bags of trash clustered in the kitchen. My bed was a sleeping bag.

Dog hair accumulated in giant clumps in the corners of rooms and in filthy patches on the rug. I was commuting an hour each way for work and, unmoored from my previous life, couldn’t manage my responsibilities. I arranged for a dog sitter.

“You just moving in?” she asked, surveying the near-empty house.

“No,” I said, unable to tell her the truth. “Just, you know, minimalist living.”

“Right.”

One day, I had to leave earlier than usual for work. I called the dog sitter and told her I’d put the key under the mat. But she never showed. That night, I returned to find the foyer soaked with urine. The next week, I got a call at the gym. The dogs had broken out and were tearing through the trash at the deli down the street, eating chicken salad and stale baked goods. A neighbor had recognized them.

I drove home, terrified that they would be taken away, that I would return to find them gone, a police car out front once again and a trail of hairballs floating into the yard.

For their part, Glasgow and Seismic were always glad to see me, always confident I would be bringing dog food or a cheese pizza, providing a walk or giving them a bath. They believed in me when no one else did, not even myself. I think I kept them for so long in that chaos because I couldn’t bear to stop loving them, couldn’t bear for them to stop loving me. But the truth was I couldn’t care for them, not in the way they needed.

In May, I heard a rumor that a family outside of town was looking for two big dogs to adopt. I drove by their farm and saw a mile of white fencing, a neat and tidy flower bed, a freshly painted mailbox. I kept their phone number in my wallet for a week before I called. It was another week before I didn’t hang up when someone answered.

The family and I arranged to meet on a warm summer evening in June. I put the dogs in my black Chevy Blazer along with their chew toys, dog beds and food dishes.

Glasgow, as always, was excited to get in the car. She loved to sit on the passenger seat. I’d crack the window for her and she would press her nose into the small open space and start drooling, leaving ropes of dried saliva along the glass. That day, I reached over and scratched her ears. I was crying as I drove, crying as we pulled into the parking lot of the Grand Union.

The new family was there in their Ford F-250 pickup. A man got out and walked toward me. I opened the back hatch of the Blazer.

“These are the dogs?” he said.

I nodded. “Please take good care of them,” I said, my voice cracking.

Losing my wife had been sudden, a blow that struck with immediacy and power. The loss of the dogs, however, had an event horizon; I approached it gradually and then I was beyond it, the pressure of time drawing me inescapably forward and down.

On that evening at the Grand Union, I remember shepherding Seismic, who didn’t hesitate, into the back of the other truck. Glasgow took more coaxing. Her hips had become balky, and she had started moving more slowly. I think that, attenuated to my moods, she understood at least some part of what was going on. Finally, they were both in the other vehicle. I hugged them, inhaling their scent, holding Glasgow especially close one last time.

I left Vermont when the divorce was complete. There was nothing to move, just myself. I thought everything would be different when I got out of that house, when the legal issues were settled, when I had a new job, when I stopped expecting my former wife to call. I didn’t drive by the farm after I surrendered Seismic and Glasgow. I didn’t visit. What if they thought I was there to take them home?

It was not until I got sober and had children of my own that I felt again that awesome responsibility — the complete trust that another being places in you — the faith that you will bring the pizza and take the walks and provide the warm baths. That you will be the one who guides, who tends, who listens.

Glasgow and Seismic are dead now. They would be twice the usual life span, or more, of a St. Bernard. But they were, in a way, my first children. They taught me how to be human. Or how to be a better human, to put somebody else’s needs before my own. Or maybe it was my first wife who taught me this when she decided to leave me with two dogs and an empty house.

Not long ago, as I sat alone at home one night, my daughter cried out in her bedroom. She was having a nightmare. I went up, but by the time I reached her, she had fallen back asleep.

I lay down next to her anyway in her small bed and kissed the back of her head, brushed the hair out of her face. Then I said a small prayer of thanks and gratitude for this role, for this opportunity to care.


