


Last Saturday, in the middle of the London men’s wear collections, a happening of sorts occurred on the Strand. At the emerging designer Daniel W. Fletcher’s off-schedule show/demonstration just outside the official venue, a group of models in warm-up suits and other kinds of eye-catching streetwear emblazoned with the word “Stay” staged a quasi sit-in while carting European Union flags and banners.

Message: Brexit — shorthand for Britain’s possible departure from the European Union, which will be decided in a referendum on June 23 — would not be in fashion’s best interests.

Mr. Fletcher was not the only designer to wear his politics on his sleeve. After the Sibling show on Sunday, the founders Cozette McCreery and Sid Bryan took their bow wearing T-shirts printed with the word “In” (as in: stay in). Ditto Patrick Grant of E. Tautz. It was about time.

A few weeks ago, Vivienne Westwood posted on her Instagram account a photo of herself wearing a T-shirt urging everyone to register to vote (the deadline was originally scheduled for June 7, and then extended to June 9), and in February Christopher Bailey of Burberry was among more than 100 business leaders who signed a letter published on the opinion page of The Times of London stating “Britain will be stronger, safer and better off remaining a member of the EU.”

But otherwise, until now, British fashion has been largely quiet on Brexit — just as it was in 2014 during the referendum on Scottish independence (which was voted down).

It was as if, afraid to offend customers, fashion industry members were keeping their opinions under a well-crafted hat.

Yet on Monday, the British Fashion Council (which does not have an official position on the issue) completed a poll of 500 member designers, and of the 290 who replied, 90 percent were in favor of remaining, with only 4.3 percent in favor of leaving. (The rest were undecided or said they would refrain from voting.)

The industry appears to be waking up to Brexit’s potentially damaging implications, practical and philosophical.

If it happens, said Christopher Kane, the recipient of three British Fashion Council awards: “The fashion industry is not going to know what hit it. It’s quite scary.”

The most obvious assumption, when it comes to fashion and Brexit, is that a leave vote would be the end of free trade, with a resulting cost wallop. HSBC Holdings has predicted the pound could depreciate by as much as 20 percent. And given that most catwalk designers source fabrics in Italy and produce in Europe, that could send manufacturing prices soaring, which will ultimately be passed on to the end consumer. Which is to say: you. (And that doesn’t even get into the possibility of import and export taxes.)

“While my aesthetic is global, my make is definitely European,” emailed Zowie Broach, a founder of the fashion label Boudicca and head of fashion at the Royal College of Art. “Now I buy most of my fabrics from Europe, but when I go outside to Switzerland or the U.S., that’s when my costs go through the roof.”

Less discussed, but potentially even more damaging for fashion, is what may happen if E.U. citizens no longer have the right to live and work freely in Britain, and vice versa. Fashion is an industry whose roots are embedded in Continental soil, and the other fashion capitals (and those who were trained there) occupy an outsize space in the designer imagination, British and otherwise — and a physical space in many of their ateliers — that cannot be underestimated.

Though Mr. Kane is Scottish and his company is based in London, for example, it is owned by the French conglomerate Kering, many of whose executives, including François-Henri Pinault, the chief executive, actually live in London, though the group is based in Paris.

Mr. Kane has, he pointed out, “all these amazing seamstresses from Italy, from all over Europe, that have been working with us for five years … How much would it cost for us to get them visas?” The answer is unclear: Few specifics have been laid out as to how an exit might take place (other than that they will have two years to figure out the logistical decoupling).

According to Peter Pilotto, who founded his namesake brand in London in 2007, even though he is Austrian-Italian and his partner, Christopher De Vos, is Belgian-Peruvian, 70 percent of their team is (as they are) international. If Brexit occurs, “people will have to migrate again,” Mr. Pilotto said. In fact, the whole company might.

Indeed, some of the most influential names on the London Fashion Week schedule, especially in women’s wear, are not British. Mary Katrantzou, winner of the British Fashion Council’s 2015 New Establishment designer award, is Greek. Daniela and Annette Felder of Felder Felder are German. Roksanda Ilincic, whose color-block dress was recently worn by the duchess of Cambridge at a street party to celebrate Queen Elizabeth’s 90th birthday, is Serbian. (Serbia is in the midst of membership negotiations with the E.U.)

London has long been a magnet for fashion students from across Europe, all of whom benefit from reduced tuition costs and have gone on to populate fashion teams throughout the industry.

Currently there are students from more than 65 countries at the Royal College of Art. “It’s our international reach, our partnerships and collaborations, that makes us the world’s number one university of art and design,” Ms. Broach said, referring to the QS World University rankings in the Art & Design field. “If Britain exits Europe, I’ll wager good money on our no longer occupying that top spot. Our students want fewer borders, not more.”

Likewise, at Central Saint Martins (alma mater of Riccardo Tisci, creative director of Givenchy and an Italian). “Undergraduates from Europe make up a considerable intake to all our fashion pathways,” said Willie Walters, C.S.M.’s director of fashion program.

Their studios are now decorated with posters given to them by the photographer Wolfgang Tillmans, a prizewinning artist who lives in London and Berlin. They feature a shoreline and the words “No country by itself,” or a skyscape and “What is lost is lost forever.”

At the recent Central Saint Martins B.A. collections, the student Philip Ellis overtly addressed the subject, twinning EU flag armbands with badges reading “stay” and “salut” on cropped punk-rock leather and army-green jackets over matching miniskirts, and gray hoodies under ruffled peasant blouses.

“My agenda is to increase discourse on Brexit,” he wrote as part of his collection development process, the better to “make a difference in the referendum that I feel so passionately about. Birds of a feather flock together. Britain should not leave the EU.”

The rest of the European sector is holding its breath. The Chambre Syndicale, French fashion’s governing body, would not respond to questions about how Brexit might affect their industry (which employs numerous Britons, including Phoebe Philo, who runs the Céline design studio from London, and Clare Waight Keller, creative director of Chloé in Paris), saying “we do not comment on political matters.”

But Carlo Capasa, president of the Camera Nazionale della Moda, the national chamber of fashion, was less circumspect. “The Italian fashion looks at a possible Brexit with concern,” he wrote in an email. “Its effects would be very negative.”

Beyond the logistics, there is a more abstract, but perhaps even more important, issue related to Brexit that goes to the heart of fashion’s power and identity. The clothes we see and desire — the clothes that resonate beyond need — are most alluring when they reflect the wider world and describe an individual’s place within it; when they take the maelstrom of questions and crosscurrents surrounding us and give them coherent form and beauty.

This is why design teams like those at Christopher Kane and Peter Pilotto are so multicultural: Not only because of the practical skills they may bring to the pattern-cutting table, but also because of the life experience they add — their unique heritage and identity. Mixed in and blended with other worlds and tastes, this creates what we think of as contemporary fashion. Closed borders threaten that aesthetic landscape, render it parochial and, potentially, irrelevant. The result could be creatively hobbling.

“Maybe it’s time we all take a stance,” Mr. Kane said. No designer is an island, even if he lives on one.


