


There is little doubt among law enforcement officials that Nicholas Santora has been a member of the Bonanno crime family for decades. He was first convicted of racketeering in the 1980s after an undercover investigation into the family’s activities, later portrayed in the Hollywood movie “Donnie Brasco.”

Four years ago, Mr. Santora pleaded guilty in federal court to extortion charges after being indicted again for racketeering, among the many blows the federal authorities have dealt the Bonanno family in the past 15 years.

But on Tuesday, a two-month trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan in which Mr. Santora and three other men faced charges of enterprise corruption ended with Justice Mark Dwyer declaring a mistrial after one juror had to be replaced and another told the judge he could no longer deliberate. The jury, with eight days of deliberation, did not reach a verdict on whether Mr. Santora remained a powerful Mafia captain between March 2010 and February 2012, overseeing gambling and loan-sharking operations.

Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan district attorney’s office, said prosecutors intended to retry the case. “The inability of one juror to continue deliberating is not a reflection on the overall strength of the case,” Ms. Vollero said in a statement.

Still, the mistrial is a setback for prosecutors after a prolonged trial during which jurors heard 450 intercepted telephone calls and listened in on several conversations between Mr. Santora and his driver, recorded secretly inside his car. The jury also heard testimony from James Tartaglione, a onetime Bonanno family captain who said he was present when Mr. Santora, 73, was sworn into the organization and took the oath of Omerta.

As organized crime trials go, Mr. Santora’s was short on allegations of violence; no murders or assaults were attributed to the crew. He and his co-defendants were accused of running a loan-sharking business through a Teamsters Local 917, operating an Internet gambling site with a base in Costa Rica and selling prescription drugs like oxycodone, Cialis and Viagra on the black market.

The mistrial also applies to three other men described by prosecutors as members of the Bonanno organization — Ernest Aiello, 36; Vito Badamo, 53; and Anthony Santoro, 52. Five other men charged in the same indictment pleaded guilty before going to trial, including Nicholas Bernhard, 54, the former president of Teamsters Local 917, which represents beer truck drivers.

“I don’t fault the jury at all for not reaching a verdict,” Mr. Santora’s lawyer, Michael Alber, said in an interview.

Mr. Alber called the trial “unduly long” and said the deadlock reflected his contention that “there’s every reason to doubt the case.”

Defense lawyers argued their clients were the victims of overzealous detectives and prosecutors who tried to link Mr. Santora to several crimes committed by the three younger men, who acted as struggling freelancers, not members of a tightly run organization.

They argued that the evidence suggested Mr. Santora often went for weeks without talking to the other defendants. In addition, defense lawyers said, prosecutors had little proof that the three men were sending profits from their illicit activities to Mr. Santora.

But the lead prosecutor, Gary J. Galperin, said there was overwhelming evidence on the telephone calls and surreptitiously recorded conversations that Mr. Santora was leading the group.

At one point, for instance, Mr. Santora told Mr. Badamo, who was his driver and right-hand man: “I got to know every [expletive] thing you are doing.” Mr. Santora also told Mr. Badamo that no illegal card games could be started without his permission. “This life — who do you think runs this?” he said.

Mr. Galperin said: “The defense would have you believe that this whole case is about targeting Italian Americans. How unfounded and insulting that is. This case is all about enterprise corruption.”


