


LONDON — The British artist Damien Hirst shot to fame, in part, through works that displayed sharks and other animals suspended in formaldehyde. Now, a report from a British scientific journal has found that some of those works may have leaked formaldehyde fumes at levels much higher than allowed.

The report, published this month in Analytical Methods, a peer-reviewed journal of the Royal Society of Chemistry, is based on tests done at a Hirst solo exhibition at Tate Modern in London in 2012, as well as more recently at the Summer Palace in Beijing. The article in which the findings were published focuses on the efficacy of a new sensor developed to test for formaldehyde fumes.

“One of Hirst’s main subjects is the setting-up of giant fish tanks filled by thousands of liters of FA, in which intact biological specimens are immersed, such as zebras, cows, calves, even sharks,” the abstract of the article said, referring to formaldehyde fumes. “It has been found that the tanks are surrounded by FA fumes, constantly exuded in the atmosphere (likely via the sealant), reaching levels of 5 ppm, one order of magnitude higher than the 0.5 ppm limit set up by legislation.”

Formaldehyde is classified as a carcinogen in the United States and the European Union. The effects of short-term exposure can include sore throats, nosebleeds and coughing, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

“Tate always puts the safety of its staff and visitors first, and we take all necessary precautions when installing and displaying our exhibitions,” the museum said in a emailed statement on Thursday. “These works contained a very dilute formaldehyde solution that was contained within sealed tanks.”

The museum also provided a statement from Pier Giorgio Righetti, a professor at Politecnico di Milano university in Italy and an author of the paper, saying that the research “was intended to test the uses of a new sensor for measuring formaldehyde fumes, and we do not believe that our findings suggest any risk for visitors at Tate Modern.”

Reached by telephone on Thursday, Professor Righetti affirmed that he felt that visitors to the exhibition would not have been exposed to harmful levels of the chemicals. But he said that, given the length of time that staff members may have been present at the exhibition, he was unable to make a similar statement on the health effects the formaldehyde levels might have had on them.

A statement posted on Mr. Hirst’s website on Thursday and attributed to his company, Science Ltd., said: “We do regular testing and our experts tell us that at the levels reported by this journal, your eyes would be streaming and you would be in serious physical discomfort. No such complaints were made to us during the show — or at any other shows featuring the formaldehyde works. We don’t believe any risk was posed to the public.”


