


Gregory Albanis has two clear memories of his graduation from New York University in 1978: screaming at his father when traffic backed up on the way to the Lincoln Tunnel from New Jersey, where they lived — “I’ll never forgive you if I miss my graduation” — and marveling at the address by the commencement speaker, Eleanor Holmes Norton, then the chairwoman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

“I never thought I’d be like the Wizard of Oz from the other side of the curtain,” Mr. Albanis said last week.

But that is what he became 19 years later — in effect, the executive producer of the commencement, which became a bigger show as N.Y.U. grew and the ceremony moved from Washington Square Park to Yankee Stadium. He is the master of the pomp and circumstance, the university official who coordinates arrangements and checks timings in the script. (And there is a script — about 90 pages long, with 125 cues for music and announcements — and unlike some diplomas, it is not in Latin.)

This year’s ceremony, on Wednesday, will be Mr. Albanis’s last as the university’s director of special events. He is stepping down. At 59, he is careful not to use a word like “retiring.”

“You know the displays for ‘Cats’ on Broadway that said, ‘Cats: Now and Forever’?” he asked. “I didn’t want it to be Albanis now and forever.” He said he would continue as a consultant to the university for a year.

Mr. Albanis’s connections to N.Y.U. run deep. His parents and seven of his aunts and uncles attended the school, and he figures that there are at least 14 N.Y.U. degrees in the family. And there was another piece of paper that N.Y.U. had something to do with: his parents’ marriage certificate. They met at a college social club now known as the Hellenic Heritage Association.

Mr. Albanis himself has two degrees from N.Y.U., a bachelor’s degree in art history (1978) and a master’s degree in public administration (1980). But all that studying did not lead to what he wanted, which was a job with the National Endowment for the Arts or the National Endowment for the Humanities. He returned to N.Y.U. to work as an admissions officer, he said, “because I knew the dean.”

“She said: ‘You were happy here. Why don’t you come back?’” he recalled.

He worked in the admissions office for 15 years and began organizing events as N.Y.U. expanded its national presence under John Brademas, the university’s president from 1981 to 1992. “We were no longer the commuter school,” Mr. Albanis said. Soon he was organizing receptions and open houses for prospective undergraduates.

And, eventually, commencement.

“Most of us, the events we plan for in our lives are maybe things like our engagement parties or our weddings,” said John H. Beckman, the university’s vice president for public affairs. “You figure everyone will arrive and make sure there’s some food. There is a whole other level of sweating the details and understanding the difference between success and failure that Greg worries over.”

Mr. Albanis has also organized the ceremonies for every major head of state who has visited N.Y.U. in the last 20 years. “We’ve had a president, a vice president, a first lady, a secretary of state, two kings, two queens, three British prime ministers and every New York City mayor and governor,” he said.

Along the way, he learned things not taught in class, including how to make small talk with royals like Queen Sofia and King Juan Carlos I of Spain, who were on their way to the dedication of the university’s King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center in 1997.

“You have to pinch yourself, you’re in the elevator with these people,” he said. “I had just come back from Spain, so I said, ‘I just visited Escorial,’ where the Spanish royal family is buried. She said: ‘I don’t want to go there. All the stone, it’s very dreary and dark.’”

“Dreary” and “dark” are words he does not want to hear in the same breath as “Wednesday.” The Yankees are sending him two forecasts a day from the team’s private weather service, and he has been checking other long-range predictions. His preoccupation with the weather dates back to the year before he took over, when rain soaked Washington Square Park the night before the ceremony.

“The rain wasn’t coming down vertically, it was coming down horizontally,” he said. “The canopy over the stage couldn’t hold all the water.” When the canopy gave way, Steven Spielberg and Robert De Niro were drenched.

So Mr. Albanis has an organizing premise. “Every time I do a commencement,” he said, “I think it’s going to rain.”

In 2011, when former President Bill Clinton was to receive an honorary degree, Mr. Albanis was so sure it would rain on commencement day that he went to a sporting-goods store the night before. “You know those pants fly fishermen wear?” he said. He bought a pair.

Sure enough, it rained until the moment Mr. Clinton arrived at Yankee Stadium. “It was like a Cecil B. DeMille movie,” Mr. Albanis said. “The sun came out.”

And then Mr. Clinton went to leave.

“He was supposed to walk off the third-base line” and exit through the visitors’ dugout, Mr. Albanis said, but Mr. Clinton headed in the other direction, toward the Yankees’ dugout.

“Normally, that wouldn’t have been a problem,” Mr. Albanis said, “but I knew the Yankees dugout was locked. I broke out in a cold sweat. Far be it from me to tell the Secret Service and a former president of the United States they were going the wrong way.” Mr. Albanis said he never heard who let them into the dugout.

He said he was ready for one last commencement, down to details like gluing an N.Y.U. tassel onto a Yankees baseball cap, something he did one morning last week. The cap is for the actor Billy Crystal, who is to receive a doctor of fine arts degree. The other honorees, including the commencement speaker, Darren Walker, the president of the Ford Foundation, will have mortarboards.

And what is the latest on the weather?

Mr. Albanis is checking the forecast. “But I have 32,000 ponchos,” he said, “if we have to give them out.”


