


BALTIMORE — The trials of the six officers charged in the death of Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old black man who sustained a fatal spinal injury while in the custody of the Baltimore police, are winding their way through the courts. Mr. Gray’s death set off widespread unrest and became part of a national conversation on police conduct. Here is an update on legal proceedings.

What happened to Freddie Gray?

On April 12, 2015, Mr. Gray was pursued and arrested by officers who said he was carrying an illegal knife; prosecutors have raised questions on that count. Video taken by bystanders shows Mr. Gray being dragged into a police van. Prosecutors and defense lawyers agree that he sustained a spinal injury during the ride, but disagree on when. Mr. Gray died a week later. His death was ruled a homicide.

Who was charged?

Six officers — three black, three white — were charged. Three of them — Officer Edward M. Nero, on trial this week; Officer Garrett E. Miller; and Lt. Brian W. Rice — were present during the arrest. Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., the driver of the van, faces the most serious charges. Two others, Officer William G. Porter and Sgt. Alicia D. White, encountered Mr. Gray during stops on the van’s route.

Here are the charges and maximum sentences:

• Officer Goodson: second-degree depraved-heart murder (30 years), involuntary manslaughter (10 years), second-degree assault (10 years), manslaughter by vehicle, gross negligence (10 years), manslaughter by vehicle, criminal negligence (three years), misconduct in office, reckless endangerment (five years).

• Officer Porter: involuntary manslaughter (10 years), second-degree assault (10 years), misconduct in office, reckless endangerment (five years).

• Lieutenant Rice: involuntary manslaughter (10 years), second-degree assault (10 years), two counts of misconduct in office, reckless endangerment (five years).

• Officer Nero: second-degree assault (10 years), two counts of misconduct in office, reckless endangerment (five years).

• Officer Miller: second-degree assault (10 years), two counts of misconduct in office, reckless endangerment (five years).

• Sergeant White: involuntary manslaughter (10 years), second-degree assault (10 years), misconduct in office, reckless endangerment (five years).

Who brought the charges?

The state’s attorney for Baltimore, Marilyn J. Mosby, announced the charges on May 1, 2015. It was an unusual step: Prosecutors around the country, including in Ferguson, Mo., and Cleveland, have declined to bring charges in other high-profile police shootings.

“I would say at every juncture, she has chosen to go with the more aggressive, vigorous option of prosecution,” said David Jaros, a law professor at the University of Baltimore. Should Ms. Mosby prevail, at least in the mind of the public, he said, “it would mark a major shift simply for prosecutors, for everyone to know that prosecutors can and are capable of taking these cases.”

What has happened in the trials so far?

Last year, the prosecution opened with the trial of Officer Porter, and the others were to follow in quick succession. But the jury deadlocked, causing Judge Barry G. Williams to declare a mistrial. Hearings and appeals have contributed to delays.

Prosecutors tried Officer Porter first because they wanted him to testify against other officers. But after the mistrial, with a retrial coming, he wanted to refuse.

Prosecutors asked Judge Williams to compel Officer Porter to testify while granting him “use and derivative use immunity,” which would bar prosecutors from using his testimony in other officers’ trials against him during his own. It is exceedingly rare for defendants to testify against co-defendants while awaiting their own trial, but Judge Williams granted the motion. Officer Porter’s lawyers appealed the decision to the state’s highest court, which affirmed it, although judges there have yet to explain the reasoning behind their ruling. Late last month, Judge Williams ruled that Officer Miller could also be compelled to testify against his colleagues.

When will the trials end?

The court has laid out this schedule: Officer Nero, Wednesday; Officer Goodson, June 6; Lieutenant Rice, July 5; Officer Miller, July 27; Officer Porter’s retrial, Sept. 6; and Sergeant White, Oct. 13.


