


Extending college for more than four years not only increases the cost of tuition and student borrowing, but it can also dent income and retirement savings, a new analysis finds.

Graduating on the “five-year plan” may be a running joke for many college students. But that outcome can eat away at a student’s chance for financial stability, according to an analysis published on Tuesday by the website NerdWallet. That’s because when students are in school for an extra year or two, they pay more in tuition and debt and are not earning a salary or contributing to retirement savings.

Students who take six years to finish a bachelor’s degree, for example, can miss out on six figures of lifetime retirement savings, NerdWallet estimates.

“The common assumption is that school is four years,” said Nonso Maduka, student loan specialist at NerdWallet. But just 40 percent of college students finish their bachelor’s degree in four years, he said, citing data from the National Center for Education Statistics.

NerdWallet used data from the National Association of Colleges and Employers to do its analysis. It considered the group of students who began college in 2008 and intended to graduate in 2012, but instead finished in five years or six years.

A common reason for taking longer than four years is transferring to another school, Mr. Maduka said; that switch can often result in lost credit. Some are caught in a tough predicament: They must work to pay for college, but working longer hours means they may take a lighter course load and therefore take longer to finish.

Some students take longer to graduate because they enter college without a declared major or clear map toward graduation. They end up taking courses that do not count toward the course of study they ultimately choose, said Dhanfu Elston, vice president at Complete College America, a nonprofit organization working with states and colleges to increase the proportion of students who finish their degrees.

NerdWallet based its analysis on average tuition costs at public and private nonprofit colleges, as well as the cost of student loans at an interest rate of about 5 percent.

The cost of taking one extra year to finish a degree at a public college is about $12,600 in out-of-pocket tuition and $6,000 in loan costs over 10 years, for a total of about $18,600. Two extra years at a public college total $37,500. Costs are higher for private schools; the cost of two extra years at a private college is almost $54,000.

The report also looked at “opportunity” costs, like lost income and compounded retirement savings. A student would miss out on more than $46,000 in income by taking five years to graduate, while a student taking six years would forgo about $94,000. (The analysis used the average starting salary for the class of 2013, and adjusted for inflation).

The resulting hit to retirement savings is sobering. The analysis assumed graduates would put about 7 percent of their income into a retirement plan (the average contribution rate for people under 25), and that the savings would compound over 45 years at a 7 percent annual return.

On that basis, students who graduate from college in five years would miss out on about $82,000 in retirement savings, and six-year graduates would fail to gain as much as $151,000.

A student who spends two extra years at private school, therefore, can accrue extra costs of nearly $300,000 over all, factoring in tuition, debt and missed income and retirement savings. That’s a significant incentive for avoiding the “victory lap” years in college, Mr. Maduka said: “Know the trade-offs you’re making.”

Here are some questions and answers about reining in extra college costs:

How can I increase the likelihood of graduating in four years?

Take at least 15 credits per semester and 30 credits a year, even if you have to take some courses over the summer, Dr. Elston said. Twelve credits a semester is the minimum required to qualify for financial aid. But doing so will put students on a five-year track, he said. “Fifteen is on time,” he said. Some schools charge the same for 15 credits as for 12, to encourage students to take a full load of courses; one example is Adams State University in Colorado.

What if I cannot afford to attend college unless I work?

If you must work, seek a school that offers so-called structured schedules, which let students take classes in a predictable block — say, 8 to noon — so they can work or care for their families in the afternoon. That, Dr. Elston said, helps lessen the chance that changes in schedules each semester will derail child care or job arrangements.

Can I save money on college credit by taking Advanced Placement courses in high school?

Possibly. Not all colleges grant credit for A.P. courses, and policies and the amount of credit granted may vary by department, Mr. Maduka said. To check if a school you’re interested in grants credit for A.P. classes, search on the College Board’s website.


