


Bryan Singer, who has directed three other films in the “X-Men” franchise, is back behind the camera for “X-Men: Apocalypse.” With a narrative that includes a fight to save the fate of the world, the film also tells more mutant origin stories, including a scene that shows Scott Summers, or Cyclops (Tye Sheridan), discovering his powers for the first time. In an interview, Mr. Singer discussed the scene and some ideas behind the film. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.

Could you tell me a little about this scene?

The film opens in ancient Egypt, where we meet our villain. After a large action sequence, we find ourselves in 1983 in a classroom in Ohio where we meet a young Scott Summers, a.k.a. Cyclops. Here, he’s sort of a young, rambunctious student. At that moment he doesn’t have powers of any kind. And he discovers, as his eyes become very irritated during class, that he is starting to develop what will become very powerful and uncontrollable optic blasts.

And what about the casting?

Tye Sheridan plays a young Cyclops. And the teacher was a piece of very exciting and fun casting for me. It’s Ally Sheedy, who I grew up with from the films “The Breakfast Club” and “War Games.” In the film “War Games,” she actually plays a girl who’s disrupting class. So it was a fun turn to make her the teacher whose class is being disrupted by young Cyclops.

What was your goal for the scene?

To establish Scott Summers as a disruptive person who is against authority, against schools, and always seems to be getting in trouble. In comic book lore, he is to eventually become the right hand to Professor Xavier and the leader of the X-Men. But in this iteration, he’s the opposite of that. So I wanted to introduce that notion, and then eventually show what it’s like when a young mutant discovers his or her powers for the first time and how terrifying that can be.

Any fun stories from shooting this scene?

I had a friend who was visiting and I wanted him to have a little cameo, so we were shooting in the hallway and I wanted him to remain in focus so he could see himself in the film but he couldn’t be moving at the same pace as Tye Sheridan because Tye is rushing to the bathroom because his eyes are messed up. So it was funny telling him, you can move at a certain rate to stay in focus, but you can’t move too fast or you’re going to look like you’re chasing after him.

How did you pull off the stunt at the end?

It took a lot of physical elements. One was, the stunt person being pulled backward into the wall, which was made of breakable material. Simultaneously, the door was pulled backward so it would appear as though the door was being blown by the optic blast pushing him backward. An interactive lighting effect was used, a very bright red strobe was fired off repeatedly during the scene. And then as the stunt person playing Cyclops tilted his head upward, we had a series of explosives lined up the entire wall and ceiling of the set that would have to go off one after the other, sending debris raining down onto the set. And then in visual effects, I used C.G.I. to add in the actual optic beam itself.

Were there any issues?

The first time we ratcheted [the stunt person] backward and blew the door, it pushed him back so violently and so hard that it moved the entire bathroom set wall. So we had to reset the wall and do the stunt three times to get it right.


