


EDMONTON, Alberta — A week after it started, the enormous forest fire that attacked Fort McMurray, Alberta, had abated enough on Sunday to allow police, fire and health workers to move into hotels within the abandoned city.

Although the fire was far from vanquished, lower temperatures and light showers allowed firefighters to check its progress. Rachel Notley, the premier of the province, said the fire was “quite a bit smaller than we feared.” Instead of reaching half a million acres as forecast, she said, it had covered 390,000 acres by Sunday morning.

The fire’s path shifted away from Fort McMurray into a heavily forested and unpopulated area closer to the border with Saskatchewan, said Chad Morrison, Alberta’s wildfire manager. The change in weather, he added, should allow firefighters to start applying a “death grip” on the blaze over the coming days. But fully extinguishing the flames is likely to take months.

“It definitely is a positive point for us, for sure,” Mr. Morrison told reporters.

Sunday was the first time that officials had adopted a positive tone when discussing the fire, which began as a small blaze that resisted attempts to snuff it out on May 1. Despite the optimism, though, the fire continued to bring disruption.

After severely curtailing production, Husky Energy shut down its oil sands operations north of Fort McMurray, following the precedent set by other companies, including Syncrude, the large oil sands venture north of the city. Although the fire had approached Syncrude’s two vast strip mines and processing plant, it did not cause damage, Mr. Morrison said. Many other oil sands companies were evacuating workers on Sunday.

Some analysts predict that the production shutdowns and the closings of the oil sands operations, which export mostly to the United States, will leave Canada without economic growth during the current quarter.

Small fires continued to flare up in parts of Fort McMurray, damaging two houses overnight. But with the threat somewhat eased, the city’s 88,000 evacuees who are now mainly in Edmonton may be able to learn the fate of their homes. After reporting early on that 1,600 properties had been destroyed, officials have provided no updates on the extent of the community’s destruction.

“The focus has been protecting and not counting,” Ms. Notley said, noting that buildings might have significant structural damage even if they appear sound on the outside.

As the government shifts its main focus from protecting Fort McMurray to planning for its residents’ return, a team of engineers and analysts will begin a formal damage assessment on Monday. Several hundred utility workers were in Fort McMurray on Sunday conducting their own analysis. Officials have said there appears to be extensive damage to the city’s electrical system.

Workers have remained throughout the evacuation to keep the municipal water system operating and supplying fire hydrants. The water within the pipes, however, is not safe for drinking.

A preliminary assessment showed that the city’s hospital had only smoke damage, said Scott Long, the executive director of operations for the province’s emergency management service. As the fire breached the city, more than 100 patients at the hospital were put into ambulances and buses before being airlifted out.

All 25,000 Fort McMurray residents who were stranded at oil sands work camps north of the city had been evacuated by Sunday morning. The pressure on emergency shelters was also easing. On Saturday night, the main reception center at Edmonton’s fairgrounds had 4,400 cots but hosted only 600 people.

Officials said that payments from insurance companies had allowed many people to move into hotels and that landlords in Edmonton were making empty apartments available at no cost. Many people have been taken in by relatives or friends.

A large portion of Fort McMurray’s population is from Canada’s Atlantic provinces. Reports from that region suggested that many people were returning there, at least temporarily.


