


Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher Ryan Vogelsong remained hospitalized with swelling and multiple facial fractures on Tuesday, a day after he was struck in the head by a 92-mile-per-hour fastball thrown by Colorado pitcher Jordan Lyles while Vogelsong was batting.

The Pirates trainer Todd Tomczyk said Vogelsong, a 38-year-old veteran, was “in good spirits” but added that doctors would not be able to determine the extent of the damage around Vogelsong’s left eye until the swelling subsided.

The Pirates placed Vogelsong on the 15-day disabled list and recalled reliever A. J. Schugel from Class AAA Indianapolis.

PIRATES’ POLANCO DRIVES IN FIVE Gregory Polanco hit a three-run homer and drove in a career-best five runs as host Pittsburgh routed the Arizona Diamondbacks, 12-1.

CUBS POUND CARDINALS’ WACHA St. Louis pitcher Michael Wacha gave up a career-worst eight runs in four innings, six in the first, and has lost five consecutive decisions for the first time after a 12-3 drubbing by visiting Chicago.

TIGER NOTCHES 400TH SAVE Francisco Rodriguez earned his 400th career save in the Detroit Tigers’ 3-1 victory over the visiting Philadelphia Phillies.

TOMMY JOHN SURGERY FOR RED SOX RELIEVER Boston’s Carson Smith had season-ending Tommy John surgery on his right elbow, four days after a magnetic resonance imaging exam revealed a tear in his ulnar collateral ligament.

Smith will need 11 to 14 months to recover.

The N.F.L. awarded Super Bowls to Atlanta, Miami and Los Angeles, three cities that made significant financial investments in new stadiums or recently upgraded existing ones.

Atlanta will host the game in 2019, followed by Miami in 2020 and Los Angeles in 2021, it was announced at the owners’ meetings in Charlotte, N.C.

Atlanta will be hosting its third Super Bowl but the first at its new $1.4 billion stadium, which is scheduled to open in 2017. The previous two were played at the Georgia Dome.

Miami will be hosting its record-setting 11th Super Bowl after a $450 million stadium renovation.

Los Angeles, which will welcome the relocated Rams this season, has not hosted a Super Bowl in the area since 1993’s game at the Rose Bowl in nearby Pasadena. The 2021 game will be played at a new $2.6 billion stadium in Inglewood, which is scheduled to open in 2019.

RAIDERS STUDY A MOVE TO LAS VEGAS The owner Mark Davis of the Oakland Raiders said his team had begun conducting market research studies to gather information about a potential move to Las Vegas.

Davis said at the N.F.L. owners’ meetings that the initial reports had come back “positive” about the feasibility of such a move. Unable to get a suitable stadium deal in Oakland, Davis wants to move the Raiders to Las Vegas.

“I have given my commitment to Las Vegas, and if they can get done what they’re talking about doing, then we will go to Las Vegas,” Davis said.

Stanford’s Taylor Davidson fought off a match point for a 3-6, 7-5, 7-5 victory over Oklahoma State’s Vladica Babic in Tulsa, Okla., that gave the Cardinal a 4-3 win and their 18th N.C.A.A. women’s tennis championship

Babic won the first set and had a match point at 5-4 in the second, but Davidson rallied for the title-clinching win.

W.N.B.A. COACH TO LEAD COMMODORES Vanderbilt hired Stephanie White of the W.N.B.A.’s Indiana Fever as its women’s basketball coach.

The hiring came a month after the resignation of Melanie Balcomb, Vanderbilt’s coach for 14 seasons.

White plans to stay with the Fever through the end of the W.N.B.A. season.

ANOTHER WILDCAT TRANSFERS Kentucky forward Batouly Camara transferred to Connecticut.

Camara, a New York City native who averaged 5.1 points and 4.3 rebounds as a freshman, became the sixth Wildcats player to transfer out of the program since the beginning of last season.

Under N.C.A.A. rules, Camera will have to sit out the 2016-17 season and will have three years of eligibility remaining.

The Dutch rider Steven Kruijswijk strengthened his grip on the leader’s jersey by finishing second to Alejandro Valverde during the 16th stage of the Giro d’Italia in Andalo, Italy.

The prerace favorite Vincenzo Nibali had another bad day and saw his faint chances of winning a second Giro title all but disappear.

Valverde edged Kruijswijk on the mountainous 83-mile leg from Bressanone to Andalo to claim his first stage win in the Giro.

It was a third successive second place for Kruijswijk, who increased his lead over Esteban Chaves to three minutes.

The race ends Sunday in Turin.

Tiffany Hayes had 27 points and 11 rebounds, Angel McCoughtry scored all 15 of her points after halftime, and the visiting Atlanta Dream defeated the Liberty in overtime, 85-79.

Hayes was 7 of 13 from the field with three 3-pointers and hit all 10 of her free-throw attempts. McCoughtry scored 4 of Atlanta’s 8 overtime points as the Dream held the Liberty to just 2 points in the extra session.

Also, the Liberty re-signed the veteran forward Swin Cash 10 days after cutting her for salary-cap reasons. Cash, 36, started 28 games for the Liberty last season, averaging 4.5 points and 2.4 rebounds a game.


