


A former New York City police officer was convicted on Wednesday of faking a mental disability to get more than $200,000 in benefits from the Social Security Administration, the first verdict by a jury to arise from an indictment of numerous former officers and firefighters in January 2014.

A jury in State Supreme Court in Manhattan found the former officer, Kevin Hurley, 56, guilty of grand larceny after three days of deliberations.

More than 100 of those indicted in the scheme have pleaded guilty, including four ringleaders who admitted that they coached officers and firefighters to mimic the symptoms of post-traumatic stress in order to convince the government to grant them disability benefits. Many of the defendants claimed falsely that they were disabled as the result of their experiences in the terrorist attack on Sept. 11, 2001.

Mr. Hurley, of Windsor, N.Y., said on his benefit applications that he was so depressed and crippled by panic attacks that he could not drive, manage money or go shopping, the evidence showed. Yet prosecutors demonstrated that he had paid all of his bills on time, driven his car more than 25,000 miles a year and made hundreds of purchases at stores and restaurants. He collected $2,000 a month from 2005 to 2013.

“He laughed all the way to the bank, and all the way to every restaurant, every store,” the lead prosecutor, Michael Ohm, said in his summation.

Joseph Esposito, another former officer and one of the four principal defendants in the case, testified under a cooperation agreement, describing how the ringleaders had recruited former officers like Mr. Hurley, taught them to feign symptoms in meetings with psychiatrists and coached them to lie on applications.

Mr. Hurley’s lawyer, Joseph Murray, argued that his client was truly disabled but had forced himself to leave the house, making short trips to places like Walmart and Quiznos, in an effort to recover, often with the encouragement and help of his girlfriend. Mr. Murray also argued that Mr. Hurley had been manipulated by the scheme’s organizers. “They victimized these guys,” Mr. Murray said in his summation.


