


Hallak Cleaners, the dry cleaning service that’s the industry go-to, will celebrate 50 years in business Thursday with an open house from 4 to 9 p.m. Come for Champagne, pro tips on stain removal and door prizes, which include a $500 gift card. At 1232 Second Avenue.

The same day, Woolrich John Rich & Brothers will mark its spring collaboration with the fabric mill Okajima in Kyoto, Japan, with a sushi and sake party from 6 to 9 p.m. You’ll find the fruits of the partnership, a kimono print parka ($795), as well as ceramics, like an unglazed sake cup ($21), from the Japanese pottery brand Hill-Side. At 125 Wooster Street.

On Friday, the online retailer Everlane will open “Shoe Park,” a 10-day interactive concept store where you can try out styles like leather babouche slippers ($145) and slides ($98) in the adult version of a playground with sculptural installations by the set designer Robert Storey. At 83 Wooster Street.

Makers & Brothers will host a furniture workshop at the Standard, East Village through Sunday with the woodworker James Carroll on site crafting stools from locally sourced timber ($285). At 25 Cooper Square.

Just in time for sunnier days, Hamptons pop-ups start opening this weekend. Julie Heller, curator of the SoHo vintage gallery EraLuxe, will open her Cabana shop for a second season. Expect summer bits like crop AMO jeans ($257) and sterling silver knot bracelets from Nikolai Rose ($240), as well as gorgeous archive pieces like an Alaïa butterfly dress ($1,350). At 53 Jobs Lane, Southampton, N.Y.

On Monday, the Los Angeles designer Jenni Kayne will bring her Cali-cool vibe out East with a pop-up with classics like a cashmere jersey T-shirt dress ($395), alongside an accessories mix that includes Birkenstocks ($135) and Barton Perreira eyewear ($395). At 2 Main Street, Southampton.

The first collection from the Lanvin alumna Alithia Spuri-Zampetti for Paule Ka, which includes feminine pieces like a Lurex jacquard drop-waist sleeveless print dress ($995) and a long-sleeve petal-print blouse ($520) incorporating the contemporary French label’s signature bow, is now available. At 723 Madison Avenue.

The Alice and Olivia designer Stacey Bendet is playing prom fairy godmother with a “Buy a Dress, Give a Dream” promotion: For every dress — like, say, a high-neck, open-back embroidered short gown ($1,198) — sold before Tuesday, she will donate a dress to Big Brothers Big Sisters of America, Prep for Prep and City Year, three charities that work with underprivileged high school students. At 431 West 14th Street.


