


Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault had only one move left — and it was a huge one — after he glanced at the replay of another Pittsburgh goal and chomped on his gum. He pulled Henrik Lundqvist, the franchise’s winningest goaltender, just 26 minutes into a playoff game gone haywire.

Having allowed four goals on 18 shots to the ravenous Penguins, Lundqvist retreated to the bench, pulled on a cap, spat on the ice and watched Antti Raanta mop up in an ignominious 5-0 loss Thursday at Madison Square Garden that put the Rangers on the brink of elimination.

“We weren’t ourselves out there,” the Rangers captain Ryan McDonagh said, spreading the blame around the dressing room.

The Penguins won two games this week at the Garden to lead the first-round series, three games to one. Game 5 is Saturday in Pittsburgh, and the Penguins will get a chance to knock out the Rangers — as the Rangers did to them the last two years.

Lundqvist and the Rangers faced a 3-1 deficit when they played Game 5 in Pittsburgh in the second round in 2014, but they won that game, 5-1, after learning of the death of forward Martin St. Louis’s mother. The Rangers ousted the Penguins and Montreal to make the finals.

“We found a way back then, and we plan on doing our best to go into Pittsburgh and try to win a game,” Rangers defenseman Marc Staal said.

The Rangers seem to have been doomed from the start of this series. Lundqvist was poked near his right eye late in the first period of Game 1 and was replaced by Raanta. Lundqvist returned for a 4-2 victory in Game 2, but he has surrendered seven goals on 49 shots in his last two games.

“I’m not going to analyze it too much; I’m just going to say I was not good enough,” Lundqvist said, almost inaudibly, as he sat at his locker. “It was just a really bad game. I need to be better, simple as that. I don’t need to say more than that.”

Matt Murray, Pittsburgh’s 21-year-old backup goaltender, turned aside all 31 shots for his first career playoff shutout in his second game. Murray, replacing the injured Marc-Andre Fleury, stopped 47 of 48 shots in two victories at the Garden.

“It’s definitely out of character for this group to come up with this type of performance,” Vigneault said. “I don’t think it was a lack of will. We just picked a very bad night to have a very bad game.”

Later, Vigneault said: “This is definitely a team loss. I am not going to single out one individual.”

A day after Vigneault grumbled about his team’s lack of desire in a 3-1 loss Tuesday in Game 3, he scratched the lackluster forward Kevin Hayes, replacing him with Oscar Lindberg, and juggled his forward lines and defense pairings.

A lot of good the maneuvering did. The Penguins scored 69 seconds into the game. Defenseman Ben Lovejoy sped over the Rangers’ blue line with no resistance. His long slap shot caromed off Lundqvist’s pads and dribbled into the low slot. Penguins forward Eric Fehr beat J. T. Miller to the rebound, and he pounded the puck past Lundqvist.

After Rangers forward Rick Nash received an interference penalty at 6 minutes 42 seconds for blindsiding defenseman Trevor Daley in front of the Penguins’ goal, Pittsburgh scored 29 seconds into its first power play. It was Pittsburgh’s fifth power-play goal of the series.

Evgeni Malkin collected a pass from Kris Letang and let a shot fly from the point. Sidney Crosby tipped the puck with his stick in the high slot and forward Patric Hornqvist deflected it again past Lundqvist at 7:11. It was the fourth goal of the series for Hornqvist.

“The power play, it gets better and more confident,” Malkin said.

The Rangers entered the game with one power-play goal in 12 opportunities, so it was not much of a surprise when they failed to take a shot on their first power play. They took only one shot on their second, and Murray stopped it.

The rookie Pittsburgh forward Conor Sheary made the score 3-0 with his first playoff goal at 16:12. He blocked a pass at the right point by Kevin Klein, then beat the flat-footed Klein to the loose puck and steamed toward the goal, chased by Marc Staal. Sheary blasted a shot to the stick side that beat Lundqvist cleanly.

“When you play a team with a lot of confidence and really skilled players, you have to be on top of things,” Lundqvist said. “Otherwise, they’re going to take advantage of mistakes.”

But the Penguins stayed on a mighty roll. Dominic Moore tackled Malkin behind the Rangers’ goal, and Pittsburgh laid siege on Lundqvist after he stopped a long shot by Malkin. Crosby fished out a loose puck at the goal and fed it back to Malkin. He scored.

The goal, four minutes into the second period, was Malkin’s first of the series. Lundqvist was gone two minutes later.

Malkin added another power-play goal at 3:28 of the third period to polish off a big night for him.

“We feel like we have a good enough team to be in a better spot than we are,” Rangers forward Eric Staal said. “But we need to respond accordingly.”


