


Imagine you are a terrorist leader bent on humbling the United States. What would be the smartest strategy at this moment?

Dragging the great superpower into a messy war? Or hanging back, doing nothing and letting the fractious country tear itself apart?

Sebastian Junger, the veteran war correspondent, raises that provocative question in his new book, “Tribe: On Homecoming and Belonging.” His answer is definitive: The savvy terrorist would hang back, denying his enemy “the unifying effects of war.”

The terrorist, observing the United States via satellite, would see that it is doing to itself what no bomb or attack could: dissolving its own social bonds through a culture of “excommunication” — turning opponents into enemies and disagreement into revulsion.

The word “tribal” is often used to discuss the country’s intense divisions. But Mr. Junger’s argument is not that the United States is becoming too tribal, but rather that it is losing a necessary tribalism.

Tribalism, in his telling, means a willingness to make substantive sacrifices for a community. As the United States has become a consumerist, hyperindividualist republic that increasingly asks less of the average citizen, Mr. Junger writes, a culture of sacrifice has fallen away.

Mr. Junger’s project is to understand what can be learned from settings where sacrifice is the norm — from Native American tribes, from Bosnia in the worst of the war years, from troubled inner-city districts that somehow resist the scourge of mass shootings.

What he finds is not an altogether unfamiliar idea: that in the journey to modernity, in the achievement of levels of peace, affluence and health that would have been unimaginable to our ancestors, some valuable things were lost.

In relieving hardship after hardship, he writes, modern society “has perfected the art of making people not feel necessary.” In giving people independence from one another, modernity has raised the incidence of mental illness and suicide.

In other words, we have paid for progress in the currency of belonging. And now, Mr. Junger believes, we might want a partial refund.

Mr. Junger’s emphasis is on the shortcomings of the post-tribal society. And so his account goes easy on the shortcomings of tribal society, and it has less to say about the millions of people all these years who have been migrants not to belonging, but from it.

If restoring a sense of community is as hard as Mr. Junger suggests, it may be because some of the people fleeing communal places knew what they were doing.

So many immigrants to the United States speak of fleeing not poverty, but cultures full of judgment, control and guilt in which love and meddling come at the cost of having space to think and create and become your fullest self.

Moreover, many of the more tribal societies that Mr. Junger admires, awash in loving connection, have tended to be less loving to those who fail to fit their picture of how one should be — to women without much interest in cooking, to people drawn to the same sex, to people unpersuaded by the local god, to people who think thoughts that will only later come to be regarded as true, to people whose parents were not supposed to mate but did anyway and now, oops, here they are.

The central transaction of modernity was well captured in the movie “Monsoon Wedding” some years ago. An uncle who has been a generous benefactor to his relatives and offers to finance his niece’s education turns out to have molested her as well.

Dependence, the movie suggests, creates a fertile environment for abuse. One can imagine that anonymous modern institutions like scholarships and affordable loans would have been, for the niece, a preferable, if less warmly human and tribal, option.

Mr. Junger’s book, so alive to the post-tribal poverties of being alone, is less aware of the poverties of being together that have sent so many in pursuit of relative solitude.


