


LONDON — Six weeks after the Panama Papers revealed vast stores of hidden offshore wealth around the world, leaders from Britain, the United States and other nations vowed on Thursday to cooperate on sweeping measures against financial corruption.

At a conference in London, Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, who two days earlier had been overheard describing Afghanistan and Nigeria as “fantastically corrupt,” announced strategies to clamp down on money laundering in his country.

He put forth proposals to make offshore companies that buy property in Britain reveal their true ownership, forcing those that hide behind complex financial structures to accept transparency. The same provisions would apply to firms that already own property in the country and to those bidding for British government contracts.

In practical terms, that would mean that companies buying or owning British property, or vying for state contracts, would first have to supply information on their actual ownership to a new public register.

Foreign companies own about 100,000 properties in England and Wales, including more than 44,000 in London, according to the British government.

Secretary of State John Kerry, representing the United States, condemned financial corruption as a threat to democracy.

“I’ve been shocked by the degree to which I find corruption pandemic in the world today,” he said at the conference, which was at Lancaster House, a mansion used by Britain’s Foreign Office.

The hiding of assets from tax authorities harms people around the world by depriving governments of the resources they need to provide health care, build schools and invest in infrastructure, Mr. Kerry said.

He also said that corruption threatened governments by encouraging foreign extremism and fomenting domestic discontent.

“Criminal activity literally is a destroyer of nation-states, because it contributes to drug trafficking, arms smuggling; it contributes to human trafficking; it becomes the facilitator of activities that create substates — in some cases, deep states — within states,” he said, referring to criminal networks that, in some countries, are more powerful than the government. “It is a contributor to terrorism, my friends, in many different ways.”

Mr. Kerry added: “The extremism that we see in the world today comes in no small degree from the utter exasperation that people have with the sense that the system is rigged. And we see this anger manifesting itself in different forms in elections around the world, including ours. People are angry, and the anger is going to grow unless we shut the doors and try to prove to people there’s a fairness that can be established in the system.”

Governments must demonstrate to citizens that the rules of capitalism are not rigged against ordinary people, Mr. Kerry said.

Mr. Cameron said he hoped that collaboration among nations would overcome resistance to greater transparency. Some advocates, however, have asserted that nations like Britain and the United States need to go even further in cracking down on tax havens within their borders.

The leaders at the gathering included President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria and President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan.

On Tuesday, Mr. Cameron was overheard telling Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace that Afghanistan and Nigeria were “fantastically corrupt countries” and “possibly the two most corrupt countries in the world.”

Mr. Buhari said through a spokesman that he had been “deeply shocked and embarrassed” by Mr. Cameron’s remarks, although Mr. Buhari did not seek to rebut them.

Mr. Cameron said on Thursday that “the evil of corruption reaches into every corner of the world,” adding that it lies “at the heart of the most urgent problems we face — from economic uncertainty to endemic poverty to the ever-present threat of radicalization and extremism.”

He added: “A global problem needs a truly global solution. It needs an unprecedented, courageous commitment from world leaders to stand united, to speak into the silence and to demand change.”

Afghanistan, Nigeria, France and the Netherlands pledged on Thursday to set up their own public registers of true company ownership. Other nations, including Australia, New Zealand, Georgia and Ireland, agreed to take initial steps toward that goal.

Plans are also underway for an International Anticorruption Coordination Center in London, in partnership with Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United States, as well as with Interpol.

In a communiqué, participants at the meeting outlined pledges to root out bribery and tackle the problem of corruption in many fields, including sports. In a statement, Britain said it planned to start an Anticorruption Innovation Hub that would bring together technology experts and law enforcement authorities.

Governments also vowed to cooperate on the recovery of stolen assets. A meeting on that subject will be held in the United States next year, focusing on returning assets taken from Nigeria, Ukraine, Sri Lanka and Tunisia.

The issue was highlighted by Mr. Kerry, who referred to “tens of billions of dollars” stolen from Nigeria by generals. He said he was working to restore $350 million to Nigeria, adding that such money represents “the opportunity to provide a desk and a chair and school and shelter and health care and meet the needs of nations.”

Britain’s relationship with its overseas territories has been criticized by people fighting tax evasion, after the recent leak of the documents known the Panama Papers, which revealed how wealthy people used offshore banks and shell companies to conceal their wealth. The papers, confidential documents from a law firm in Panama, exposed the British Virgin Islands as a major center of offshore activity.

Representatives of Panama and the British Virgin Islands were not invited to Thursday’s meeting, though the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development announced on Wednesday that Panama had agreed to join about 100 other countries in sharing information automatically to try to prevent tax evasion.

Mr. Cameron has also been embarrassed personally after an admission that he earned money through an offshore trust established by his father, who was named as a client of Mossack Fonseca, the law firm at the center of the Panama Papers.

In a statement, Nick Bryer, of Oxfam, the international confederation of 18 organizations working together with partners and local communities in more than 90 countries to fight poverty and inequality, cast doubt on the scope of the plans that were outlined.

“Registers of company ownership that are not public are simply not good enough,” he said. “The prime minister should push for full transparency of the U.K.’s overseas territories and crown dependencies at the anticorruption summit.”


