


In the 2012 presidential campaign, June was a pivotal month for President Obama’s re-election efforts. Mitt Romney had emerged from a slashing primary race close to broke, looking to get to the nominating convention so he could reset his candidacy and get an infusion of cash.

While there is little that is similar between the candidacies of Mr. Romney and Donald J. Trump, the result may end up being the same.

Mr. Romney was defined by a brutal series of television ads aired by both Priorities USA, the “super PAC” supporting Mr. Obama, and his campaign. Mr. Romney, in those renderings, was a heartless corporate raider who talked about liking to fire people who did not provide good services, and whose private equity firm feasted on the modest-wage jobs of hard-working people.

Mr. Romney never recovered. But he was still only a few ticks behind Mr. Obama in the polls in June 2012. In the last week of June that year, Mr. Obama was at 47 percent, with Mr. Romney at 44 percent, according to an NBC/Wall Street Journal survey.

Mr. Trump has insisted the race between him and Hillary Clinton is roughly that close. But several credible national surveys have shown Mr. Trump’s poll numbers sinking sharply in the wake of his criticism of an Indiana-born federal judge as “Mexican” in early June. Three surveys have shown Mrs. Clinton with a double-digit lead.

At the same time, Mr. Trump is off the air in terms of paid advertising. He has not aired a single ad since he became the presumptive Republican nominee on May 3. The Republican National Committee is not on the air helping him, and neither are any super PACs to any surgical degree.

By contrast, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign has an advertising buy in battleground states that exceeds $20 million. And Priorities USA, which was reconstituted to support her candidacy, is spending more than $10 million of its own in a number of states.

Mr. Trump informed NBC on Sunday that he did not believe the race would begin until after the Republican convention on July 18. But he might be limping into Cleveland by then.


