


HONG KONG — A Chinese official warned on Wednesday that a scheduled meeting between President Obama and the Dalai Lama in Washington would “undermine mutual trust and cooperation” between the two countries.

Hours later, Mr. Obama met with the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader at the White House as planned.

Beijing routinely pressures foreign leaders not to meet the Dalai Lama, whom it accuses of seeking Tibet’s independence from China. The Dalai Lama, however, says he merely wants to protect Tibetans and their homeland’s identity.

“Tibet affairs are part of China’s internal affairs, and no foreign country has the right to interfere,” Lu Kang, a spokesman for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said on Wednesday. He accused the Dalai Lama of “long conducting anti-China splittist activities on the world stage under the cloak of religion.”

Foreign leaders have increasingly declined to meet with the Dalai Lama, fearing retaliation from Beijing. China protested and canceled high-level visits to Britain after Prime Minister David Cameron met with him in 2012. When the Dalai Lama visited Britain again three years later, Mr. Cameron avoided him, something the Tibetan spiritual leader suggested was because of concerns about trade.

United States officials have continued to meet with the Dalai Lama, though the White House avoids turning such exchanges into high-profile affairs. Mr. Obama has met the Dalai Lama on multiple occasions during his administration, most recently in 2014. In 2015, both men attended the National Prayer Breakfast in Washington, although they did not meet individually.

As he has on previous occasions, Mr. Obama met with the Dalai Lama on Wednesday in the Map Room of the White House, considered part of his residence, rather than the Oval Office, located in the West Wing, where he conducts official business and typically receives heads of state.

Reporters were not allowed access to document any part of the meeting, even to take a picture, although the official White House photographer released his own image of Mr. Obama warmly gripping the arms of the Dalai Lama, who promptly shared the picture on his Instagram account.

The setting reflected that the visit was “personal” rather than official, said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, since the Dalai Lama is not a foreign government leader.

“But the president does have a personal affection for the Dalai Lama and for his teachings,” Mr. Earnest said. “The president does support the preservation of Tibet’s unique religious, cultural and linguistic traditions, so that’s why the president had the meeting.”

He added that, as in the past, the visit should not be read as a change in United States policy with regard to Tibet. “Tibet, per U.S. policy, is considered part of the People’s Republic of China,” Mr. Earnest said. “And the United States has not articulated our support for Tibetan independence.”

According to a White House statement, the president accepted the Dalai Lama’s condolences for the mass shooting in Orlando, Fla., and Mr. Obama encouraged “direct dialogue between the Dalai Lama and his representatives with Chinese authorities to lower tensions and resolve differences.”

In recent years, many Tibetans have demonstrated against Chinese rule over their homeland, and more than 140 have set themselves on fire. More than 100,000 Tibetans live in exile, most in India, which has been the Dalai Lama’s home since he fled Tibet in 1959.


