


The Los Angeles Clippers on Monday night lost two stars and, most likely, any hope of a long playoff run.

Power forward Blake Griffin will miss the rest of the postseason after aggravating a leg injury, according to a statement the Clippers released on Tuesday, and point guard Chris Paul is out indefinitely after breaking a bone in his right hand. Paul had surgery on Tuesday and will be re-evaluated in four to six weeks, the team said.

Both injuries occurred in the third quarter of Monday night’s Game 4 loss to the Portland Trail Blazers.

Clippers Coach Doc Rivers, speaking at a news conference Tuesday, looked shellshocked as he reflected on losing Griffin and Paul. He said that while he was sure that other teams had lost their top two players, “I don’t know when, and I know it didn’t happen in the same game — I can tell you that for a fact.”

Without Paul and Griffin, the Clippers’ leading scorers and indisputable leaders, Los Angeles will be at a severe disadvantage against Portland. The series is tied at 2-2, with Game 5 to be played in Los Angeles on Wednesday.

“We’ve won games before without key guys, and I think we can win games in the future without key guys,” Rivers told reporters.

Griffin missed more than three months of the regular season after injuring his leg in a December game against the Los Angeles Lakers. While he was recovering, he punched an assistant equipment manager, breaking his hand and drawing a four-game suspension.

Entering Monday night, Griffin had played in only eight games since he finally returned to the Clippers’ lineup early this month. He averaged 15 points, 8.8 rebounds and 4 assists per game in the first round against Portland.

The Clippers said in their statement that there was no structural damage to Griffin’s leg and that he was expected to be ready for the start of training camp next season.

Paul, who appeared to injure his hand while defending Gerald Henderson, played 74 regular-season games, averaging 19.5 points and 10 assists and leading the Clippers to a 30-15 record in the games Griffin missed. In line with his reputation, Paul had elevated his game for the playoffs, averaging 23.8 points per game.

The winner of the Clippers-Blazers series will face either the Golden State Warriors or the Houston Rockets. The Warriors lead the series, 3-1, but are playing without Stephen Curry, who is expected to miss at least two weeks with a sprained knee.

That injury seemed to put the Clippers in position to advance past the second round of the postseason for the first time in franchise history. Now, making it out of the first round might be a significant achievement.

“There’s storms, and with every storm, it’s stopped raining at some point,” Rivers told reporters. “We’ve just got to figure it out.”


