


The television industry in 1990 was facing problems much like those it confronts today. Viewers, especially younger ones, were turning away from network TV and toward new entertainment options: video games, VCRs, outliers like MTV. An anything-goes mind-set was in the air, as networks looked for something new and exciting. And so it was that for 11 infamous episodes that fall, ABC offered up a police drama in which criminals rapped, officers sang, and jurors announced their verdict by bursting into a rousing gospel tune.

The show was called “Cop Rock,” a high-profile failure that has become the stuff of television legend. It was an effort to tell a cop-shop story with the tools of a Broadway musical, an idea that generated a smattering of admiration but a whole lot of ridicule that remains to this day. Some consider it one of the worst shows ever made.

But hold on. Sometimes “worst” is a misnomer for “ahead of its time.” On Tuesday Shout! Factory releases “Cop Rock: The Complete Series,” a three-disc package that provides a chance to revisit this TV curiosity. Watching the 11 episodes — the original 16-episode order was truncated when the show didn’t generate ratings — is fascinating, and not always in a train wreck way. When “Cop Rock” worked, though that was only intermittently, it worked quite well.

The idea of putting original music into scripted TV shows has been resurgent recently, in NBC’s “Smash” in 2012 and in ABC’s “Galavant” and CW’s “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” now. Maybe it’s always destined to be a doomed concept — “Smash” lasted only two seasons, and neither current show is a ratings hit — but “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” is delightful, as was the recently canceled “Galavant,” and “Smash” certainly had its devotees. All of them owe a debt to “Cop Rock,” which arrived in September 1990 with high expectations: One of its creators (with William M. Finkelstein) was Steven Bochco, who had raised the bar for police dramas considerably in the 1980s with “Hill Street Blues.”

“When I was making ‘Hill Street Blues,’ a Broadway producer talked to me about the possibility of doing ‘Hill Street’ as a Broadway musical,” Mr. Bochco said in an email interview. “For all sorts of practical reasons, that wasn’t possible, but the idea of a musical cop show stuck with me.”

He called “Cop Rock” the “most challenging show I’ve ever done, and the most fun, despite its failure,” but added, “In all candor, I haven’t watched it since the days when we produced it, so I have no idea if it holds up or not.” Were he to take in a few episodes, he might be impressed with his own prescience, because what immediately strikes a 2016 viewer is how current the story seems.

A white officer named LaRusso (Peter Onorati) shoots and kills a defenseless black suspect, an event that sets the whole series in motion. Racial tension, both between the police and the community and within the police department, is a recurrent theme. “Scandal”-like crisis management, shady campaign financing, celebrity stalking all turn up. It’s not really that Mr. Bochco foresaw those present-day phenomena, of course; the series actually reminds us that many of the things we think of as specific to today have been around a long time.

As for the music, yes, it’s sometimes jarring and inserted clumsily, but many of the songs make for enjoyable listening. Randy Newman wrote the numbers for the pilot episode (he also sings the show’s theme song), and as it went along, the series drew on a stable of songwriters for the rest. Many guest stars were drawn from the musical-theater world, and the production numbers were staged with verve. When Anne Bobby, playing a police officer with marital troubles, leads a group of women in a locker room anthem whose refrain is “Why can’t a man be more like a woman?” you can feel how great the number would be in a Broadway house.

“I always thought of it as a sort of glorious experiment,” Ms. Bobby said in an interview. “‘Cop Rock’ was really breaking down these walls of perception, with not one mallet but two.” The first wall said that stage musicals were one thing, television shows another. The second held that the best way to inject music into a scripted TV show was to use known songs (as was done in the well-regarded British show “The Singing Detective”) rather than original ones.

That proved to be too much innovation for 1990 viewers, and “Cop Rock” still registers as an imperfect experiment, at best. But if nothing else, it’s a noteworthy effort to try something different in an industry that, then and now, is often content to repeat the same successful formulas over and over.

“When people come up to me and talk to me about ‘Cop Rock,’” Ms. Bobby said, “they’re really coming up to me to talk because they got it.”


