


BRASÍLIA — In a stunning twist in the effort to impeach President Dilma Rousseff of Brazil, the new speaker of the lower house of Congress has changed his mind — less than 24 hours after announcing that he would try to annul his chamber’s decision to impeach her.

Brazilians awoke on Tuesday to the news of the sudden about-face by the speaker, Waldir Maranhão, who on Monday was widely ridiculed and threatened with expulsion from his Progressive Party for trying to upend the impeachment process.

Mr. Maranhão said on Monday that he would to try to annul the April 17 impeachment vote against the president, citing concerns about procedural irregularities. But in a decision made around midnight here, and widely circulated in the early morning on Tuesday, Mr. Maranhão told Renan Calheiros, the head of the Senate, that he was revoking his earlier decision.

The head-spinning change of course was only the latest development in a political crisis that has mesmerized and bewildered Latin America’s most populous nation.

The practical significance of the decision is that it improves the chances Ms. Rousseff will be ousted this week.

The Senate, which was already threatening to disregard Mr. Maranhão’s pronouncements, is scheduled on Wednesday to start voting on whether to remove Ms. Rousseff from office and place her on trial over claims of budgetary manipulation. Ms. Rousseff is widely expected to lose that vote, clearing the way for her to be replaced by Vice President Michel Temer.

The circuslike atmosphere in Brazil’s Congress — which has recently been marked by shouting matches, protests inside the chamber and lawmakers spitting on one another — has provoked ire across the country.

“Anyone who still lives with the idea that institutions are functioning is either a cynic or blind,” said Josias de Souza, a prominent columnist.

Mr. Maranhão had taken the helm of Brazil’s lower house as interim speaker just last week, after the previous speaker, Eduardo Cunha, was forced to step down by the Supreme Court to face a trial on graft charges. Mr. Cunha, who is accused of taking as much as $40 million in bribes, had overseen the impeachment proceedings.

But like dozens of other prominent politicians across the spectrum, Mr. Maranhão is grappling with claims that he pocketed bribes in the graft scheme surrounding Petrobras, the national oil company.

Ms. Rousseff is not accused of stealing for her own personal enrichment. Instead, she faces accusations that she borrowed money from state banks to plug budget holes, masking the depths of Brazil’s economic troubles to bolster her re-election prospects.

Last month, the lower house voted to send Ms. Rousseff’s case to the Senate by a wide margin — with 367 lawmakers voting for impeachment, 137 voting against and seven abstaining.

In a last-ditch effort to prevent her from being ousted, José Eduardo Cardozo, the solicitor general in Ms. Rousseff’s government, said on Tuesday that he was asking the Supreme Court to rule on whether the impeachment proceedings in the lower house were invalid.

In his request before Brazil’s highest court, Mr. Cardozo argued that Mr. Cunha, the deposed speaker of the House, oversaw the proceedings as part of a strategy to shield himself from graft inquiries.

It was unclear when the Supreme Court would rule on Mr. Cardozo’s filing. But some justices on the court have already signaled that they do not intend to interfere in a substantial way in the handling of the impeachment process in Congress.

Even before Mr. Maranhão reversed himself, the Senate leader, Mr. Calheiros, had already vowed to go ahead with the Senate vote on Ms. Rousseff’s removal on Wednesday.

The public backtracking by Mr. Maranhão, 60, raised questions about the lawmaker, who is expected to be next in line for the presidency if Ms. Rousseff is suspended for trial and the vice president takes the helm of the government this week.

Many political analysts are at a loss to explain Mr. Maranhão’s motivations. Some raised the possibility that his attempt to annul the impeachment vote was a last-ditch effort by Ms. Rousseff to prevent her ouster, which now seems all but certain.

Mr. Maranhão hails from Maranhão, a state in northeast Brazil that ranks among the poorest in Brazil. He was one of 10 children raised in poverty in a poor area of São Luís, the state capital. Educated as a veterinarian, he was the dean of a public university in his home state before winning a seat in Congress in 2006. Until his elevation to speaker last week, he was a relatively obscure member of the chamber’s so-called lower clergy, as Brazil’s less prominent federal lawmakers are called.

Mr. Maranhão voted against the impeachment of Ms. Rousseff last month, disobeying the guidance of his own Progressive Party and breaking with the stance of Mr. Cunha, the deposed speaker, who had named Mr. Maranhão as his deputy. In that role, Mr. Maranhão had successfully maneuvered to prevent an ethics panel in the lower house from sanctioning Mr. Cunha over claims of graft.

Various lawmakers said that they would now seek to have Mr. Maranhão removed from his new post as speaker of the lower house, but the effort seems to be fraught with uncertainty and bureaucratic hurdles. Even if his own party was to expel him from its ranks, he might still be able to remain as speaker.

Either way, the process could drag on for weeks, a period during which Mr. Maranhão could seek to prolong his stay as speaker by appealing any decision to remove him to Brazil’s Supreme Court, legal scholars said.


