


NATIONAL

An article on Thursday about the police chief of Portland, Ore., accused of a cover-up in a friend’s shooting, misspelled the surname of a founding member of CopWatch, a group that documents instances of police misconduct. He is Dan Handelman, not Hendelman.

BUSINESS DAY

The State of the Art column on Thursday, about the nonhomogeneity of the so-called millennial generation, misspelled the given name of Google’s head of human resources. He is Laszlo Bock, not Lazslo.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on the Personal Tech pages on Thursday about traveling abroad with a smartphone misstated the recommended data option for visitors to Spain. It is one gigabyte for one week and 1.5 gigabytes for a two- to three-week trip, not 1.5 gigabytes for a one-week visit and two gigabytes for a two- to three-week visit.

SPORTS

An article on Tuesday about first-round matches at the French Open misstated, in some copies, the seeding of Sloane Stephens. She is 19th, not 24th.

•

Because of an editing error, a picture caption with an article on Tuesday about the family of Tony Gwynn filing a wrongful-death lawsuit against the tobacco industry misstated the length of time that elapsed between when the picture of Gwynn coaching at San Diego State was taken and his death in June 2014. The photo showed Gwynn a year before his death, not eight months before.

•

The On Horse Racing column on Saturday, about Nyquist’s pursuit of a Triple Crown, misstated, in some editions, the significance of American Pharoah’s Triple Crown victory in 2015. He was the 12th Triple Crown champion ever and the first in 37 years, not the 12th Triple Crown champion in 37 years.

THE ARTS

A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about Willem Sandberg, a former director of the Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam and graphic designer whose work is the subject of an exhibition in Bexhill-on-Sea, England, misstated the date of a poster he designed. It was for a museum exhibition in 1960, not 1950.

•

The Books of The Times Review on May 11 about the novel “The Fireman” by Joe Hill misidentified the place where the nurse Harper Grayson lives. It is New England, not Seattle. It also misstated the number of children the Fireman brings her to save. It is one, not two.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


