


The Kansas City Royals return to Citi Field on Tuesday, facing the Mets in a two-game series at the site of their triumph last fall. The Royals won the World Series in Flushing last Nov. 1 in a 12-inning thriller that Whit Merrifield watched from home in Winston-Salem, N.C.

Merrifield was a minor leaguer then, but he will probably lead off for the Royals on Tuesday, as he did for each of the team’s three victories against Cleveland last week. The Royals have endured a season of extremes, with four winning or losing streaks of at least five games each. But they found themselves in second place in the American League Central heading into the weekend, thanks partly to Merrifield’s unlikely help.

The Royals promoted Merrifield, 27, on May 18, just before they lost third baseman Mike Moustakas for the season in a collision with left fielder Alex Gordon. Moustakas tore his right anterior cruciate ligament, and Gordon broke a bone in his right wrist. Gordon should begin a rehabilitation assignment soon, but Merrifield has filled in well for both players, while mainly holding down second base. He was hitting .327 with an .821 on-base plus slugging percentage through Friday.

“I don’t even think I have a natural position anymore, to be honest with you,” Merrifield said by telephone last week. “I grew up a shortstop, I was a shortstop/second baseman in high school and in summer ball, and when I got to college, there was a need for a center fielder. I was relatively fast, so they tried me out in center field, and I took to it pretty well.”

By his junior year at South Carolina, though, the Gamecocks needed more offense in the infield, so Merrifield played second and third in addition to the outfield. Scouts liked his versatility, and the Royals drafted him in the ninth round in 2010, shortly before his line-drive single clinched the College World Series title against U.C.L.A.

“People are serious about college baseball in the Southeast, and playing for South Carolina, you’re expected to come in there and win,” Merrifield said. “Being around that kind of culture is very similar to what it’s like here in Kansas City. The expectation is winning.”

Merrifield’s father, Bill, played six seasons in the minors, mostly with the Angels, who traded him to Pittsburgh for second baseman Johnny Ray in 1987. The Pirates called up Bill Merrifield, told him he was starting at first base — and then, during a rain delay before the game, changed their minds and sent him to the instructional league instead.

Bill Merrifield would play one more minor league season and never officially reach the major leagues. Yet the story was not part of family lore; Whit said he never knew it until his mother told him in high school or college.

“My dad downplays it a lot,” Merrifield said. “He tells me that he didn’t really care about being a big leaguer. He didn’t really like baseball; he just did it because he was good at it. From his standpoint, it’s not as big of a deal as people are making it out to be. Obviously, it’s a pretty crazy story, but to him it was a blessing, because if he were to have made a big league team and been a big leaguer for the next four or five years, he would have been miserable doing it.”

Instead, Bill Merrifield retired, finished college, started a family and founded a successful sports marketing and communications company. He now works in the athletic department at Wake Forest and supported Whit financially on his climb through the minors.

Now, the family is reveling in Whit’s success in the career that never quite materialized for Bill. His grandfather Bill Sr. has driven his Subaru Outback to road games in Chicago, Minnesota and Baltimore, and has even gotten fan mail sent to his grandson.

“He’s 86 and he’s a driving fool,” Whit Merrifield said. “He’ll hop in the car and drive just about anywhere.”

Bill Sr. tentatively plans to take the brief Mets series off. The way Whit has started his career, though, there should be many more chances to see him.

Contenders rarely turn to the Yankees for help before the trading deadline, but this summer could be an exception. As the Yankees plod along with a middling record — and the worst offense in the American League East — that could be changing.

The Chicago Cubs have scouted the Yankees and would be an obvious fit to add one of their overpowering relievers. The Cubs have baseball’s best record but could improve a bullpen that is respectable, with a 3.48 earned run average entering Friday’s games, but not dominant. Closer Hector Rondon blew save opportunities on Tuesday and Wednesday in Washington.

Even if the Cubs trade for Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller or Aroldis Chapman, though, Rondon will remain an integral part of their bullpen. Rondon had converted all 11 save chances before the Washington games, and had a 1.57 E.R.A. entering the weekend, with 32 strikeouts and just three walks in 23 innings.

Rondon, 28, has improved each season since the Cubs stole him from the Cleveland Indians’ farm system in the Rule 5 draft after the 2012 season. Theo Epstein had just finished his first year as president for baseball operations, and with the Cubs in a full rebuilding effort, they could afford to keep Rondon on their roster all season.

Rondon had pitched just 13 games the previous three years because of Tommy John surgery and subsequent setbacks, but the Cubs liked what they saw in nine innings of winter ball in Venezuela.

“I throw almost like the same stuff now, but I think the confidence is different,” Rondon said last month when asked how he had changed from his days in the Indians’ system. “Right now, if the hitter is looking for a fastball, ‘O.K., I’ve got a good fastball,’ and I can hit my spot. If you’re going to swing breaking ball, ‘O.K., there it is.’ I put it in my mind to make that pitch with good location.”

For now, Rondon would seem to be the most likely pitcher to be on the mound if the Cubs win the World Series for the first time since 1908. So much could change before they could have that chance, including the makeup of the bullpen. But Rondon acknowledged that he had imagined it.

“That is one of my goals in my life: to throw the last pitch of the World Series,” he said. “Hopefully, that moment’s coming, but everything comes at the right time.”

For years, when Glenn Hubbard would find his 1984 Fleer baseball card in his fan mail, he would keep it for himself and sign a replacement card instead. Hubbard, who played 12 seasons as a second baseman for Atlanta and Oakland, wanted to take the card off the market, one by one.

“I used to hate that card,” said Hubbard, now the bench coach for the Class A Lexington Legends in Kentucky. “My son sent me a site that said it was one of the top five worst cards of all time, and I said, ‘O.K., I’m glad I’m known for that.’ ”

The Legends will commemorate the infamous card with a bobblehead giveaway at Whitaker Bank Ballpark on Friday. The mini-Hubbard is depicted with a bushy beard and a boa constrictor draped around his shoulders, just as he was on April 17, 1983.

Before the Braves’ game in Philadelphia that day, the Phillies staged a birthday celebration for the Phanatic, which made its debut in 1978. As at any 5-year-old’s birthday party, there were balloons, cartoon characters, a petting zoo and party favors.

All fans 14 and under received a Phanatic growth-chart poster. Hubbard received an embarrassing baseball card, after asking a photographer to snap his picture with an eight-foot reptilian friend. As a boy, Hubbard had a snake for a pet and knew how to hold it safely.

“He took the picture and I said, ‘Can you send me one?’ and he sent me an 8-by-10,” Hubbard said. “I didn’t think anything about it. So I go to spring training and a kid comes up to me and says, ‘Hey, can you sign this card?’ And it’s a snake card!”

Hubbard did not know the photographer was on a freelance assignment for Fleer, which used the image for Hubbard’s next card. The background is a blizzard of the bizarre — a giant inflatable Phanatic, a man in a Barney Rubble costume, two red balloons — but the snake made the shot indelible.

Hubbard, 58, still seems incredulous that the team would give out a bobblehead of his likeness; his family is coming up from Atlanta for the event. Hubbard was a .244 career hitter but played for three Hall of Fame managers — Bobby Cox, Tony La Russa and Joe Torre — and owns World Series rings from three organizations.

“Listen, they give bobbleheads to guys that were great players,” he said. “I played a lot of years in the big leagues and I could say I played there, but I wasn’t a great player by any means. All the things I’ve had happen, I can’t help but look in the mirror and say, ‘Man, you’ve been in the right place at the right time.’ ”

Of course, Hubbard never knew that the right place to earn a bobblehead would be 33 years ago, at Veterans Stadium, with a snake at a mascot’s birthday party.


