


The crisis roiling the ballet company of the Bucharest National Opera in recent weeks rippled not only through the international dance world but through Romanian politics as well. And ultimately it was a government-brokered plan that paved the way for the return on Wednesday of the company’s two biggest stars: its artistic director, Johan Kobborg, and the dancer Alina Cojocaru, who both resigned this month after clashing with management over the direction of the company.

“He’s back in the office, and I’m in the studio, finally,” Ms. Cojocaru said in a telephone interview from Bucharest.

The ballet company’s profile had risen since Mr. Kobborg, a Dane who is a former principal at the Royal Danish Ballet and the Royal Ballet in London, became its artistic director two years ago, and his fiancée, Ms. Cojocaru, a star who is a principal at the English National Ballet, returned to her native Bucharest as a permanent guest artist. Both worked to improve the company’s reputation, bringing new dancers and repertoire to Bucharest.

But they resigned on April 12 after new management took over the opera house and removed Mr. Kobborg’s title of “artistic director” from the company’s website, saying it did not technically exist in the official hierarchy. His name was placed among the ballet company’s “artists,” a low rank comparable to the corps de ballet in other companies.

The move prompted an outcry from international dance fans, and raised questions about how ambitious or international the company wanted to be, while bringing nationalist tensions to the surface after a protester denounced “foreigners” at a rally outside the opera house.

A gala for April 28 was canceled. Bitter accusations were traded, including questions raised about a gala for the company held last year in New York. (Ms. Cojocaru said that its finances had been handled correctly, and that contracts, which she posted on social media, support that.)

Romania’s prime minister, Dacian Ciolos, met with Ms. Cojocaru. And this week the country’s culture minister, Vlad Alexandrescu, brokered a deal to bring a new interim manager to the opera house for three months and for the return of Mr. Kobborg and Ms. Cojocaru.

Now the company will have to turn to the business of healing — and dancing. “We are very happy,” Ms. Cojocaru said, “to be supported in this journey ahead.”


