


Betsy Cox is sort of a planner for those getting unhitched — a divorce concierge — and José Barceló, a scion of the Ron Barceló rum company in the Dominican Republic, is currently her most active client.

Earlier this year, Ms. Cox, 52, escaped the cold of New York City to take a daylong meeting with Mr. Barceló, 53, who has separated from his wife of 23 years. Ms. Cox and he played 18 holes of golf, toured his new properties around Casa de Campo and Punta Cana, and joined him for dinner at an Italian restaurant.

Between golf and rum shots, she took notes, a lot of them, typing away on her BlackBerry as she used her iPhone to do quick searches and to respond to texts from other clients.

This is what Ms. Cox jotted on the digital to-do list: Mr. Barceló wants to travel to a different country every month for the next year. He wants to study philosophy. He wants one daughter to get set up with a cool job in New York and to find for the other daughter a summer camp to attend in Switzerland. He also wants to meet a woman and fall in love.

Ms. Cox, who is laid-back in a very can-do sort of way, and who calls the business Blackbook Divorce, specializes in making it all happen. “He wants to completely remake himself, which makes him a perfect client,” she said.

She is arranging for his travel — to four continents, 12 countries and at least one health spa. (“I need to send him to a fat farm,” she said. “I was thinking about The Ashram, but I’m not sure he can handle it.”) She’s looking for a monthlong philosophy course for him in London.

“She’s not my wife, but I don’t have a wife anymore and I need someone to take care of me,” said Mr. Barceló, who is paying Ms. Cox $350 an hour.

Ms. Cox is hired by men and women who need help navigating the turbulence of leaving one life behind and building a new one. “My job is to fill the void for what they don’t have,” she said. “I’m a temporary fixer. They really need someone when they suddenly have no one.”

As technology works to ease so many of life’s quandaries, divorce remains one of the most logistically complicated and emotionally wrought events. But a small marketplace of fixers (mostly, so far, middlewomen) are starting businesses meant to simplify the ancillary processes associated with a marital break-up.

Liza Feiler started a company called Divorce Concierge Group in the Washington area after her own marriage ended in 2012. “I was lost after my divorce, unsure where to begin,” said Ms. Feiler, 44. She is hired, post-divorce, for a starting flat fee of $350, most often by ex-wives. She helps clients with tasks like putting their homes on the market and hiring accountants.

“You come to me and say, ‘I need new health insurance,’ and I will come back to you with two plans to choose and a start date,” she said.

Digital entrepreneurs are also marrying in. Divorceify, a web platform created by three lawyers, pairs members to services that fit their individualized needs: therapists, mediators, parenting coordinators and financial consultants. “Divorce is not a one-size-fits-all process, and you need a holistic approach,” said Sonia Queralt, 34 and a divorced divorce lawyer and coach in Miami, who is one of the founders.

Ms. Cox’s service is also personalized and touches on different facets of her clients’ lives. Her clientele is well-to-do, often international, with multiple homes: the sort of people who frequent Gstaad and Greece if not SoulCycle and Sagaponack.

The services Ms. Cox provides tends to fall into stereotypical silos. For men, she helps them get set up to manage their own homes and to prepare for parenting challenges.

For women, Ms. Cox works to get them on a budget, to make sure they have insurance and wealth managers and to give them tough-love lectures about the importance of getting a job. She helps them sell country homes for some extra cash. (For real estate transactions, she gets a cut from the broker.)

For men and women, she offers herself as a sounding board and friend. She arranges visits to spas and nutritionists for weight loss and to psychiatrists to treat depression.

The need for Ms. Cox’s services is perhaps best explained by the man who helped introduce her to this potential market, her own ex-husband, Kevin Cox, 53. (They were divorced in 2000 after seven years of marriage and have amicably raised their son, Kevin Jr., 18.)

“When you look at a couple, there are, generally speaking, two people with very distinct responsibilities,” said Mr. Cox, an investment banker. “Suddenly one side is thrust into taking care of what the other side has always taken care of. I have seen men whose careers fly off the rails amid a divorce.”

It was thanks to her own marital breakup that Ms. Cox met the man who has become her closest professional partner, the prominent divorce lawyer Bernard Clair. They regularly refer business to each other.

“She’s tied into a dirty little secret and that is that even moneyed spouses, the so-called masters of the universe, need a lot of help before, during and after the divorce process,” said Mr. Clair, 65. “A guy has had everything done by the homemaking spouse and is suddenly living alone, and he doesn’t know what the hell to do.”

Exhibit A, a client shared by Ms. Cox and Mr. Clair: a father of two young children who is a wealthy financier who travels frequently for work. His wife had wanted the divorce, and the combination of her leaving him and him finding himself living alone for the first time in more than a dozen years left the client, Mr. Clair said, “emotionally bereft.”

While Mr. Clair hammered out the legal settlement, Ms. Cox got him settled.

Mr. Clair said she connected him with an agency for nannies and he hired help. She also introduced him to other divorced parents with children of similar ages to his. (“He was overwhelmed with the responsibilities of filling all the free time with the children,” Mr. Clair said.)

Ms. Cox created a FreshDirect account for the man and put together a list of foods for regular delivery. She taught him how to use Grubhub. She found him a psychiatrist and a girlfriend.

“I work a lot with people on issues that can help ease the transition for kids,” Ms. Cox said. “I encourage men to get an apartment that’s in walking distance to the mom’s and to make the new home feel very familiar for the kids.”

Ms. Cox’s friends and clients say she is suited to this specialized high-end niche, in part because she had worked at a wealth management and investment firm, and as an event planner who traveled abroad extensively, givng her connections all over the world.

She is also nurturing. When Ms. Cox takes on a client, she offers a full-service operation.

“What she is doing with divorce is very smart,” said Ana Luiza Rego, 57, as she sipped coffee at her Manhattan pied-à-terre. “If you leave men alone, they die. Have you ever seen a man at the supermarket? They have a cart filled with peanuts.”

Ms. Rego is an old friend and current client: She is long ago divorced (twice, from the same man), but she is just now trying to rebuild her career as a painter and make a new life. A resident of Rio de Janeiro, Ms. Rego wants to move to New York with her daughter Filippa Paulson. It’s Ms. Cox’s job to facilitate that.

“I want two very different things,” Ms. Rego said. “I want to catch up with my career and to make my daughter successful. I don’t have anyone else to help me, and it can be very lonely sometimes — $350 an hour is worth it.”

Ms. Paulson, 21, spent about six weeks in New York earlier this year to study with her Cox-procured American tutors and to experience local culture. “She got me a great table at Catch downtown,” Ms. Paulson said. “She gets me into 1 Oak.”

Middle-of-the-night demands are part of the gig. “I sleep with my phone on the pillow,” Ms. Cox said. “Kids of clients are always texting me asking, ‘Can you get me in?’ Then I go back to sleep. If I can’t do the little things, then I lose my credibility and then no one calls, at any hour.”


