


A relatively dry El Niño winter, a warm spring that melted snow earlier and years of policies that left forests ripe for burning have contributed to the destructive wildfire that forced the evacuation of Fort McMurray in Alberta, scientists say.

Global warming may have played a role, too, although experts cautioned that it was impossible to link an individual event like this one directly to climate change.

But there is little doubt that global warming has affected the frequency and intensity of fires, and lengthened the fire season in Alberta, as it has elsewhere in North America.

“The warmer it is, the more fire there is,” said Mike Flannigan, a wildland fire expert at the University of Alberta in Edmonton. In Alberta, he said, the fire season now begins March 1, a month earlier than in the past.

Around Fort McMurray, the number of heat-wave days, when temperatures are at least nine degrees Fahrenheit above normal, has tripled since 1950, said Stefan Kienzle, a hydrologist at the University of Lethbridge in southern Alberta.

Hotter temperatures dry out the underbrush and ground litter that can fuel a fire.

“Fuel moisture is really the key to the fire business,” Dr. Flannigan said. “That’s why temperature is so important.”

Warm temperatures in the region this spring made the fuel situation worse, by melting snow earlier. An earlier melt means that sunlight hits the forest floor sooner, so the underbrush has more time to dry and becomes easier to ignite, said David Martell, a forestry professor at the University of Toronto.

“If the snow disappears quicker, then that whole volatile situation comes quicker and lasts a little longer,” he said.

Alberta had already been affected by the powerful El Niño that developed last year in the Pacific Ocean and that has affected weather around the world.

Like much of the northwestern United States and Canada, Alberta was drier than normal this winter, although perhaps not as dry as might have been expected given the intensity of El Niño, said Anthony Barnston, the chief forecaster at the International Research Institute for Climate and Society at Columbia University.

In Alberta, though, what may have had a greater impact were drier conditions from late summer into fall last year, a period when the region normally gets a lot of rainfall, Dr. Barnston said. That meant the province was already experiencing a water deficit when El Niño-related dryness set in.

Some experts also say that fire-suppression policies have helped make fires in Canada more destructive.

Like many forest agencies in the United States, those in Canada long had policies to fight every fire, no matter how small they were or how little they threatened people. That approach increases the amount of fuel available so that out-of-control fires can become hugely destructive.

Within the past decade, though, some Canadian agencies have adopted different policies, monitoring fires case by case and letting smaller ones burn, which spares larger trees but consumes much of the fuel. That can leave a mosaic of thinned-out patches that can help halt the spread of larger fires.

“There is an intent to try to let fire play its natural role in particular areas where it’s safe to do so,” said Peter Fuglem, former director of the wildfire program for the British Columbia Forest Service. “But it’s a difficult policy decision on when and where to let fires burn.”

Dr. Flannigan said that letting some fires burn was reasonable for most of northern Canada. But in Alberta it is difficult because “there’s almost no place that doesn’t have significant development.”

That applies to Fort McMurray, where the fire can be seen as another example of how development — in this case related to the region’s rich reserves of oil sands — into what had been largely wilderness makes certain fires so destructive.

In 1951, a few years before modern commercial oil sands development began, Fort McMurray had 926 people. This week, as the flames approached and eventually overran the community, more than 80,000 people fled.


