


Denver Broncos cornerback Aqib Talib was shot in the leg at a nightclub in Dallas, a team spokesman said Sunday.

Patrick Smyth, the spokesman, said that the team had been in contact with Talib, who had sustained an apparently minor gunshot wound.

The police told The Dallas Morning News that Talib had been one of two people shot in an altercation and that both victims were hospitalized with wounds that were not believed to be life-threatening.

Last week, Talib said he was looking forward to traveling to the White House with his teammates on Monday to be honored by President Obama for their Super Bowl victory. The Broncos’ three-day mandatory minicamp starts Tuesday.

Talib, 30, has been named to the Pro Bowl the last three seasons. He has 30 career interceptions since 2008, his rookie year with Tampa Bay.

Marco Estrada took a no-hitter into the eighth inning for the third time in a year, and the visiting Toronto Blue Jays held off the Boston Red Sox, 5-4.

Jose Bautista opened the game with a home run, the first of four Toronto hit over the Green Monster. Edwin Encarnacion added a two-run shot, and Darwin Barney and Russell Martin each had a solo homer.

Last June, Estrada took no-hit bids into the eighth inning in consecutive starts before they were broken up.

Police Investigate Thrown Bottle The Philadelphia police are investigating after a beer bottle landed near Phillies first baseman Ryan Howard during Saturday’s 6-3 loss to Milwaukee. Howard, the 2006 National League Most Valuable Player, has struggled all season. He said he could deal with verbal criticism, “but when you start throwing stuff, that’s when stuff gets personal.”

Around the Majors Evan Longoria homered for the fourth consecutive game, connecting twice, and Tampa Bay won at Minnesota, 7-5. Daniel Murphy homered and drove in three runs, and Jonathan Papelbon pitched out of a jam in the ninth inning to preserve Washington’s 10-9 win at Cincinnati. Albert Pujols hit the 30th home run of his career at Pittsburgh’s PNC Park, the most of any road ballpark, and the Los Angeles Angels beat the Pirates, 5-4.

Anna Nordqvist successfully defended her ShopRite L.P.G.A. Classic title with a seven-under-par 64 final round in breezy conditions for a one-stroke victory in Galloway Township, N.J.

Nordqvist, 28, is the oldest tour winner this year.

The French pair of Caroline Garcia and Kristina Mladenovic secured a rare triumph for the home nation at the French Open, winning the women’s doubles, 6-3, 2-6, 6-4, over Ekaterina Makarova and Elena Vesnina of Russia.

The last French pair to win women’s doubles at Roland Garros was Gail Chanfreau and Francoise Durr, who won in 1970 and then successfully defended their title the next year.

A full-page newspaper ad thanks Ken Starr for his “exceptional care for students” after his removal as Baylor president over the university’s handling of sexual assault complaints against football players.

The ad in The Austin American-Statesman was signed by seven Baylor supporters and urged readers to “commend Judge Starr” at the website ThankKenStarr.com.

Starr, who resigned as chancellor at Baylor last week, has said he did not know about the allegations involving Baylor football players until news media reports first surfaced in 2015 during a player’s trial.

Rain postponed the Nascar Sprint Cup race at Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, Pa. Brad Keselowski will have the pole for Pocono’s first Monday race since 2009.

The 2012 rain-shortened race at Pocono was marred by lightning strikes that killed one fan and injured nine others.


