


One morning in April 2015 at Westchester County Airport, the main runway had to be closed unexpectedly. Steve Ferguson, the airport’s assistant manager and a private pilot, was the only one waiting to take off when an air traffic controller made a surprising announcement over the radio: A bald eagle stood at the end of the runway.

“You guys, I’m waiting down here to take off, are you sure it’s an eagle?” he asked the control tower. “I’m thinking, there’s a bird, but it can’t be an eagle, a bald eagle, it can’t be.”

It was. While many airports are accustomed to confronting birds, which can present a hazard to planes, Westchester airport officials could do little to shoo away the bald eagle, since the species is protected by the federal government.

The eagle flew away on its own after several minutes, and the airport was reopened to arriving and departing flights.

Still, the airport decided it had to do something, since the sighting last year was not a one-time visit. This year, officials got permission from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to harass eagles using air horns and pyrotechnic guns. In the application, the airport said there had been nine separate bald eagle sightings in 2015.

Protected for decades while the species faced extinction, the American bald eagle has made a remarkable turnaround, and there are now an estimated 50,000 eagles in the continental United States, according to Richard Dolbeer, a scientist and adviser to the federal Agriculture Department.

But the eagle’s resurrection has also meant it could make its way to places where it should not be. Like airports.

As a result, the federal government has given Newark Liberty and La Guardia airports permission to repel bald eagles, while many others, including Kennedy Airport, have applications pending. The permits come with an obligation: The airport must make the property less welcoming to wildlife.

That means different things at different airports, but in Westchester, where the airport sits between a forested area and a golf course, a second, taller perimeter fence has been installed. Employees patrol it regularly, making noise and driving off any animals they see. Even so, the airport seems to be irresistible, judging by the number and variety of animals trying to get onto the property.

During a recent tour of the airport grounds, Derek S. Colbert, a wildlife biologist for the Agriculture Department who works there, pointed out where coyotes had dug under the fence and where a turtle had been seen climbing over it. He pointed out mud nests that cliff swallows have built in the rafters of hangars and places where blackbirds flock, in the grass, and sometimes inside the airplanes parked on a ramp.

“We’re having a very large problem with starlings aggressively nesting in the tails of aircraft,” Mr. Colbert said.

Last year, the airport recorded 43 “wildlife strikes,” most involving planes hitting small birds. Collisions can damage an airplane’s body, wings, engines, landing gear or windshield.

An airport camera captured a compelling scene in March: A private jet was racing down the runway when a coyote crossed directly in front of it just as the plane took off.

The bald eagles are surprising newcomers. Another was spotted on a runway in April by Luc Piderman, the airport’s operations supervisor, who, armed with the newly obtained authorization to harass it, fired a noise-making gun. “It just soared,” he said. “It’s a huge bird.”

As bald eagles have become more common at airports, the potential for collisions has also increased. This year, four people aboard a small plane in Alaska were killed when it crashed after hitting a bald eagle. The bird strike is believed to have been a contributing factor.

“We’re finding them nesting around airports, in cities, in buildings and lots of places where we never would have thought,” Mr. Dolbeer said.

The arrival of bald eagles at the airport in Westchester represents an environmental success story. They were once threatened by the use throughout the country of the pesticide DDT, which made the shells of eagles’ eggs too thin to sustain baby chicks; the chemical is now banned.

Because of their size, and their ability to drop from the sky without warning, eagles and other large birds can be dangerous to aircraft.

In 2014, a JetBlue Airbus A320 took off from Westchester bound for West Palm Beach, Fla. The plane hit a herring gull and the jetliner was forced to make an emergency landing at J.F.K., where workers found pieces of the gull and a gaping hole in the nose of the airplane.

The most famous plane-versus-bird encounter is probably the Miracle on the Hudson, when a US Airways jetliner landed in the river after it struck several geese, disabling its engines. “The episode forced everybody to realize the risks of wildlife on airports,” said Peter Scherrer, the Westchester airport manager. “That’s why you have wildlife officers on airports now.”

Though the job of harassing bald eagles — perhaps America’s most beloved bird — seems an unpleasant assignment, Mr. Colbert says he sees the bigger picture.

“We are in this field because we love wildlife and we want to see them thrive, but there are conflicts occurring,” he said. It is time, he added, “to teach them that this is not the place to be hanging out.”


