


For three decades, the burlesque performance expert Jo Weldon has studied why people wear clothes made of leopard patterns. She has concluded that in the last few centuries spotted-cat motifs have been used to attract attention and exude power, ferocity, independence, sophistication, sensuality and sometimes outright debauchery.

The underlying message is, she said, “I will be seen, and I am not prey.”

Ms. Weldon will discuss her research in a lecture on May 17 at the Morbid Anatomy Museum in Brooklyn, where an exhibition featuring selections from her collection of leopard-print objects will be on view from May 17 to 30. She blogs at historyofleopardprint.com, and is finishing a book on the subject.

At moments in her scholarly pursuit, she said, she’s “gone way too far” and found herself practically unable to tear herself away from pinning down particular facts.

One might even consider her, well, dogged.

She has learned to identify leopard patterns, which are often confused with those of ocelots, jaguars and cheetahs. She has interviewed people wearing the patterns; sometimes, she said, they had not understood their feelings of empowerment until they heard about the history and significance of their clothes. She has studied how leopard skins and printed versions of the pelts have appealed to Egyptian queens, Jacqueline Kennedy, the pinup model Bettie Page and the performers Eartha Kitt, Carmen Miranda, Ann-Margret and Dolores del Río.

Famous men have been drawn to the patterns, too, including the fashion designers Oleg Cassini and Christian Dior and the underwear innovator Frederick Mellinger, who founded Frederick’s of Hollywood.

Napoleon’s troops trimmed their helmets and saddle covers in leopard skin. Mobutu Sese Seko, the longtime dictator of Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo), had a signature leopard-skin hat. Circus strongmen and actors playing Tarzan or cave dwellers have typically sported skimpy leopard garments. For her portrayal of Mrs. Robinson in “The Graduate,” Anne Bancroft wore leopard print lingerie as she seduced her daughter’s boyfriend.

The movie’s recurring use of the pattern, Ms. Weldon said, “came to emblemize the bad sexualized mother.”

She attributes her own interest in the subject partly to her zodiac sign (Leo), the year of her birth (1962, a year of the tiger) and the pumas native to her home state, Colorado. As a child she was fascinated with Ms. Kitt playing Catwoman, and Ms. Weldon’s teenage years were spent among punk rockers with tastes for leopard clothing. For her book and exhibition, she has acquired vintage outfits, images of people wearing leopard patterns and advertisements and sewing patterns for the clothes.

She also owns a circular fragment of an actual leopard pelt, cut from a coat designed by Pauline Trigère; at one point, she was told, the piece was destined to cover a bar stool cushion. Ms. Weldon brings it to lectures, she said, so that audience members can pay their respects to a noble predator probably killed so that a human could be wrapped in its pelt. She suggests that they support foundations like Panthera, which protect wildcats and their habitats.

The Manhattan physician Robert Abbe spent his vacations in the 1920s setting up the Museum of Stone Age Antiquities near his sprawling shingled summer home in Bar Harbor, Me. He died in 1928, just before his displays opened at the building, a tile-roofed octagonal structure along a hiking trail in nearby Acadia National Park. The Abbe Museum, as it is now known, has expanded his collection of stone and bone tools and pottery shards with artifacts from the region’s American Indian tribes, collectively known as the Wabanaki. On Sunday, a survey of Wabanaki implements, household goods, clothing and art forms opens at the museum’s main building, now in Bar Harbor, in time for the centennial of Acadia National Park, where Dr. Abbe’s original octagon has been preserved.

The new exhibition, “People of the First Light,” will include birch bark boxes and canoes; beaded epaulets and moccasins; silver coin brooches, birch root clubs, rawhide snowshoes, stone adzes and sweetgrass baskets. One display case will be devoted to early-20th-century photographs, postcards and other ephemera from Lucy Nicolar, a Maine native and Penobscot tribe member who was a singer, vaudeville star and civil rights activist.

Part of the museum’s collection came from the Boston shipping heiress Mary Cabot Wheelwright. She also had a home near Santa Fe, N.M., and founded what is now the Wheelwright Museum of the American Indian there. The Abbe Museum is also showing pieces that the linguist Frank T. Siebert acquired from tribe members in Maine. Mr. Siebert, who died in 1998, labored for decades to create a dictionary of the Penobscot language, which scholars are completing under the auspices of the Maine Folklife Center and the Penobscot Nation Cultural and Historic Preservation Department.

In 2011, Mr. Siebert’s heirs dispersed much of his collection, which had been on view at institutions including the Abbe Museum, through Skinner auction house in Boston. Maine museums acquired some of the lots. A beaded pointy cap, which sold for $35,550, is now at the Maine State Museum in Augusta, along with Mr. Siebert’s wampum necklace, which had belonged to a Penobscot basket maker named Sylvia Stanislaus. The Abbe Museum’s purchases included a medal in the shape of Maine’s outline; in 1936, the state’s governor gave it to Mrs. Stanislaus to celebrate her centennial.

A new book, “Creating Acadia National Park: The Biography of George Bucknam Dorr,” by the historian Ronald H. Epp, explains how Dr. Abbe collaborated with the park’s founder, the Boston textile heir George Dorr, to create the trailside museum. Dr. Abbe had been inspired after seeing American Indian stone tools in a Bar Harbor storefront window. “I was filled with a desire to possess and study them,” he later recalled. The philanthropic effort briefly revitalized his health, Mr. Epp writes; Dr. Abbe, who died of bone marrow failure, had been an early advocate of radiation treatments for cancer and was most likely overexposed to radioactive toxins.


