


Earlier this month, Julie Mathieu and Muriel Tallandier opened a physical extension of their bimonthly French pastry magazine, Fou de Pâtisserie: a new, namesake sliver of a shop on the pedestrian rue Montorgueil, where nothing is made on site — the duo has tapped leading chefs all around the city to deliver their best sweets daily. As inconceivable as it may seem that a pastry-dense city like Paris wouldn’t already have its own concept store, Fou de Pâtisserie boutique is effectively an industry first.

“These chefs are used to having their pastries distributed in their own boutiques, at stands or, in some cases, delivered to restaurants, but none are distributed by a third party,” explains Tallandier. “Getting them to lend their artistic image and give up control wasn’t easy.”

Tallandier and Mathieu have brought on board six resident chefs — Cyril Lignac, Christophe Adam of L’Éclair de Génie, Philippe Conticini, Hugues Pouget of Hugo & Victor, Jonathon Blot of Acide and Olivier Haustraete of Boulangerie Bo — and a handful of guest stars like Jacques Genin, Gilles Marchal and the inimitable Pierre Hermé. That they deliver fresh pastries, cakes, chocolates and candies daily is a testament to the impact Tallandier and Mathieu have made on the industry, and the close relationships they’ve built with the country’s top chefs since launching the magazine in 2013.

For some of the participating chefs, the shop is an opportunity to broaden their reach. Haustraete’s pastries, for example, have until now only been available at his 12th Arrondissement bakery — practically a fringe neighborhood for the Left Bank contingent. Which means his grapefruit-pistachio tartelette, available at Fou de Pâtisserie at the moment, has been elusive for most. “Few Parisians will cross town or make multiple stops to pick up pastries. Our shop is central and makes the good stuff easier to access,” Mathieu says.

The current selection features a signature recipe and a limited-edition creation from each chef, which may vary from a slight tweak (like Christophe Adam’s salted caramel éclair with different toppings) to an entirely new concoction. There’s Philippe Conticini’s Phil’goût, a decadent, puffed rice chocolate cake with a hazelnut crust and a mixed milk- and dark-chocolate top layer; and weekend-only goodies like Gilles Marchal’s célèbre Madeleines. Pop-up events with a narrow focus, like Japanese chefs in Paris, will be part of the shop’s programming in the coming months — to regularly represent the latest and greatest in the world of pastry.


