


PHILADELPHIA — David Wright has made a living hitting in Citizens Bank Park.

Wright has nearly a .300 batting average in the stadium, which opened in 2004, the same year Wright made his major league debut. He also has 22 home runs there, the most of any visiting ballplayer in the stadium’s history, and the most Wright has hit on the road against any team during his 12-year career.

One of his most thrilling shots against the Phillies came in August in his first at-bat after he returned from four months on the disabled list.

Wright continued his hot hand here Monday when he launched a no-doubt shot to deep right field in the first inning for his first home run and R.B.I. this season. For good measure, he hit another shot in the ninth to notch his first multi-homer game in three years.

Wright’s home runs set the tone for the game, which the Mets won, 5-2. It was their fourth victory in five games, after they lost five of seven to start the season.

“It’s a good place to hit certainly, but maybe I just play here a lot,” Wright said after the game.

The barrage was an affirmation of Manager Terry Collins’s faith in Wright, the team’s captain. Collins said he planned to start Wright in all three games this week in Philadelphia as a way of seeing how Wright’s balky back reacts to the workload.

A year ago, Wright was found to have spinal stenosis, a narrowing of the canal in the spinal cord that can lead to chronic stiffness and pain. The condition is unpredictable, so Wright often does not know whether he can play until the morning of a game.

He has lengthened his pregame warm-up routine to compensate, and Collins plans to sit him on day games after night games.

Wright did not play Sunday, so Collins was comfortable returning him to the lineup. Wright also made a nifty play in the field in the fourth when a slow roller got past pitcher Noah Syndergaard. Wright scooped up the ball in front of shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera and threw out Phillies left fielder David Lough.

For the first five innings, Syndergaard had nothing but Wright’s home run as a cushion.

But, as in his first two starts this season, Syndergaard effectively mixed his slider with his fastball to keep batters off balance. On Monday, he added a curve ball.

Entering the day, Syndergaard’s average fastball velocity of 98.1 miles per hour led the majors, according to FanGraphs. Against the Phillies, several of Syndergaard’s fastballs topped 100 m.p.h.

The Mets have welcomed Syndergaard’s emergence. Matt Harvey has pitched unevenly, and Jacob deGrom has been dealing with back stiffness and attending to the birth of his first child. Steven Matz was hit hard in his first start.

For much of the game, Syndergaard looked like the team’s ace. After striking out nine and 12 in his first two starts, he kept the tally going against the Phillies, fanning eight in seven innings.

The Phillies scored their only run off Syndergaard in the third inning, on a double by Freddy Galvis, who stole third base and scored on a single by Odubel Herrera.

The Mets bats reawoke in the sixth, when Yoenis Cespedes hit a line drive down the right-field line for a triple off Phillies starter Jerad Eickoff. Cespedes scored when Lucas Duda hit a double that tailed away from Lough in left.

Syndergaard seemed energized by the run support. In the bottom of the sixth, he struck out Galvis and Herrera. After giving up a single to Maikel Franco, who advanced on a wild pitch, Syndergaard walked Ryan Howard. But Syndergaard struck out Cameron Rupp on a 100-m.p.h. fastball to end the threat.

“What I felt good about tonight was the ability to go out there and be quick toward home plate and also deliver a quality pitch,” Syndergaard said.

With a low pitch count — 79 pitches through six innings — Collins let Syndergaard bat in the top of the seventh. He walked, but right fielder Curtis Granderson and Wright struck out to end the inning.

In the eighth inning, though, Duda hit his first home run of the season to push the lead to 3-1. Neil Walker followed with another solo homer, leading the many Mets fans along the third-base line to stand and cheer. Some of the Phillies fans among them headed for the exit.


