


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

I hope you’re all having meaningful Memorial Days. I’m currently dedicating my life to stopping ants from entering my kitchen, and it’s not going well. Between that and finishing up “Lady Dynamite,” I really have my hands full.

I’ve also been thinking a lot about the “average” show. If you lined up every one, from best to worst, who’d be in the middle? Is there a caliber of show that occurs most often? There’s without a doubt more excellent television than ever before. But it’s not as if we somehow stopped making bad TV — certainly the number of crummy shows is also higher than it’s ever been. So has the quality of the “average” series changed in the last 10 years? How about the last 20? 30? I don’t know that there are good answers to these, but it’s fun to think about. Just imagining a spreadsheet of TV-goodness data brings me a little thrill.

Plenty to watch this week, and lots to think about. Let me know if you have a secret TV spreadsheet: watching@nytimes.com. See you Friday. Short week!

This eight-hour mini-series, which starts Monday night and will run simultaneously on History, Lifetime and A&E, is particularly worth watching if you have never seen the 1977 original mini-series. Either way, this adaptation of Alex Haley’s seminal book is affecting. Deep performances, particularly from Anika Noni Rose as Kunta Kinte’s daughter, Kizzy, and strong production values go a long way, but there are a few moments that feel a little stilted, particularly toward the end. (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9 p.m., History, Lifetime, A&E, LMN)

Maybe, just maybe, there might still be legs to the prime-time variety show. At least that’s NBC’s hope with this latest attempt, “Maya and Marty,” starring Maya Rudolph and Martin Short, airing Tuesday. If not them, who? (Though that’s what people said about Rudolph’s one-off variety show in 2014 and Neil Patrick Harris’s failed series this fall. We’ve been wrong before.) All the other shows I mention in this newsletter are shows I’ve watched, but “Maya and Marty” hasn’t taped yet, so I can’t vouch for it. What I can vouch for, though, is my own curiosity and my general enthusiasm for Rudolph and Short as performers. (Tuesdays, 10 p.m., NBC)

Aboriginal stories finally get center stage in this supernatural — and superhero — drama. This Australian coproduction with Sundance TV is set in the “near future” and centers on the conflict between human society and Hairies, a “subhuman” group forced to live in subjugation. Would you believe an unlikely candidate suddenly finds an element of magic within himself? Yeah, yeah, there are some familiar narrative moves, but “Cleverman” draws on Aboriginal mythology and Australian social strife in ways that are new and interesting. If you like shows like “Black Mirror,” “Mr. Robot,” “Humans” or even “Daredevil,” “Cleverman” is for you. (Wednesdays, 10 p.m., Sundance)

Netflix’s “Peaky Blinders” is back Tuesday for its third season. (And it was recently renewed for two more seasons.) Rejoice! And then make like Cillian Murphy and get rid of your sideburns. (Watch Seasons 1 and 2 on Netflix)

Ian McKellen and Anthony Hopkins star in Starz’s version of the famous play “The Dresser,” about a demanding actor and his devoted dresser, backstage during a World War II-era production of “King Lear.” It’s beautifully done, but you have to really be in the mood for a melancholy highbrow British period movie. (Monday, 9 p.m., Starz; rent the 1983 Academy Award-nominated version, starring Albert Finney and Tom Courtenay on iTunes and Amazon)

“Reply All” is about the Internet and web culture, and it’s a show I enjoy tremendously but isn’t really connected to TV in any way.

However, its most recent episodes — “On the Inside,” “On the Inside Part II,” and “On the Inside Part III” — are about a convicted murderer who maintains his innocence. If you’re a fan of “The Jinx,” “Making a Murderer” or “Serial,” give it a whirl. The fourth and final installment in the story comes out June 8, so pace yourself.

T. J. Miller plays the gnarly Erlich on “Silicon Valley,” and in this season’s premiere he hurled a stream of insults at Stephen Tobolowsky’s Jack. Turns out there was a lot more where those came from. This four-minute supercut of his barbs is glorious, even if you’ve never watched the show.


