


BERLIN — The German government is negotiating with Jewish representatives to ensure that the thousands of poorest and weakest Holocaust survivors worldwide receive the intensive care they need to live out their final years at home.

The German Finance Ministry and the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany continue to hold regular talks but the effort to reach an agreement has taken on a new sense of urgency, because the youngest of those needing full-time care are already in their 80s — and many others are over 100 years old.

With an estimated 100,000 Holocaust victims living in the United States, roughly a fifth of survivors worldwide, their plight has raised concern in Congress, and on Thursday representatives introduced a resolution calling on the German government to do more.

Representatives Ted Deutch, a Democrat, and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Republican, both from Florida, submitted the resolution to the House asking Germany to “recognize the imperative of immediately and fully funding victims’ medical, mental health, and long-term care needs and to do so with full transparency and accountability to ensure all funds for Holocaust victims.” A companion resolution was introduced in the Senate.

The German Finance Ministry did not respond to repeated requests for comment.

The Claims Conference cares for 55,000 survivors in dozens of countries around the world through compensation and reparations programs financed by the German government that began more than 60 years ago.

But as they age, Holocaust survivors face increasing special-care needs, linked to the persecution they suffered and the isolation resulting from the loss of family members in the Holocaust.

The current round of talks, which opened in January and is scheduled to end by June, is trying to find a way to meet those needs, said Greg Schneider, the executive vice president of the Claims Conference.

The German government currently provides compensation for survivors to be cared for in their homes for up to 25 hours per week, based on an assessment of an individual’s need.

In many cases, however, that is not enough, leaving mentally and physically frail or forgetful survivors without anyone to look after them over the weekend, or throughout the night.

A central element of the negotiations is to move away from weekly caps on hours and to create a more flexible system.

German officials have cautioned that for such a plan to be effective, they need to assess what needs are not being met and to structure a program based on a budget that would pay for in-home care of the neediest cases over the next five to seven years.

Among the most acute cases are those who suffer from a loss of memory compounded by the emotional triggers that affect many victims.

As their memories fail, they often recall their younger lives, when they may have been forced from their homes, crowded into cattle cars and ripped from their parents, whom in most cases they would never see again.

“When you are a Holocaust survivor and regress, what you are going back to is darkest point of human history,” Mr. Schneider said.

He gave the example of a woman in the program with dementia who requires full-time care. Although she still lives with her husband, who also survived the Holocaust, every time he tries to leave their home she starts to scream, “Don’t go! They will take you away, they will get you!”

“She is living in a world where the Nazis are still there,” Mr. Schneider said.

In response to a congressional letter written to Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble in December, Jens Spahn, a deputy minister who is leading the negotiations on behalf of the German government, said his country recognized that current levels of care were “insufficient for those in need of intensive long-term care.”

“Some survivors require more extensive care, in some cases full-time care,” Mr. Spahn wrote in the letter.

Germany has made payments worth more than 73.4 billion euros, about $83 billion, in reparations and compensation, mostly to Jewish victims of the Nazis. The assistance to aging survivors is only a small part of these contributions.

“Many of my constituents are in their 80s, 90s, even 100, and our focus is ensuring that their needs can be provided for,” Mr. Deutch said.

“I’ve been trying to help survivors since coming to Congress six years ago,” he said. “While we acknowledge that what is being done by the Germans is incredibly generous, survivors’ needs are not being met.”


