


“Fear is a wound to your heart,” says M. Ellen Dash, who founded a national swim school for adults afraid of the water. Don’t bother with the mechanics of freestyle or backstroke until you’ve dealt with the panic. Start slow. “No scrambling, no hurry, no tension, no worry,” Dash says. Walk around in the shallow end of a pool. Keep your mind on the present; notice the sensation of liquid against skin. Allow yourself to feel in control. “Don’t manage your fear,” Dash says. “Heal it.”

Some 19.2 million American adults suffer from phobias (twice as many women as men). Fear of water is among the more common. If you can, talk about your anxiety. In the first hours of class, Dash’s students explain the root of their water aversion. For some, it stems from a traumatic experience; for others, it’s a learned trait. Of the 5,000 adults who have been through Dash’s program, some 90 percent have at least one parent who was afraid of water. Unlearn the terror before you pass it along.

You won’t want to initially, but try putting your face underwater. Stand in the pool, holding the edge with one hand and pinching your nose with your other. Dip your face in quickly. Repeat until you’re no longer clenching your jaw, until you can let go of your nostrils and allow them to fill with water. Celebrate: You’ve just passed a major milestone.

It might take days or even years, but eventually you will need to go into the deep end, where your feet don’t touch the bottom. The goal — what Dash considers to be the mastery of aquaphobia — is to float peacefully in deep water for at least five minutes, 10 feet from a wall or support. First, sit at the edge, dangling your legs over. Then slide in, holding on to the pool’s lip. Trust this medium of hydrogen-­and-­oxygen-­based molecules to buoy you up. You may be an air-­breathing land animal, yet your body is a watery one. A newborn baby is about 68 percent water. People dehydrate as they age and fatten, but even an adult woman who is 30 percent fat will be more than 50 percent water. Be comforted by that — and push off from the edge. “See,” Dash says, “you are not sinking!”


