


Though best known as a top makeup artist and the organic beauty mogul behind RMS Beauty, Rose-Marie Swift has a semisecret side hobby: astrological readings. “The thing is, I’m an Aquarian — Aquarians rule astrology,” she explained on a recent rainy day in her Union Square home. Her fascination with celestial charts began when she was 15: “I hated my stepfather and wanted to know the reason he acted the way he acted. I went, ‘Let’s look up Scorpios, man’” — and she discovered “The Only Astrology Book You’ll Ever Need.” Today, she gives one-hour readings to clients and friends in the fashion and beauty industry, including Linda Rodin, who stopped by for a reading that afternoon.

“Usually people come to me when there’s a drama that they can’t answer,” said Swift, who believes astrology can explain almost everything. “I’m an Aquarian; therefore, I’m a future thinker,” ergo her beauty line. “My rising sign is Libra, which rules the beauty industry,” she said. “My moon is Sagittarius, so I’m a truth seeker — this is why I mouth off; my Mars in Aries makes me feisty.”

Rodin is a Pisces (hence her “incredible sense of style”) but, according to Swift, has Mercury (the planet that rules communication, intellect and awareness) in Aquarius. Meaning, “she’s exactly like me in the way she speaks and opens up.” And it’s true: The two fling compliments at one another like badminton players backhanding a birdie — which is to say, very fast, frequently and forcefully.

In the same way that aversion led Swift to astrology, it also introduced her to alternative beauty sources. “I wouldn’t touch anything he touched,” Swift said of her stepfather. “So I wouldn’t use the soap. When my mom let me wear eyeliner, I’d take it off with olive oil, and later coconut oil. I’ve never used that mainstream stuff.” Given the glut of organic and clean beauty products on the market now, Swift is “trying to make it as easy as I can on them,” she said, referring to her clients, “so they don’t have to live the way I do in my head.” Below, she shares with T her easy wellness tips for a cleaner lifestyle.

“Your skin is a mirror to your gut. The first thing I tell everyone is probiotics, probiotics, probiotics. I take some vitamins too, like astaxanthin and turmeric. I’ll do homeopathy drops for different organs, too — one for the liver or the lymphatic system — and take digestive enzymes.”

“Don’t be affected by marketing, product claims and brand names: Just get cleaner makeup. There are a lot of brands out there now that don’t have all those chemicals. EWG’s Skin Deep Cosmetic Database has a list of safer sunscreens and toxicities of brands. (The people behind it are chemists and scientists.) There’s also a cosmetic app called Think Dirty.”

“The rebounder is really good for the body,” she said, referring to the mini trampoline shown above. “It gets the whole lymphatic system going and oxygenated. I do it for like five minutes, 10 minutes. It stimulates the organs to release toxins and doesn’t hurt your body.”

“I never eat late. The later you eat, the harder it is on your liver. I usually eat at 5:30 or 6. Today my diet is 60 to 70 percent raw and the rest cooked. I don’t do meat — I haven’t eaten it in over 30 years.” She said about her vegetarian diet: “It’s the most anti-aging thing you could imagine; it helps the skin.”

“Every morning I do a juice or smoothie. I have a Vitamix and a Green Star Juicer. Sometimes I focus on vegetables or fruit, depending on the day, but everything’s always organic.”

1 banana 1 handful of strawberries or blueberries 1 handful of sunflower sprouts A 2-3 inch piece of cucumber 1 floret of cauliflower 1 ½ cups water ½ tablespoon chia seeds 1 tablespoon HealthForce Vitamineral Green 1 tablespoon HealthForce Greener Grasses

1. Add all the ingredients to the blender and mix until creamy.


