


SEATTLE — It was major local news when the new City Council was seated here in January with a 5-to-4 majority of women.

It was even bigger news last week, when that new majority worked together for the first time — rejecting, in a 5-to-4 decision along gender lines, a land-use deal that would have paved the way for a sports arena intended to help lure major league professional basketball back to Seattle.

The resulting backlash was ugly, and swift.

In hundreds of email messages and social media posts, the female Council members were attacked by people — practically all apparently men — who said they lacked intelligence and an understanding of the importance of sports because they are women. One Twitter poster simply used a four-letter graphic insult to define them. Another man, in a signed email, suggested they should all kill themselves and “rot in hell.” Other critics, in less violent but equally demeaning terms, addressed them as “ladies,” who should “go back to the kitchen.”

In a city where liberal views are all but assumed and sports passions run deep, the attacks quickly became as big an issue — or at least just as politically complicated — as the arena plan itself.

Mayor Ed Murray, who supported the arena proposal, and Chris Hansen, the businessman who had been seeking the deal, both gave an unsolicited defense of the five women at a news conference on Wednesday — two days after the vote. But that, in turn, caused more controversy, with some people resenting the appearance that women under attack had needed men to stand up for them.

On Friday, the Council member who cast the decisive arena vote, Lorena González — and who also received the brunt of the hate mail — said in her first interview since the storm erupted that she appreciated Mr. Murray’s and Mr. Hansen’s support and believed it honorable, but in all due respect, she said, it was also not necessary.

Women were a majority on the nine-member City Council through most of the 1990s, but since then until this year, as through most of the city’s political history, they were a minority voice.

“When we are dealing with sexism, we have to understand that we need to give women opportunity to lead and to stand on their own two feet because that’s what we do every day, and while I appreciate the intentions to defend us, I would have certainly appreciated some consultation before the statements were made,” said Ms. González, who before her election last year worked as a civil rights lawyer for a decade in Seattle, defending women in workplace sexual harassment cases.

“The fact that it was five women who tipped the vote to prevent this land use action from occurring, I think, just scratched the surface of what we know is a still unfortunately very, very strong sentiment of sexism out there,” she said in a telephone interview. “My hope is that the men who are engaging in this vitriolic behavior will understand that it needs to end.”

The women on the Council, in their comments before the vote, all said that financial arguments had swayed them. They said that giving over city resources for the project without any promise that a National Basketball Association team would come — and with recent comments by league officials that no new franchise was likely — made the arena terms questionable, and that another location, already owned by the city, should be considered.

Seattle is home to the Seahawks of the National Football League and the Mariners of Major League Baseball, but it has not had an N.B.A. team since 2008, when the Supersonics left town for Oklahoma City to become the Thunder.

Seattle, by various measures — not least that fans of the Seahawks can trigger with their roars and stomping feet actual small earthquakes in the area around that team’s football stadium — is a sports-crazed town. And being without an N.B.A. franchise for years has also been a blow to Seattle’s image as a major city.

But Ms. González, who said that at least one of the emails to her had been referred to the Seattle police for investigation, said the arena vote had also exposed other fault lines.

“This particular issue will ultimately calm down, at least for a little bit,” Ms. González said, “but I think the bigger question is: ‘What does it say about us as a city?’ ”


