


Peter Parker, a.k.a. Spider-Man, grew up in Queens, and several superheroes have lived in Manhattan, including Captain America, a son of the Lower East Side. But this Saturday and Sunday, Brooklyn will pack the most kapow of any borough, producing dozens of its own young challengers, ready to vanquish evil and soar to great heights (at least in their imaginations).

These transformative powers will come from the Brooklyn Children’s Museum, whose Superhero Weekend invites small visitors to exercise their creativity and learn some science, too.

“We have this wonderful live collection,” said Hana Elwell, the museum’s director of exhibits and interpretation, referring to the animals housed there. Some, she pointed out, have adaptations that might be considered superpowers if exhibited by a human.

Spike Jeremy, for instance, a bearded dragon, belongs to a species that can change color and shed its skin. Isis, a python, possesses extraordinary strength, “and then we’ll use an Eastern box turtle to demonstrate the power of camouflage,” Ms. Elwell added. Patches, the turtle, can draw in her legs and head, making her indistinguishable from a rock.

Children can handle these reptiles, as well as the sea stars, urchins and crabs in “Aquaman’s Touch Tank,” marine species that all have the ability to regenerate body parts. They can meet a tarantula during “Spider-Man Science!,” a workshop in which they’ll also build string webs. And young fans of Superman may be inspired by “Kryptonite and Other Radical Rocks,” a program that includes fluorescent geological specimens like uranium. (This sample is protectively encased.)

“We’ll talk about how igneous minerals are born from volcanic eruptions — kind of the superpowers of rocks,” Ms. Elwell said.

Other programs will emphasize the fantasy world of superheroes — and superheroines. The museum will provide fabric, trimming and glitter for creating capes, and materials for masks, badges, headbands and crowns. Once appropriately attired, little crusaders can take part in “Superdrama,” a workshop to practice superhero moves. “We’ll probably hold up cards with words like ‘stomp’ and ‘bam’ and ‘wham,” Ms. Elwell said.

As for flying, it will be practiced safely — and vicariously — through “Up, Up and Away,” a workshop to make small parachutes from tissue paper and paper cups. (Tiny plastic bears will do the sky-diving.)

The weekend will also emphasize “the power to just give your all in an everyday way,” Ms. Elwell said. That means honoring Sunday’s biggest superhero: Dad.

(From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400. Details and schedule: brooklynkids.org.)


