


Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.

1. All this current talk about putting a black woman on US currency is just another distraction from the socioeconomic consequences of wealth skewed by racism.

Literally, black people were money before. During slavery times, when, stolen from ourselves, our bodies not only manufactured wealth for others, they were as good as gold for all debts public and private.

Black faces on US currency... For me, the answer is “no thank you,” at least until that fundamental truth is addressed and atoned.

— JAM in Linden, N.J., reacting to an article about Harriet Tubman, the former slave turned abolitionist and Union Army spy, replacing President Andrew Jackson on the $20 bill.

2. Harriet Tubman is a great choice. She used ingenuity and grit to fight an evil system and won most of the time. That’s what America is all about.

— Doug H. in Lithonia, Ga.

3. Purple Rain was the first album my immigrant parents bought for me. With their limited English, neither they nor I knew that it was wholly inappropriate for an 8 yr. old. But that’s a testament to how amazing the music was — you didn’t need a grasp of the English language to understand it. Still one of my all time favorite albums.

As a girl from Minnesota, I am so proud that his genius and influence is ours to claim.

— LeoPeters in Michigan, reacting to an article about the musician Prince’s death Thursday.

4. I was struck by the huge diversity of the Prince fans ducking and dodging all around me. Young, old, black, white, Asian, Latino, all dressed to impress in a colorful array of Prince’s own flamboyance, they’d paid top dollar to experience Prince, alone with his piano, flash his musical brilliance in ever changing hues.

— Shar in Atlanta, who wrote of her experience in a traffic jam outside what would be Prince’s final concert at the Fox Theater there on April 14.

This comment received more than 200 reader recommendations.

5. Apology is needed without question, honoring every enslaved person — since their names are known — would be good. Endow the scholarships, or buildings, or rooms, etc. with their names. Scholarships for descendants are a great idea, along with Georgetown providing assistance to black early-education and high school students to ensure they have a good start, one which the enslaved never had.

And Georgetown must make this history part of its lessons and legacy — when all students join the institution and benefit from the education, facilities, history and prestige, they understand upon whose backs it was built.

— Shaun in Passaic, N.J., reacting to an article about whether Georgetown University owes a debt to the descendants of 272 slaves sold by the Jesuit priests who ran the school in 1838 to pay off debt and secure the school’s future.

6. Imagine a place so terrible, so absolutely destructive that you have no better option than to put your child in a tiny boat and travel across an entire sea in an attempt at escape. We’re so completely isolated from the true terror in this world that we can’t even relate to that level of devastation.

— Summar Kawas on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about Pulitzer Prize-winning photos of the migrant crisis in Europe.

7. When Trump came on the scene, finally I said, a breath of fresh air. A nationalistic, “American First” Republican, who is also a moderate on the social issues. So I re-registered as a Republican last summer and have been a vocal supporter of Trump on social media.

I don’t know what’s going to happen in the next few months in this crazy crazy election year. But for today at least, I was proud to be an American. A citizen of NY who had a chance to vote for a candidate that I passionately believe in and support.

And that hasn’t happened for me in 30 years.

— Mathew Wood in New York, reacting to an article that detailed scenes from New York State’s presidential primary in the five boroughs of New York City.

8. I’m an engineer, and this happens all the time at work. For example, I often overhear conversations between one man and one woman in my office, and he consistently interrupts her, mansplains every idea she presents, and talks endlessly about ideas that aren’t relevant. I sometimes just want to yell across the room, “STOP INTERRUPTING HER!”

It’s awesome that I have a place at the table and that people mostly respect my ideas, but my place at the table and my good ideas don’t automatically give me a voice. I have to actively work to make my voice heard.

— Bethany in Chicago, reacting to an Op-Ed essay that sought a scientific reason for some men’s tendency toward pedantic overexplanation.

This comment received more than 760 reader recommendations.

9. Years ago when we flew my husband would throw a tantrum if he couldn’t have the aisle seat, even though I was taller and had longer legs. I divorced him. Taken care of.

— Ellen D. Murphy on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about travelers who avoid the middle seat on airplanes at all costs.

This comment received 299 likes.

10. I have been riding bicycles for over 60 years, sometimes in challenging events, and I am deeply saddened. Perhaps pro cycling could model itself after [World Wrestling Entertainment] so that there is no doubt of the charade being played upon its fans and other members of the public.

— CJ13 of California, reacting to an article about tiny motors that some athletes have attached to their bicycles to gain an unfair advantage in cycling races.


