


The challenges facing the long-struggling Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn seemed to mount on Friday, when the New York City Education Department said an investigation found that its principal and two other administrators had failed to report an allegation of sexual harassment and a suspicion that students had stolen and used a department credit card.

It was not clear what penalties the principal, Michael Wiltshire, who said this week that he was considering leaving his position after less than two years, would face as a result of the findings. The department said only that the superintendent overseeing the school would decide on the penalty. But the investigation appeared to be another blow to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s effort to revive Boys and Girls, which has deep roots in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood but a history of low performance.

The New York Post reported on Friday that the department found that Dr. Wiltshire had failed to report an alleged gang rape of a female student in a locker room. But on Friday afternoon, the mother of the student who made the sexual harassment allegation, speaking on the condition of anonymity to protect her and her daughter’s privacy, said that no rape had occurred and that her daughter had received a verbal threat, by a young man attending a different high school who was on the Boys and Girls campus. On Friday evening, The Post published an update saying the girl told administrators only that she had been threatened.

The mother said her daughter told her about the threat on the night it occurred, and the next day they met with two assistant principals and a guidance counselor. A few days later, they met with the principal, and her daughter gave a written statement. The mother said the boy was banned from Boys and Girls. She said that she was satisfied with the school’s response and that, since it was only a verbal threat, she did not want to report the episode to the police.

The department would not comment on the specifics of the allegation, other than to say that one student was accused of harassing another. The department said Dr. Wiltshire and the other administrators did not follow mandated reporting procedures, which require submitting a report through the department’s Online Occurrence Reporting System within 24 hours as well as reporting allegations of school-related criminal activity to the school safety agent.

Dr. Wiltshire did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment.

The department installed Dr. Wiltshire at Boys and Girls in late 2014 while allowing him to remain in charge of the selective school where he was already principal, Medgar Evers College Preparatory High School. Some at Boys and Girls have complained that Dr. Wiltshire’s attention has been divided and that he has at times appeared to be more loyal to Medgar Evers than to Boys and Girls.


