


Many people miss Oliver Sacks, the neurologist, best-selling author and philosopher of the mind who died of cancer last August at 82.

And some of them — readers, friends, colleagues and former patients — gathered Wednesday night at the Skirball Center at New York University for a celebration of his life and work.

The event, part of the World Science Festival, which Dr. Sacks had participated in over the years, included remarks by Temple Grandin, the central character in Dr. Sacks’s book “An Anthropologist on Mars;” the physicist Brian Greene; and the composer Tobias Picker.

The participants delivered brief reminiscences as they perched on stools, behind a gauzy scrim and against a backdrop of projected images. One scene depicted puffy white clouds against a sky of robin’s egg blue; another was described in the script for the show as “brilliant zigzags draining color that Oliver speaks of, that then become something else, gradually, until we realize we’re looking at the neural network of a brain.”

Dance and song punctuated the speeches during the show, which the festival produced in partnership with the Oliver Sacks Foundation.

Eric Jordan, a singer who had had a stroke, performed an operatic rendering of Dr. Sacks’s best-selling book “The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat,” and Dr. Sacks appeared on film reading excerpts from his 2015 memoir, “On the Move: A Life.”

The elaborate staging — the production was written and directed by John Christian Plummer of the drama series “Granite Flats” — might not have been quite to Dr. Sacks’s liking. In life, he was startlingly lacking in artifice or pretension, his excitement about the natural world as simple and untempered as a young child’s.

But many of the speakers shared stories that captured his brilliance and his quirkiness.

Mr. Picker, who said he had Tourette’s syndrome since childhood but had received the diagnosis later in life, described meeting Dr. Sacks at a dinner party he hosted.

“He was very helpful to me because he could talk about it, talk about what he was observing, in a way that made me understand how I was being observed by the outside world,” Mr. Picker said.

“I had a very difficult childhood, and it stayed with me, well, it will stay with me forever,” he added. “But knowing Oliver, being able to, to spend time with Oliver, and to be, just to be in the presence of his greatness, made me feel better about myself.”

Dr. Greene, the physicist, said that he was “awe-struck” when he met Dr. Sacks, who he said had “a ferocious talent and a rare gift” for finding beauty and humanity in the stories of people given diagnoses of illnesses like autism, Tourette’s or encephalitis lethargica — the disease that afflicted the patients in his book “Awakenings.”

The two men chatted over cocktails, Dr. Greene recalled, and Dr. Sacks mentioned that he had finished Dr. Greene’s book “The Elegant Universe” just that day. He had liked it, Dr. Sacks said, but he added that the book was “slippery.”

Dr. Greene tried to reply, saying that yes, even physicists found quantum mechanics slippery. But Dr. Sacks stopped him. “No, I mean that the book was literally slippery,” he told Dr. Greene. Dr. Sacks said he had read it in the bathtub and had to buy another copy.

Robert Krulwich, a science journalist and co-host of the NPR program “Radiolab,” said that Dr. Sacks, whom he described as having “crazy eyes for seeing and a pretty big heart,” had an intelligence that seemed effortless.

“He could consume all kinds of information just very, very easily,” Mr. Krulwich said. “And then he could weigh it and measure it and balance it.”

Dr. Sacks was, by all accounts, including his own, a creature of excess. He turned in manuscripts that were hundreds of pages too long. He was addicted to gefilte fish. He frantically opened and closed windows to achieve his ideal temperature range of 55 to 60 degrees. He was fond of quoting a headmaster who had once commented, “Sacks will go far, if he doesn’t go too far.”

Ms. Grandin, a professor of animal science at Colorado State University who has autism and is known for her work in the livestock industry, remembered that when Dr. Sacks came to visit her, he wanted to go to the national park.

“I had to stop him from jumping into the river,” Ms. Grandin said of Dr. Sacks, who loved to swim.

“I said, ‘Oliver, you’re going to go over a dam if you jump in that river. You absolutely can’t go in that river,’ ” Ms. Grandin recalled. “And I stopped him from doing that.”

Dr. Sacks was a marathon swimmer and could squat 600 pounds, and among the speakers were his Russian swimming coach and his personal trainer.

But in the end, it was Dr. Sacks himself, brought to life on the screen and speaking with his distinctive voice, who reminded the audience most forcefully of how much he had given them — and how much they had lost with his passing.

“It was especially the physiology of the sense that fascinated me,” he said, reading from his memoir. “How did we see color, depth, movement? How did we recognize anything? How did we make sense of the world visually?”

In his fascination about the world and its many wonders and contradictions, he drew all of us with him, and he draws us still.


