


While planning her wedding, “I only hung up on my mother once,” said Michelle Blackley of Buffalo. “She’s normally a calm, laid-back woman, but the wedding definitely flipped a switch where it became about her and less about me.”

She noted that the duo had a few heated conversations leading up to her union there last October, said Ms. Blackley, now 38. “She became a micromanager and wanted to delegate who was on the guest list, whether we should have flameless candles in the Gothic church we were getting married in. And we had one big fight about my veil.”

Many things about weddings may have changed, but one constant has been a mother’s need and desire to be involved in the planning.

“A wedding is a culmination of what you’ve invested in your child’s life,” said Lori Thomas, 62, of San Diego, whose daughter, Whitney, married there on March 4. “It’s the last big thing you’ll do for them. Since there are no real rules that tell you how involved you can be, the participation spectrum is endless.”

Behind every father who gives away his daughter, there’s usually a mother directing how he should do it. She’s also the one telling the photographer what moments to capture while making sure the guests she invited are seated in the correct spots.

“Because people are marrying older, women in their late 20s, late 30s have an increase in emotional maturity,” said Deborah M. Merrill, author of “When Your Children Marry: How Marriage Changes Relationships With Sons and Daughters,” and a sociology professor at Clark University in Worcester, Mass. “They’re more mindful of their mother’s feelings. They have better coping skills and are better at problem solving. They may not want their mothers there, but they are more thoughtful about how they say it. And that’s a real shift.”

“There’s far more navigating of people’s feelings than I expected,” said Alexa Smith, 30, who is marrying Sept. 2 at Battery Gardens, a restaurant in Manhattan. “I have a mom and a stepmom, who are like best friends, so that’s having a mom in stereo. Both email or call every day with suggestions.”

Ms. Smith, who is from Kentucky and is an only child, noted that sentimentality drives her mother’s one opportunity to see her daughter married. “She’s been deeply involved because she knows this isn’t coming around again,” Ms. Smith said. “I’m on my own. I live with the person I’m marrying. This is my last need from them. That must be very hard for a parent.”

Even so, Ms. Smith also foresaw the potential of being overwhelmed by good intentions, especially when it came to one of the most time-honored wedding rituals: a mother and daughter buying the wedding dress together.

Several months before her mother and stepmom and an aunt flew in from Kentucky to begin the gown search, Ms. Smith found one she loved at Gabriella’s in SoHo while on her lunch break. Recognizing how much tradition was wrapped up in the search, she kept it a secret from her family.

When her posse arrived in New York, they all visited Kleinfeld, Saks Fifth Avenue and Vera Wang. Ms. Smith had deliberately left Gabriella’s on Wooster Street for the end of the pilgrimage, where unbeknown to her relatives, she had put the dress on hold.

“I had the salesperson pull the worst dresses he could find, all which made me look terrible or lumpy,” she said “Then I put on the one I’d picked out months before, which was beautiful and fit perfectly. Everyone cried when they saw me in it. When I told them what I’d done, they cried a little harder, but they also thought it was funny.”

The dynamics between many boomers and their millennial daughters has changed, making the process somehow less grating.

“Formality of the relationship is a thing of the past,” said Deborah Tannen, the author of “You’re Wearing That? Understanding Mothers and Daughters in Conversation” and a linguistics professor at Georgetown University. “These women are closer than a generation or two generations ago. Many mothers identify as their daughters’ best friend. They rely on their phones to text, Snapchat, email and speak daily. But it’s not just the mothers seeking participation. It’s the daughters, too.”

Professor Tannen pointed out that being involved is fine, but to be careful of boundaries. “Close bonds always run the risk of feeling like bondage,” she said.

Ms. Blackley said: “My hair started to fall out because of the stress. I’d never want to plan something like that again. I don’t think my mother would, either.”

While some mothers are learning limitations, others are learning that grooms have opinions, too — ones that he wants to make sure are heard.

“I assumed Whitney and I would plan the wedding together, but I quickly realized this was a collaborative process,” said Ms. Thomas of San Diego, who soon found out that her daughter’s husband, Drew, had a “clear and definitive vision of what he wanted in his wedding. It’s not as common in this culture for the groom to have that much input. Years ago it seemed like they didn’t really care, but Drew did.”

Still, when it comes to weddings, some brides prefer their mother’s voice instead.

“I ask my mother’s opinion on everything,” said Ashley Iverson, 33, who, while in the planning stage spoke to her mother almost 10 times a day. “She has good taste. She’s smart. She loves to plan parties. And she’s paying for our wedding. The only person I wanted to back off was my fiancé. He’s the only man I know who wanted to be involved. At first it was nice, and then got annoying.”

Other mothers become surrogate planners: a trusted soul to meet with vendors when their daughters aren’t available.

“My mother lives close to where we were getting married,” said Whitney Berry, 34, Lori Thomas’s oldest daughter. “I’m in L.A. and wasn’t able to meet with everyone, so she picked out the flowers, did an additional visit to the venue, walked the property and took pictures. She also found the cake. We didn’t care about having one, but she really did. She wanted us to have that moment where we cut the cake as a couple, so she found a magazine that highlighted one made of cheese, which we loved because it was unique and personal. And it still honored the tradition that was so important to my mother.”

Today’s overly extravagant and elaborate celebrations have created a cultural chaos of unending choices. In situations like these, adding Mom’s thoughts to the mix often generates even more complexity.

“The greatest arguments and biggest complications come from having too many options, and from mothers not being able to rein in their opinions because of that,” said Marcy Blum, a wedding planner in New York. “Years ago there was only a three-course meal, so there wasn’t much to fight over because that’s all you got to choose. Now it’s everything from molecular gastronomy to a 10-course dinner, and that dinner can be served in a barn, not in a hotel.”

She also mentioned the reflection factor.

“Because most people assume the parents are hosting, and because some parents’ names are on the invitations, mothers worry how everything will look to their friends,” she said. “They lose sight of what’s realistic. The more weddings they go to, and the more they see what other people are doing, the more they feel they need to be better than the Joneses.”

For other mothers, the thinking is simple. “The fact that I’m paying for it gives me a say,” said Marsha Iverson, 69.

Ms. Iverson had an integral part in planning her first daughter’s wedding three years ago, and intends to reprise that role with her other daughter, Ashley.

“A friend said give her X amount of money and let her do what she wants,” Ms. Iverson said. “If I just give her the money, I’m only a guest who gave her a gift. I don’t want to be a guest. I want the joy of planning this with her. It’s a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for both of us. This isn’t just a check, it’s my heart. But I’m very aware this is not my day, it’s hers.”


