


On a recent evening, Catherine Treboux, the elegant proprietor of Le Veau d’Or, an Upper East Side restaurant that has remained virtually unchanged since the days of Grace Kelly’s patronage, was sharing her observations about shifts in the city’s dining habits. It was not long after 10 o’clock and the restaurant had emptied, which is fairly common there and in many other places, Ms. Treboux believed, because of a collective will to get home for two hours of emailing and recorded television before bed at midnight. Lingering at the table had long been discarded as a ritual among the urbane. We lamented the turn to a dull, zestless efficiency.

Every time and place gets the sex scandal it deserves, and in the early years of the second decade of the 21st century, New York got Anthony D. Weiner and his comic porn pseudonyms, a scandal that didn’t involve actual sex. The initial revelations of his penchant for junior high school-style texting practices led to his resignation from Congress in 2011. Two years later, during his second bid to become the city’s mayor, the world discovered that he was still at it, despite his proclamations of self-reform, this time with a 23-year-old named Sydney Leathers who said she heard from Mr. Weiner five times a day. He finished the Democratic primary with just under 5 percent of the vote. To put that in perspective, he did worse than Norman Mailer, who ran for mayor in 1969, several years after he had stabbed his second wife during the final hours of a party at which she told him that he wasn’t as good as Dostoyevsky.

Mr. Weiner’s doomed effort to lead the city is chronicled in a new documentary, “Weiner,” which was shown at the Sundance Film Festival this year and will be released in the next week. The filmmakers, Josh Kriegman and Elyse Steinberg, were given broad access to the candidate — permission that Mr. Weiner opens the film suggesting he wishes he hadn’t granted. But ultimately, it is the universe around Mr. Weiner that seems perversely unhinged; a citizenry of judges and high priests who seem to have processed his transgressions personally. Women approach Mr. Weiner as though he were every guy who didn’t call after the third date. “You did disgusting things and now you have the nerve to walk around in public,” one man yells at him during a campaign stop at a bakery. In a television interview, Lawrence O’Donnell assumes the role of St. Peter, asking Mr. Weiner, “If you take in the totality of your life, do you think you’ve spent your time well?”

Had he chosen to dignify the question with an honest answer, Mr. Weiner might have said that he spent a lot of the time during his political career, between phone calls about Medicare Part B, feeling bored and alienated. In a particularly telling moment in the film, Mr. Weiner likens his lewd texting addiction to “almost like playing a video game.” There was no feeling to it, he convincingly implies. “Do my personal relationships suffer because of the superficial and transactional nature of my political relationships, or is it the other way round?” Mr. Weiner asks himself rhetorically in the film. “Do you go into politics because you’re not connecting on that other level? And did the technology that undid me allow me to be in touch with people and have kind of more superficial relationships? I don’t know.”

The questions he raises aren’t trivial. The central relationship in Mr. Weiner’s life is with his wife, Huma Abedin, whose presence in the film — shaken, stoic, resigned, imperious, irritated — has been at the center of the anticipation surrounding it, given her close relationship to Hillary Clinton and all the analogies to which the two women’s marriages lend themselves. The differences obviously outweigh any similarities. The Weiners are immersed in the monotonies of domesticity — at one point in the film their baby son is present at a crisis management meeting in the couple’s apartment. Husband and wife compare the ingredients on rival jars of red sauce. The Clintons are Davos. The Weiners are Whole Foods. Mrs. Clinton has had to manage a man who likes women; Ms. Abedin seems forced instead to handle a man who likes screens. Mr. Weiner’s public life in the past few years has been distinguished mostly by his presence on Twitter. Professionally, things haven’t really taken off again, unless of course you count his appearance in “Sharknado 3: Oh Hell No!”

The documentary occasions a chance to engage in alternative history as a parlor game. What would it be like if Mr. Weiner had been elected mayor, with his fiery speechmaking and combative style? He was convinced it was his time. The other day, Alec Baldwin posed the question on his radio program, “Here’s the Thing.” “I’ve had this theory about mayors in New York City,” Mr. Weiner responded, “that we go from personality-like mayors — the Koches, the Giulianis. And then we like to take a deep breath afterward and have more of a calmer — technical, maybe — guy. I had the theory that we were due after Bloomberg for more personality — someone who really enjoyed it, someone who liked engaging in it, mixing it up a little more.” Bill de Blasio, Mr. Weiner said, “hasn’t quite been that.” Anthony Weiner wants everyone to know he would have been more fun.


