


The N.H.L. suspended Chicago Blackhawks forward Andrew Shaw for one game for shouting an anti-gay slur while in the penalty box during his team’s Game 4 playoff loss to the St. Louis Blues on Tuesday night.

Shaw was also fined $5,000 for directing an inappropriate gesture at the officials and will be required to take sensitivity training. He will miss Game 5 on Thursday in St. Louis, with the defending champion Blackhawks trailing by three games to one.

The incidents occurred late in the third period after Shaw was penalized for interference with Chicago down by 4-3. He gestured at the officials while skating to the penalty box. Video of Shaw in the penalty box seemed to show him shouting the slur, though it was not clear to whom his remarks were directed.

After the game, Shaw told The Chicago Tribune: “I mean, emotions are high; I really don’t know what’s said. I was obviously upset with the call being that late in the game.”

But on Wednesday, he apologized in a statement. “I am sincerely sorry for the insensitive remarks that I made last night while in the penalty box,” he said. “When I got home and saw the video, it was evident that what I did was wrong, no matter the circumstances.”

Speaking to reporters later, Shaw said, “I’ll never use that word again, that’s for sure.”

“I get it,” he added. “It’s a hurtful word. It’s 2016 now. It’s time that everyone is treated equally.”

The Blackhawks said in a statement: “We are extremely disappointed in Andrew Shaw’s actions last night. His comments do not reflect what we stand for as an organization.”

Colin Campbell, the N.H.L. vice president for hockey operations, said that while Shaw was remorseful, he had to be held accountable.

“The emotion of the moment cannot and will not be a mitigating factor for the conduct that is expected of an N.H.L. player,” Campbell said.

In December, the N.B.A. suspended Rajon Rondo for one game for using a similar slur, directed at a referee, Bill Kennedy, who subsequently revealed that he was gay. Five years ago, Kobe Bryant yelled the same slur at an official and was fined $100,000. In 2012, the Toronto Blue Jays suspended shortstop Yunel Escobar for writing a homophobic word, in Spanish, onto his eye black.

The slur and the rude gestures combined with several fights and disputed calls to add another chapter to the bitter rivalry between the Blues and the Blackhawks on Tuesday night.

It hardly seemed fair that St. Louis had to play Chicago in the opening round of the playoffs this season. The teams had the third- and fourth-best records in the N.H.L., but because both play in the strong Central Division, they found themselves facing off early.

Though the Blues had the better record and home-ice advantage, history seemed to be on the side of the Blackhawks. Chicago has won three of the last six Stanley Cups. The Blues have lost in the first round for three straight years, have not made the Cup final since 1970 and have never won the Cup in their history, which dates to 1967.

Tuesday’s game will be remembered for ugly incidents.

In the second period, the Blues rookie Robby Fabbri was pushed into Blackhawks goalie Corey Crawford, leading to a rare skater-versus-goalie fight. Crawford left his crease to shove Fabbri and get the melee started, but the Blues wound up with three penalties to the Blackhawks’ two.

Chicago soon scored to take a 2-1 lead. But Vladimir Tarasenko got his second goal of the game late in the second period to tie the score, and the Blues scored twice early in the third.

On the brink of elimination, Chicago will feel the loss of Shaw. He has two goals and two assists in the playoffs and is tied for the team lead in points.

His importance is magnified because the team’s three top scorers — Patrick Kane, Artemi Panarin and Jonathan Toews — have only one goal among them so far.

More fights, including one between Shaw and Alex Steen, took place after the final horn, leading to 14 penalties being assessed after the game was over.

Every game in the closely fought series has been decided by one goal. But Chicago now must win three straight games, two in St. Louis, to advance.


