


Cigar smokers don’t get much respect. In movies and television, there is no prop so directly associated with villainy as the cigar. From Gordon Gekko to Tony Montana to Yosemite Sam, whenever a character fires up a stogie, you can be pretty sure you’ve found your bad guy.

There is also the smoking-ban movement, which achieved a law in New York State in 2003 that covers all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants. Then, in 2011, a New York City ordinance banned smoking at public parks, boardwalks, beaches and pedestrian plazas.

Even at home, men and their cigars are often shooed out the door to the patio, or sometimes beyond. I know one cigar smoker who is obligated to keep a distance of 20 feet from his house.

Long Island cigar aficionados have a refuge from this ignominy: Matador Cigars. Matador, which started in 2008 with a store in Roslyn Heights, has expanded to a mini-empire with additional locations in Massapequa Park and, more recently, Hauppauge. The reason for its success? In addition to having a comprehensive cigar selection, it is also the most comfortable place to legally smoke on Long Island.

The Matador chain is owned and run by Boris Grossman, a cigar enthusiast who acquired his taste for tobacco while working on Wall Street. When the financial crisis hit in 2008, Mr. Grossman believed that he’d had enough of finance and decided to open a cigar shop. Initially he looked for space in Manhattan; he recalls riding around the city on a bicycle just after the crash looking at shuttered businesses. But when he inquired, everything was still too expensive. Shortly thereafter, he found the space in Roslyn Heights.

Each of the Matador shops, which are open from morning through evening, has an elaborate exhaust and circulation system, so the plumes of smoke are quickly expelled, with fresh air constantly pumped in.

The layouts of the three stores follow a similar formula: In the center is a large walk-in humidor with over 1,500 cigars. It is anchored on either side by two comfortable smoking lounges. These lounges include rows of handsome leather club chairs, ottomans and ornate standing ashtrays. No matter where you are sitting, you will be facing at least one of the many flat-screen televisions that line the wall, so no sporting event need be missed. There is no liquor license, but a server can help customers cut and light their cigars, and keep the ashtrays fresh. Need to use the restroom? In this temple of tobacco, even the toilets have ashtrays.

With optional yearly memberships that include a personalized humidity-controlled cigar locker, Matador can give the impression of a private men’s club; female guests are rare. In other respects, the environment is highly democratic: Guests do not need to be members to enjoy the lounges (the purchase of a single cigar will do), and the diverse crowd is a mix of both white- and blue-collar. The televisions tends to favor professional hockey and Megyn Kelly.

Male-centric as it is, the energy at the Matador shops is also polite and comradely — there seems to be none of the posturing sometimes found with men at a bar or a live-sporting event. And despite all the screens, conversation abounds, the subjects including sports, politics and a healthy dose of gossip. “Like women at a nail salon” is how Mr. Grossman characterizes it. It all amounts to a kind of impromptu social experiment, the results of which you don’t need a sociology degree to interpret: Remove alcohol and jockeying for women’s attention, and men actually get along well.

What should you smoke at Matador? Prices range from about $7 (the Padron 2000, a full-bodied robusto from Nicaragua, is a good bargain at approximately $8) to $50 a stick for the Zino Platinum series, a refined, medium-bodied brand from the Dominican Republic. Mr. Grossman’s personal favorites include the complex, medium- to full-bodied Don Carlos 30th Anniversary, which costs around $35.

Though his days on Wall Street are behind him, it is clear that Mr. Grossman hasn’t lost his entrepreneurial spirit. Asked if he would consider opening yet another Matador shop, he replied without hesitation: “Sure. In fact I’d like to see it franchised.” He added, “I could see the stores spreading all around the Northeast, you know?”


