


At noon on Tuesday, a flock of sparrows gathered as usual outside Jan’s Hobby Shop on Lexington Avenue near 93rd Street — waiting for their usual midday meal from Madame inside.

They finally sent a representative in off the sunny sidewalk, a little brown bird that hopped gamely into the store and looked at Collette Hutchins, 83.

“Ah, my friends want food, tout de suite,” blurted Ms. Hutchins, who, with her son Fred, has run the shop for 43 years at three different locations on the Upper East Side.

The throwback shop stocks plastic kit models, the related supplies, and little else. It also serves as a display space for the trove of models meticulously assembled and decorated with historical precision by Mr. Hutchins, the obligatory hobby geek ever at his cluttered work space in the rear.

Ms. Hutchins’s childhood in wartime France helped foster her son’s fascination with World War II model planes and other historical weaponry.

He pores over the latest battleship or fighter plane made from scratch, as classical music fills the shop and his mother looks on proudly and extols her son in her strong French accent.

“Here, we show art and history,” Ms. Hutchins said. “Freddie started building models when he was 5 years old and he hasn’t stopped since. Now he’s 58.”

In warm weather, Mr. Hutchins may work on the sidewalk on one of the numerous large replica battleships he has built from scratch.

From behind the crowded counter, under a large model plane hanging from the tin ceiling, Ms. Hutchins calls customers, feeds her sparrows and phones her twin sister, Ginette Bedard, who lives in Howard Beach, Queens, and still runs in the New York City Marathon each year. Ms. Hutchins is often irreverent, sometimes irritable and indelicately vigilant about shoplifting.

Ms. Hutchins runs for 90 minutes around her block each morning, she said, nearby on York Avenue. Then she opens the shop in her running suit and sneakers, her hair in a tall bun and her eyes accented with generous strokes of green-blue eye shadow.

“I’m an artist — I love color,” said Ms. Hutchins, a painter who bought the business for her son when he was a teenager.

As a boy, Freddie avoided the local bullies by staying inside and building the models he bought at Jan’s Stationery Shop on York Avenue, he said. When his father became terminally ill, Ms. Hutchins began cooking at a French restaurant. Her son helped her cook but soon convinced her to buy Jan’s for $12,000 in 1973. She paid cash.

“It was my incentive and her money,” he recalled. “It was a pact made in heaven, and she’s been here ever since.”

“And I got myself a job for life,” Ms. Hutchins said.

When she was a little girl, Ms. Hutchins said, she noticed her Jewish friends and neighbors disappearing, fleeing the Nazis’ rise to power and control of the Lorraine region, where she lived.

“In our school, the Germans put a picture of Adolf Hitler over the teacher’s desk and made us stand and say ‘Heil Hitler,’” Ms. Hutchins recalled. “Then, in 1945 — same school, same teacher — they took Hitler off the wall and put up a picture of Charles de Gaulle and we stood up and said, ‘Vive de Gaulle!’”

Ms. Hutchins said some of her relatives who opposed the Nazis were put into prison camps, and her two teenage brothers were pressed into military service for Germany, but then they deserted.

One hid out in the family hayloft during the remaining months of the war, in uniform and a thick beard, said Ms. Hutchins, who became curious about why the barn was suddenly off limits and why her mother constantly took food there.

“I said to myself, ‘Hm, rabbits don’t eat meat,’” she recalled. “One day, I saw a man in there with a beard, and I ran and told my mother, ‘There’s a German soldier in the barn.’ She wanted to laugh.”

She recalled that when American troops reclaimed her region for France, they loved the local schnapps made from mirabelle plums.

“They told the children, ‘We’ll give you chocolate for schnapps,’ and they gave us two little Hershey bars,” she said. Ms. Hutchins then pointed at her son’s displayed aircraft models of British Lancaster bombers and the German V-1 missiles — and said she saw the real versions soaring over her farmhouse.

“I saw this tank for real,” she said, grabbing a model for the Tiger 1, a German tank, in a box.

In the 1950s in Lorraine, she met her husband, a former United States Marine who had fought in the Pacific. They moved to Casablanca, in Morocco, and then settled in New York City.

The shop’s long hours — open seven days a week and closed only on Thanksgiving and Christmas — will continue as long as she is alive, she said.

“To retire is to expire,” she said. “I’m going to die with my boots on.”


