


Right now on Broadway, audience members can glimpse the behind-the-scenes frenzy at an elite eatery in the comedy “Fully Committed.” And a ticket to the musical “Waitress” opens a window onto the lives of workers at a small-town diner, who find unlikely romance amid the pie-making and hash-slinging.

Entertaining? Hopefully. But for actors in these and other shows, what’s happening onstage may stir up bittersweet memories of earlier lean times when, as fresh-faced new arrivals in New York, their only chance to emote was reciting dinner specials for surly customers at the restaurants where they worked.

While waiting for their big break, many performers put in time as waiters and at other food service jobs. They may not be on Broadway yet, but they often toil in tantalizing proximity, either at restaurants in or near the theater district or as servers at glitzy parties with boldface guests.

The gap between where these young actors are and where they want to be can feel huge.

So it seemed to Keren Dukes, 27, who plays several roles in “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” the night she worked as cater-waiter at a party for the musical “Spider Man: Turn Off the Dark” at the Foxwoods (now the Lyric) Theater.

On the guest list: Bono and the Edge of U2, who wrote the score for the show.

“I was in the theater, and it was so exciting,” she recalled, “but not actually to be part of it was such heartbreak.” (It didn’t help that she dropped a tray of Champagne flutes just as the speeches ended.)

The benefits to a restaurant or food-service job are many: tips, camaraderie with fellow wannabe actors working alongside you, and flexible schedules that allow for auditioning and attending classes.

“It was a sense of community,” said the actress Faith Prince, 58, recalling the several months she spent toiling as a waitress in 1981 at McHale’s. The now-closed bar and hamburger joint in the theater district was a hangout for stagehands and other Broadway employees.

Ms. Prince, most recently in “Disaster!” on Broadway, recalled that it felt like a family reunion when she won the major role of Adelaide in a 1992 revival of “Guys and Dolls” and entered the theater for her first rehearsal on the set.

“A bunch of the stagehands were like: ‘Hey, Faith, Faith, you’re doing good! You got a Broadway show.’” she said. “And one goes: ‘Do you remember me? I used to order the cheeseburger.’ And I’m like: ‘Yeah, yeah, Joey, I remember. You’re a cheeseburger, medium-rare.’”

Another plus is free food, which has helped many a young performer stretch a budget. Just ask Leslie Kritzer, 38 and currently in “The Robber Bridegroom.” She worked as a barista and waitress in training in 2000 at a fancy restaurant called Atlas, which attracted a celebrity clientele.

“People would order these decadent desserts all the time and not finish,” Ms. Kritzer said. “We were a bunch of poor actors, and we’d bring them back to the kitchen and eat them. I especially remember a banana cake soufflé. I probably ate a dozen or so famous people’s desserts in the half-year I worked there — I’m not ashamed to say.”

On the other hand, while catering a birthday party, Ms. Dukes learned the hard way that rules are rules.

“At the end of the night, we’re all ready to go home and exhausted, and I see there are entire platters of food, untouched,’’ she explained. “I went to the boss and asked if I could take the food to a shelter like the ones my church has. She said no and gave me every rule in the book why they couldn’t risk food poisoning. She took the platter of sliders or chicken dumplings, and she threw it in the trash.

“I knew they were wasting food and throwing it away, but, up until then, not quite how much. I quit. I just never went back.”

Mostly, though, the skills required for service work can be applied to stage careers. “You learn to keep a smile on your face, no matter what,” said Lauryn Ciardullo, 30, an understudy to Jasmine in “Aladdin.”

And of course there are the stories — about a huge tip, an impossible customer or a celebrity encounter — on which performers can dine out for years.

Take Marc Kudisch, 49, now playing Captain Hook in “Finding Neverland.” When he worked in 1989 as a waiter at Broadway Bay, a long-gone seafood restaurant on the Upper West Side, a customer he mistook for an elderly bag lady turned out to be Jo Van Fleet, who had won a best supporting actress Oscar in 1956 for “East of Eden.”

“I walked over and said, ‘So how’s everything, Jo?’” he said. She became a regular of his at lunch, always ordering the lobster special and a bottle of Champagne. “And she opened up like a book,” Mr. Kudisch said. “I was getting stories from her about ushering on Broadway, about the Actors Studio, about [the director Elia] Kazan. She would wander over to other tables and tell people to be nice to me because I was her friend.”

Meet four actors who not so long ago were on the other side of the counter.

‘Fiddler on the Roof’

Now Perchik in “Fiddler on the Roof.”

Then Peddled bottled water and candy at shows pre-curtain and during intermission, including at the theater where he is now onstage.

Why he did it “It’s on a theater schedule, and I could go to auditions. And I got to see the first act of the shows that I worked, like ‘Chicago,’ ‘Billy Elliot,’ and ‘Phantom of the Opera.’ I’m like a closet ‘Phantom’ fan — the chandelier, the overture. I loved it! Still do.”

Will never forget “Occasionally you’d get tips from generous patrons. For me, it was the older women. They liked the way I looked. At Wednesday matinees, I was rolling in it.”

Lesson learned “How to deal with difficult people. It was a good training ground to build up my body armor and thick skin. You definitely need a lot of that in this business.”

‘The Lion King’

Now Ensemble, Mufasa understudy in “The Lion King.”

Then Waiter at several restaurants, including Kitchenette in Harlem, and catering companies.

Why he did it “I don’t have anyone paying my way through New York City, so I’ve always held down multiple jobs.”

Will never forget “I got a $100 tip on a $100 check from a tourist once when I worked at Angus McIndoe. I think that it was more he was hoping for a date than for my customer service.”

Reality check “Customers can be really demanding. Once, there were these two older women, and I’d already given them their drinks but not taken their food order. One just kept yelling, ‘Frittata, frittata, frittata,’ over and over again. New Yorkers aren’t known for their patience.”

Lesson learned “Try to remain calm. You’re in front of 1,600 people at the Minskoff every night, and anything can happen. That’s the same in the restaurant business.”

‘On the Town’

Now Between jobs; last on Broadway as Hildy in “On the Town.”

Then Singing waitress at Ellen’s Stardust Diner, a restaurant in the theater district.

Why she did it “I made more money at Ellen’s working four shifts a week than working in the ensemble, after taxes and everything, when I was on Broadway in ‘American Idiot.’”

Will never forget “At least every hour, someone would ask, ‘Can you sing something from “Wicked?”’”

Reality check “I’d be singing a beautiful ballad and a customer, not even from one of my tables, would go: ‘Can you give me ketchup? I need mustard!’ And I’d be like, ‘Really?’”

Lesson learned “How to deal with people. Same in the theater. Every time you’re in a new show, you have 35 different personalities you’re going to have to work with on a daily basis, and it’s easier to be gracious and nice to most people.”

‘Waitress’

Now Dr. Pomatter, the gynecologist love interest in “Waitress.”

Then Waiter at Ruby Foo’s, now closed.

Why he did it “When I first moved to New York, a friend was a bartender there and said, ‘I could totally get a job for you.’ Suddenly, I’m slinging sushi and dumplings.”

Will never forget “If you ever go out to eat on New Year’s Eve, especially in Times Square, you can rest assured your server is probably matching you drink for drink. I certainly was. My manager stopped me and said, ‘Drew, are you drinking drinks off your tables?’ and I said: ‘Absolutely not. Why would I when I can drink them from the bar for free?’ Two days after that, I got an acting job and quit.”

Reality check “I was the worst waiter. My short-term memory is not fantastic. I’d have to memorize the menu and know every ingredient. It felt like a lot of responsibility at 22. I got by on my charm.”

Lesson learned “The ability to talk to anyone about anything at any time. As an actor, it can inform your ability to improvise and to be present in the moment.”


