


The bidding price for a bribe to get a gun permit in New York City was quoted at $6,000 this week in a federal criminal complaint. A regular visitor to the Police Department’s licensing bureau claimed that he had gotten licenses 150 times over the last year, waving the prospect of $900,000 in future cash under the nose of a police officer wearing a tape recorder.

In one instance, the visitor had gotten a gun license for a man who had been the subject of four domestic violence complaints and a forgery arrest, and involved in multiple car accidents.

With political campaigns sweeping in billions, with major banks tricking their customers out of vast fortunes, a $6,000 bribe seems quaint. But the human scale of graft, through history, helps us understand the synergy of greed and appetite, hassle and necessity.

That said, past results, of course, are no indication of future performance.

Driver’s licenses and car titles:

Clerks at a Bronx office of the Department of Motor Vehicles once sold a license for driving heavy trucks to a man with no legs. They also sold two licenses to another man, one in which he was photographed wearing a wig, and the other without it. Car titles and registrations, handy for thieves, ran $1,500; driver’s licenses could go for $100, more or less, depending on the desperation of the customer. During a 1991 case, the entire Bronx office was shut down for employee arrests.

Things have tightened up over the years. Moreover, a visit to the motor vehicles office, while not a trip to the ice cream parlor, no longer involves hours of torment. Aggravation: a leading economic driver of bribery.

Building inspections:

Construction rules in New York are supposed to keep people safe inside and around buildings. They are, of course, a hassle. For all this, there is the job of expediter: At its most legitimate, this role is played by a person who stands in line and files the right paperwork, saving time. But with a real estate boom, one expediter in Brooklyn greased a Buildings Department supervisor, according to a report last year by the city’s Investigation Department and the Manhattan district attorney. The expediter, the report said, paid a $200,000 mortgage for the city official, bought him and his wife two sport utility vehicles, and sent them on an $8,000 Royal Caribbean cruise.

How risky is this? A crooked inspector who was part of the scheme let a Borough Park synagogue add two floors without proper support, the authorities said. The existing roof jutted through a new floor. The facade cracked.

Issuing fake building permits is like giving a gun license to a person with a history of domestic violence.

An article in The New York Times in 1871 declared, “Disgraceful Corruption in the Department of Buildings.” Nearly a century later, in 1966, the buildings commissioner proposed that inspectors wear uniforms without pockets. The inspectors union fought it, the City Council was against it and the buildings commissioner quit.

Karaoke bar protection:

A police officer in Flushing, Queens, was accused in December of collecting $2,000 a month from the JJNY Karoke Club for tipoffs on police raids and to quash drug arrests.

Bootleg Cream:

Back in the 1920s, a health department boss seized 56 cans of cream shipped into the city from Newark by a wholesale dealer on the grounds that bringing them from out of state amounted to bootlegging. The wholesaler testified that he had to bring $2,000 to a bagman in the lobby of the Hotel Pennsylvania to get the cream back, even though it was worth only $1,500; he said he worried that if he didn’t pay, he would lose his license.

Food inspections:

Restaurant owners dreaded seeing health inspectors drive up in Cadillacs and wearing Rolex watches, the head of the F.B.I. in New York said in 1988. The inspectors charged $50 to $1,400 — sometimes to overlook violations in the kitchen, but also to not hit restaurants with phony ones. Restaurants paid so that their names would not run in the city newspapers on the weekly “Rat List,” a rundown of places that been cited for violations, real or fake.

Now, restaurant inspectors wear baseball caps and shirts from the health department, and are shifted around the city to avoid falling into a rut.

In the gun permit case, the authorities said, the man offering the bribes actually frisked the police officer but missed the tape recorder. As a result, this exchange was taped:

“I want to repeat myself: I’m not bribing you,” the man said.

“Of course you’re bribing me,” the officer said.

Think of it as an offering to the gods of Official Paperwork.


