


Celeste Abou Negm and Dvir Kafri were married June 18 at River Farm, the headquarters of the American Horticultural Society, in Alexandria, Va. Rabbi Binyamin Biber officiated

The bride, 29, will take her husband’s name. She is studying for an M.B.A. at the University of California, Los Angeles. She graduated from Swarthmore College. She served in the Peace Corps in Metu, Ethiopia, from 2010-12, working with local governments and farmers.

She is a daughter of Elizabeth E. Ferenczi of Washington and the late Youssef Abou Negm. The bride’s father was a consul at the Egyptian consulate in New York. The bride is also the adopted daughter of Martin D. Ferenczi, the president of the North American region of Oberthur Technologies, a software developer and producer of chip payment cards in Chantilly, Va.

The groom, also 29, is a physicist for the Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Lab in Venice, Calif., where he designs and analyzes superconducting quantum circuits. He graduated from Rice University and received a Ph.D. in physics from the University of Maryland.

He is a son of Orna Z. Kafri of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Tal Kafri of Carrboro, N.C. The groom’s mother is a registered nurse at UNC Health Care, a nonprofit medical system owned by the State of North Carolina and based at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. His father is an associate professor of microbiology and immunology in the Gene Therapy Center, also at the University of North Carolina.

The couple met in February 2013 at a kickball game with mutual friends in Silver Spring, Md.

“I thought she was really cute,” said Mr. Kafri, who had a girlfriend at the time. “She was really sweet and very charming.”

In September, Ms. Abou Negm and Mr. Kafri met again at her housewarming party in Washington, but it was no coincidence. Ms. Abou Negm had returned from the Peace Corps less than a year before and only knew a few people in the city, so she invited five friends, and told each of them to bring along a friend of their own. That opened the door for Mr. Kafri, who was now single and tagging along with a mutual friend in the hope of becoming better acquainted with Ms. Abou Negm, whom he remembered from their kickball game.

“I really wanted to see her again,” he said.

He soon got his wish, and when he was introduced to Ms. Abou Negm as a physicist, they spent a few minutes talking about quantum entanglement.

“I liked him right away,” Ms. Abou Negm said. “I sort of remembered him from kickball, and I thought he was very cute and very nice.”

The next day, Ms. Abou Negm noticed a long footnote about quantum entanglement in the novel she was reading, “A Visit From the Goon Squad,” and texted Mr. Kafri. When she broached the subject with him, he took the opportunity to broach another with her: lunch.

The next weekend they went on their first date, to a Dominican restaurant in Washington, and began dating steadily thereafter.

“He had such a great sense of humor and he was very smart,” she said.

“She seemed to love life more than anyone else I had ever met,” he said.

In June 2015, Ms. Abou Negm returned to Metu, with Mr. Kafri in tow.

“It had been such a huge part of my life and I still had friends there,” she said. “I wanted to share what I had been through and seen with Dvir.”

A week later, they were still in Ethiopia and hiking on the highlands of Lalibela, overlooking a troop of gelada baboons and a flock of shepherd boys behind them in the distance, when Mr. Kafri reached for the engagement ring he had brought along.

“On a scale of 1 to 10, how romantic do you think this scene is?” he asked Ms. Abou Negm, who was now sitting beside him in the grass.

When she replied “seven,” Mr. Kafri began putting the ring away for a more appropriate time, but just then, Ms. Abou Negm, realizing why she had been asked the question, began blurting out “10! 10!”

He then proposed and slipped the ring on her finger, and Ms. Abou Negm began to cry.

“It was a rather surreal moment, but there were no witnesses,” Mr. Kafri said, “except for the baboons.”


