


RE: MINECRAFT

Clive Thompson wrote about the vast and expanding world of the popular computer game that is teaching millions of children to master the digital world.

While pointing out the admirable similarities between block play and Minecraft (each of which provides opportunities for creative problem solving, computational thinking and the development of civic literacy), Clive Thompson does not acknowledge the major and undesirable differences. A computer game can never capture the sensations of working with real materials, in this case, the weight, texture, grain and smell of wood. Even the online “human” interactions are often one step removed from actual people and address a limited range of social and emotional issues.

Technology has its place, but as a developmental psychologist, I believe that the disproportionate amount of time that children today spend in front of screens deprives them of direct experience with the rest of the physical and interpersonal world. Leading a meaningful life and benefiting society require more than a generation of adept coders. I wish the article presented a more balanced perspective. Ann S. Epstein, Ann Arbor, Mich.

For an adult, the only thing more boring and baffling than Minecraft is listening to your kid talk about Minecraft. (My kids are 8 and 4.)

Which is why I enjoyed the Minecraft article, because it made me rethink — grudgingly, yes, but miraculously, considering the depth of my loathing — my attitude toward “Minecrack.” It’s no longer an awful, ugly, pointless time-suck of a “game” with no objective and no reward; now it’s an awful, ugly, computer-­programming game with social elements and logic puzzles, which will help set my daughter and son up for successful futures! Right! Yes! I’m going to go with that from now on. Lydia Markoff, San Jose, Calif.

RE: DONALD TRUMP

Jeff Sharlet considered Donald Trump as a preacher of the prosperity gospel whose success is based largely on the power to persuade people that his story can be theirs.

Jeff Sharlet’s article is unfair to the writings of Norman Vincent Peale and his book “The Power of Positive Thinking.” Sharlet implies that Peale’s book deals in the kind of anger, bitterness and financial and personal entitlement that the writer believes characterizes Trump’s campaign. But Peale’s book does not extol greed, does not support any form of hatred and is not about superficial “magical thinking.” It merely gives suggestions on how you can make an unpredictable and often deeply painful life on earth more successful, comfortable and joyful. There are no shallow guarantees in it, no self-­indulgent pronouncements of personal power. The book is straightforward, unpretentious and smart; compassionate, contemporary and useful. It is better than the article’s assessment of it, and yes, better than Trump. It is worth rereading, or reading for the first time. Scott Klavan, the Bronx

Highly influenced by Norman Vincent Peale’s 1952 best seller, “The Power of Positive Thinking,” Donald Trump, Jeff Sharlet wrote, “doesn’t reject faith. Instead, he returns it to the roots of Christian business conservatism.”

The lust for success and wealth, however, directly contradicts the Christian New Testament, which favors the weak and the poor and condemns the wealthy and the pursuit of wealth. Actually, many of Trump’s followers don’t even think in terms of great wealth but rather yearn for just a decent job. Their sense of powerlessness is palpable. Trump himself gave them a clue concerning the real problem: The political class, which the Republicans love to attack, he declared, is actually a mere puppet to the wealthy. However, Trump’s followers ignore the implications, the reality of class domination — and instead focus on a magnetic, messianic personality. They’ll need a lot of luck. Roger Carasso, Santa Fe, N.M.


