


William Weld, the vice-presidential nominee for the Libertarian Party, said Wednesday that he believed Hillary Clinton had done nothing “criminal” in using personal email as secretary of state.

Mr. Weld spoke during a wide-ranging interview alongside Gary Johnson, a former governor of New Mexico and the Libertarian Party’s presidential nominee. Both secured the Libertarian nomination Sunday at the party’s contentious convention in Orlando, Fla., over the weekend.

The remarks from Mr. Weld, who served as the governor of Massachusetts as a Republican in the 1990s, are deeply at odds with criticisms from Republicans over Mrs. Clinton’s tenure at the State Department and the scandal involving her use of a private server for all work emails.

His comments could also fuel further skepticism among some Libertarian voters who view Mr. Weld’s right-of-center years as governor with suspicion. They could also inflame criticism that he is a de facto stalking horse for Mrs. Clinton, the Democratic front-runner for the nomination.

Mr. Weld gave a single-word response about whether Mrs. Clinton was a good secretary of state: “Yes.”

He was equally succinct when asked if her use of a private email server, now the subject of an F.B.I. investigation, was a legitimate issue.

“No,” said Mr. Weld, a former prosecutor, adding that he had read of no evidence that would clear the bar for criminality. “I think it’s a nonstarter.”

He was noncommittal as to whether it showed poor judgment on behalf of Mrs. Clinton, but pointed out that Colin Powell had also used private email while secretary of state under George W. Bush — a point often made by Mrs. Clinton’s aides.

Mr. Weld has been friendly with Mrs. Clinton since they worked together on the impeachment team of the House Judiciary Committee during the presidency of Richard M. Nixon. He praised her as “kind” and smart.

He saved his harshest words for Donald J. Trump, the Republican Party’s presumptive nominee, whom Mr. Weld has excoriated for anti-immigrant speech.

“The wall is a joke,” Mr. Weld said of Mr. Trump’s vow to build a wall along the border with Mexico. But, he added, “I would say it was a joke if it didn’t remind me so much of the Berlin Wall.”

He compared Mr. Trump, who has an ardent base of supporters, to Jim Jones, the cult leader whose followers committed suicide by the hundreds, drinking poison at his urging in Jonestown, Guyana, in 1978.

“Everybody was so fanatically devoted to him that they drank the Kool Aid — and it wasn’t particularly good Kool Aid,” Mr. Weld said. “The analogy there is just the ability to stimulate a fanatical following. And that’s fine, but if the fanatical following leads to fanatical behavior, that’s not fine.”

Mr. Weld and Mr. Johnson appeared to be adjusting to their roles as running mates. Mr. Weld, a starchy Northeasterner from a deeply pedigreed family, appeared unaccustomed to playing second fiddle to Mr. Johnson, who is fond of marijuana and embraces being called a “fringe” candidate. The two men disagreed more than once during the interview.

At one point, Mr. Johnson expressed reservations about changing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to include protections for gays, lesbians and transgender people. But Mr. Weld quickly said he personally would have no problem with it. And while Mr. Weld praised Mrs. Clinton’s years in the State Department, Mr. Johnson criticized the foreign policy doctrine of the Obama administration.

Both said they were still discerning policy differences with Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump, although they struggled to come up with deep policy differences with Mrs. Clinton. Mr. Weld made clear that he saw the presumptive Republican nominee as a clear and urgent threat.

“In the case of Mr. Trump, there are questions about whether he would hue to a steady course as president,” Mr. Weld said. “And it may not be fair to posit that question against the backdrop of the Republican debates, but on the stability question, they were pretty bad.”

“You don’t have that question with Mrs. Clinton,” he said.


