


Waikiki has never exactly been thought of as cool. But the neighborhood — the tourist epicenter of Hawaii’s most populous island — is getting a much-needed dose of style when the Surfjack Hotel & Swim Club officially opens this month on Lewers Street, a few blocks from famed Waikiki Beach.

Unlike its famous high-end (and much pricier) neighbors like the Halekulani and the Royal Hawaiian, Surfjack’s appeal lies in its contemporary, hyper-local ethos. “When many people think of Hawaii, it’s still usually vague images left over from the 1950s — hula dancers, mai tais, luaus,” says the co-owner Sean Williams, a California native who grew up spending family vacations on the island. “But there’s so much going on here in the worlds of art, food and design. We wanted to capture that modern sense of Hawaii.”

To that end, Williams and his team enlisted the help of the Honolulu-based design firm the Vanguard Theory (for the public spaces and the restaurant) and L.A.’s Studio Collective (which designed the 112 guest rooms), to infuse the interiors of the 1960s Modernist building with elements from local designers and makers, all pulled together with an appropriately beachy theme. The local artist Kris Goto’s surf prints hang on guest-room walls alongside vintage postcards; the Honolulu photographer Mark Kushimi’s beach scenes are placed throughout the property; and restored Aloha fabrics (of the same style used for those iconic Aloha shirts) from the Oahu-based fashion label Tori Richard are used for furnishings. There’s also an outpost of Olive & Oliver, the combined concept shop of two of Oahu’s hippest boutiques, Olive (for women’s wear) and Oliver (for men’s), run by the husband-and-wife team Parker and Ali Moosman.

What gives Surfjack the most cred, though, is the collaboration with one of Hawaii’s most respected homegrown chefs, Ed Kenney. The on-site restaurant Mahina & Sun’s brings Kenney’s trademark Hawaii-sourced, sustainable seafood and local fruits and veggies (used in dishes like brown rice salad with macadamia nuts and pickled mushrooms, and poke bowls made with fresh marlin and Maui onions) to Waikiki, along with a setting that he hopes will draw in more than just guests of the hotel.


