


One day after trumpeting the capture and extradition of an Eritrean man they said was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of African migrants, the Italian authorities said on Thursday they were looking into the possibility that they had the wrong man.

In a phone interview, Francesco Lo Voi, the chief prosecutor in Palermo, Sicily, said that “all the necessary verifications” would be undertaken “to clarify this situation, which is singular.”

Mr. Lo Voi’s office, and the authorities in Britain, announced on Wednesday that a well-known trafficker named Medhanie Yehdego Mered, 35, had been arrested in Sudan on May 24 and extradited to Rome.

They described the arrest as a breakthrough. Mr. Lo Voi said it “demonstrated international judicial and police cooperation,” and Britain’s National Crime Agency, which said it “tracked him down” to an address in the Sudanese capital of Khartoum, called Mr. Mered “one of the world’s most wanted people smugglers.”

But within hours of the announcement of Mr. Mered’s arrest, Meron Estefanos, an Eritrean-born activist and a journalist in Stockholm who works with refugees in Sweden, said the man in custody was not Mr. Mered. An article in The Guardian on Wednesday also raised doubts.

A former Eritrean official, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisal from the authorities there, said on Thursday that Mr. Mered was a notorious people smuggler who may have extensive connections within the Eritrean and Sudanese governments. The former official said that Mr. Mered might have been detained but used connections — and cash — to quickly get out of custody, or that he may have fled after being warned of the coming police operation.

On Thursday, four people said in separate phone interviews that the man in custody was their brother, Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe, 29, an Eritrean who moved to Sudan last year. They insisted he had no involvement in people-smuggling, and portrayed him as a member of a dispersed but close-knit and law-abiding family.

One of the siblings, Seghen Tesfamariam Berhe, 31, who lives in Khartoum, said her brother was picked up at a cafe two weeks ago by the Sudanese security forces. “They brought him home, searched his home,” she said. “They found nothing, because there was nothing in the house.”

Ms. Berhe said that for nearly two weeks, she didn’t know what had become of her brother — until she saw photos of Mr. Berhe that were distributed by the Italian authorities on Wednesday. “He has been here for one year,” she said. “He has not smuggled or trafficked. They are just accusing him without any evidence.”

Another sister, Hiwet Tesfamariam Berhe, 34, who lives in Baerum, Norway, near Oslo, said she was running errands on Wednesday when a sibling alerted her to a news article showing their brother being escorted by two Italian policemen.

“I was shocked,” she said. “Then I went home and turned on the television.”

Another sibling, Eden Tesfamariam Berhe, 27, who lives in San Francisco and is a caretaker for the elderly, said she was stunned to see photos of her brother in custody at the airport in Rome. The photo, she said, did not match an image that the British authorities said was of Mr. Mered. “The picture is not the same,” she said.

Their brother Sirak Tesfamariam Berhe, 28, a student and part-time Uber driver who also lives in San Francisco, said: “It was shocking to me because the brother that I know, he would never do that kind of thing.”

British and Italian officials say that Mr. Mered helped run a smuggling ring that was responsible for the deaths of 359 people who perished when a boat capsized near the Italian island of Lampedusa in 2013.

“My brother was in Eritrea at the time of Lampedusa,” Eden Berhe said, her voice cracking. “I lost my friends in Lampedusa, my cousin. He is not involved with that kind of thing.”

Anbes Yemane, 23, an Eritrean who entered Sweden in 2013 to seek asylum, said in a phone interview from Borlange, a small city in southern Sweden, that Mr. Mered had facilitated his journey from Libya to Italy in December 2013, for a payment of $1,800.

Mr. Yemane said he met Mr. Mered on multiple occasions in Libya, while Mr. Mered arranged for enough people to fill a boat to Italy.

“That’s not him,” Mr. Yemane said of the man in the photos distributed by the Italian authorities, referring to Mr. Mered. “I know him. I couldn’t mistake him. I was disappointed that it wasn’t him.”

Eritrea is considered one of the world’s most repressive states, and just this week, United Nations investigators accused its leaders of crimes against humanity. As Eritreans have fled, government officials there have been suspected of profiting from human trafficking. Human rights advocates say that Eritrean soldiers have taken money from people in exchange for access to the border, and that officials at Eritrean embassies abroad have accepted under-the-table payments to issue passports and other documents that asylum seekers need.

In Khartoum, police officials and officials at Sudan’s Foreign Ministry declined to comment, as did officials at the Italian Embassy there. British officials said they had nothing to add beyond their statement on Wednesday, in which they acknowledged The Guardian’s report raising doubts about the arrest, but expressed confidence in their intelligence gathering.

Mr. Lo Voi, the prosecutor in Sicily, said by telephone that the identification of the man in custody as Mr. Mered had been “confirmed by Sudanese authorities through Interpol,” but that investigators were seeking to confirm his identity, “after which we will see what the result of the verification tells us.”

He declined to provide further details, saying only that his office would communicate the results of its investigation as soon as possible.


