


A FOUR-BEDROOM POSTMODERN HOUSE IN COLOGNE

$1.85 MILLION (1.65 MILLION EUROS)

The German architect Heinz Bienefeld designed this four-bedroom three-and-a-half-bath house, which is in the residential neighborhood of Müngersdorf, in western Cologne. Built in 1981, the three-level brick house has sanded red-brick floors, floor-to-ceiling windows and a simple geometric design, which are all typical of Mr. Bienefeld’s work.

The front door of the 3,337-square-foot house opens into a long rectangular entrance hall. A hallway runs to brick steps leading down to the main living area, which is framed by 13-foot-tall floor-to-ceiling glass windows with views of the garden. The central section of the house is designed around an atrium.

The kitchen is off the hallway on the ground floor and has stone countertops and modern appliances. There is a separate delivery entrance for the kitchen. The dining room, across the main hallway from the kitchen, is open to the living room. Off the dining room is a round room lined with cushioned seats, with a fireplace and a glass chandelier.

A brick staircase leads upstairs to the master bedroom, which has an en-suite bathroom and a dressing room. From the bedroom, glass doors lead to a circular balcony with views of the garden. Another bedroom upstairs is used as an office or library.

In addition to a guest bedroom on the ground floor, there are two more bedrooms in the basement, which receives daylight through the glass walls surrounding the atrium. There is also a wine cellar in the basement, as well as a workshop and storage space.

The overall property is about one-fifth of an acre, including the lawn and gardens in the backyard, which is surrounded by a brick wall. There is a garage big enough for three cars. The current owner — who is the original owner — installed a new heating system about seven years ago, said Tobias Schulze, the managing director of Cologne Sotheby’s International Realty, which is listing the property. The furniture is not included in the price, but some pieces may be available for sale, he said.

Müngersdorf is one of the most expensive neighborhoods in Cologne, Mr. Schulze said. “The west of Cologne is very green, mostly large detached houses, close to the city forest,” he said. Shopping, restaurants, schools and a subway stop are about a mile from the house. The center of the city is reachable in about 10 minutes by subway. The Cologne airport is about a 30-minute drive; the larger international airport in Düsseldorf is 45 minutes.

MARKET OVERVIEW

Homeownership in Germany is traditionally lower than in other European countries, which has kept sales volume and prices low. Only 53 percent of Germans own their homes, compared with an average of 70 percent in the rest of Europe, according to European Union data.

But there has been a surge in home purchases in recent years, because of low interest rates on mortgages and the lack of returns on savings. The number of new mortgages issued in 2015 increased by 22 percent from a year earlier, according to the Deutsche Bundesbank.

“People would rather buy property than put money in the bank,” said Brigitte Kunkel-Griffin, the owner of German Property Services, a real estate firm in the Rhine region.

The supply of available homes is low, which has sent prices soaring, particularly in the big cities, as more people move from rural to urban areas. In Germany’s largest cities — Berlin, Hamburg and Munich — prices have increased by 30 percent in the last five years, according to Bulwiengesa, a consulting firm.

“Not enough homes were built in Germany during the last decade,” said Alexander Rychter, the director of VdW Rheinland Westfalen (Association of Housing Companies in Rhineland and Westphalia). “Add to that an increasing interest of Germans to get into the cities and you get to the present situation, with very dynamic housing markets and prices that keep rising fast.”

In Cologne, Germany’s fourth-largest city, prices in the most popular neighborhoods have risen by 30 percent to 35 percent in the last four years and now range from 465 euros to 650 euros, or $521 to $729, a square foot, Mr. Schulze said. Cologne is home to several large German corporations, including the airline Lufthansa and the media company RTL Television.

WHO BUYS IN COLOGNE

Cologne doesn’t attract many international buyers, Mr. Schulze said. About 85 percent of his clients already live in Cologne or within 60 miles.

South of Cologne, in the Rhine region, which is a popular vacation and second-home destination, international buyers are much more common, Ms. Kunkel-Griffin said. More than 50 percent of her clients are from English-speaking countries, primarily from Britain, the United States and Australia. Recently she has also seen an increase in buyers from the Middle East, who are looking for second homes and a stable investment. Many international buyers see German real estate as a relatively safe investment, compared with the stock market or property in other countries, Ms. Kunkel-Griffin says.

BUYING BASICS

There are no restrictions on foreigners buying property in Germany. The process follows European Union standards, and there will be few surprises for international buyers, Mr. Schulze said.

An impartial notary handles the bulk of the paperwork. Hiring a lawyer is recommended but not essential, agents said. Mortgages are available, but foreigners may be asked to pay 20 percent to 40 percent of the purchase price upfront, Ms. Kunkel-Griffin said.

Property records are easily accessible, making it simple to track ownership and confirm the title, agents say.

“The acquisition of property is concluded as soon as the change of ownership is signed into the land charge register,” Mr. Rychter said. “Registers are transparent and well-organized, so that ownership is distinctly identifiable at all times.”

WEBSITES

Cologne tourism site: cologne.de

German tourism site: germany.travel

LANGUAGE AND CURRENCY

German; euro (1 euro = $1.12)

TAXES AND FEES

In the state of North Rhine-Westphalia, which includes Cologne, there is a property purchase tax of 6.5 percent of the sales price. The seller’s agent and the buyer’s agent each typically receive a commission of 3 percent of the purchase price, plus value-added tax. Registration and notary fees may add another 1.5 percent to 2 percent to the purchase costs. Property taxes on this house will likely be about 5,000 euros, or $5,600, a year, Mr. Schulze said.

CONTACT

Tobias Schulze, Cologne Sotheby’s International Realty, (011-49) 221 997 73 50; koeln-sothebysrealty.de/


