


CARACAS, Venezuela — Venezuela’s electoral commission on Tuesday released documents that would allow opposition politicians to collect signatures and formally begin a process aimed at removing President Nicolás Maduro from office.

The decision by the commission — which is controlled by Mr. Maduro’s Socialist government and previously resisted handing over the papers — lifted hopes of the opposition politicians, who control the National Assembly and have vowed to oust the president by the end of the year.

It made Venezuela the second country in the region undergoing an effort to remove its leader. This month, Brazil’s lower house of Congress approved the impeachment of President Dilma Rousseff over accusations that she misused state money.

On Tuesday, opposition politicians in Venezuela said they would forge ahead to collect signatures to get the recall effort underway.

“Today, we are struggling for the future of the country and we will not rest,” said Tomás Guanipa, a congressman and leader of the opposition party Primero Justicia. “We will defeat all of the obstacles the government and electoral commission put in our way.”

Mr. Maduro has characterized the effort as a coup attempt. “They go around saying ‘Our hour has come,’” he said of his opponents on television Tuesday night. “Your hour will never come.”

To hold a recall vote, opposition activists must first collect the signatures of one percent of eligible voters. In a second stage, 20 percent of voters would have to agree to the recall for it to be held. Mr. Maduro’s opponents would then have to win the recall with more votes than he received in his initial election, just under 51 percent.

Were Mr. Maduro to be removed this year, elections for a new president would be called.

A coalition of opposition parties defeated Mr. Maduro’s National Socialist Party in elections last December. But Mr. Maduro continues to control most of the levers of power.

That the commission gave the opposition access to the paperwork at all came as a surprise to many in Venezuela. Opposition leaders said that on previous attempts they had been ignored by the commission. One encounter turned violent.

Luis Pedro España, a sociologist and political scientist in Venezuela, said the government would probably try to delay the process until next year. If it can, Mr. Maduro could still be recalled, but his vice president would serve the remainder of the term.

“The government has no chance of winning an election and it knows it,” he said. “You see it in the polls, in the results of the Dec. 6 election and the crisis conditions that the country is facing.”

Mr. Maduro, who became president in 2013 upon the death of the socialist movement’s founder, Hugo Chávez, has seen his popularity plummet as the country suffers through the worst economic crisis in a generation as well as soaring crime and chronic shortages of basic goods.

Oil prices, which had financed Mr. Chávez’ ambitious socialist agenda, have collapsed and the International Monetary Fund is predicting triple-digit inflation. The country has ordered rolling blackouts as electricity runs low, and the shortages have meant that people must stand in line for hours to buy basic items like eggs and milk.

On Tuesday, the government declared Wednesday and Thursday holidays for government workers to save electricity, adding them to Friday, which had already been declared a no-work day. The government also said children would not attend school on Friday.


