


Elle Macpherson, 52, has been modeling for 35 years. These days, though, you’re more likely to find her in a product development meeting than in front of a camera. She has founded two companies, a namesake lingerie line and WelleCo, a wellness and supplements company that is introducing a sleep-inducing tea and calming essential-oil mist this month. Ms. Macpherson, a native of Sydney, Australia, now lives in Miami. Here are her best beauty picks and fitness advice.

The first thing: I believe in beauty from the inside out. What you put in your body is more important than what you put on your body, although they do work in tandem.

Second thing: I believe in exfoliation. The skin is the No. 1 detox organ, so if I can exfoliate and get my circulation going, that’s really important as well. I use a sea salt scrub for my body twice a day. For my face, I use a glycolic wash cleanser by NeoStrata every day. Then a couple of days a week, I also use a scrub or deeper exfoliator. I like the Dr Sebagh one, which is acid based and it’s gentle. Or I use a Dr. Brandt one that is like a face polish.

At the moment, I’m loving the Crème de la Mer. It’s really rich, and my skin has a tendency to get dehydrated from plane travel. Being based in Miami, sunblock is my best friend. I like Invisible Zinc. I also like one by Dr. Brandt.

I get recommendations from dermatologists or makeup artists. I like hearing about things word of mouth because there is so much product out there now, and they all come in such beautiful packaging, and they all promise the world. I get it confused, so that’s why word of mouth is key. Like the eye cream I use is by Arianna Skincare. I heard about it from Norman Foster’s wife. Her skin looks amazing, and I asked what she used. She suggested this eye cream, and it really works. I also like the Natura Bissé Diamond Eye Serum. Then for my lips and cuticles, I use Lucas’ Papaw — it’s very Aussie.

I like a very natural face. I don’t really wear any foundation at all. For everyday, I use RMS Beauty products. They’re coconut-oil-based, and they sit on the skin beautifully. I have one pot for the eyes and one pot for cheeks and lips. I do wear mascara: I like Diorshow Blackout. And I like a very, very pale brow. I fill them in with the Bobbi Brown pencil in Ash, but I don’t like it when the brow is dark. Everybody is doing these exaggerated brows, but it’s not my thing. I like a strong frame as in the shape, but I like the color to be soft. For a night out, I’ll do a dark smoky eye. I use Bobbi Brown pencils, then smudge.

I’m not someone who will spend an hour on makeup. I’m lucky if I spend 10 minutes, even when I’m going out. Concentrating for hours on your face — I don’t think it’s healthy.

Living in Miami, it’s obviously humid. There’s a tendency to glow, but I like that. If I’m doing TV, I use MAC Studio Fix on my T. It’s really great for photography, TV and film, but it’s too much for everyday. Chanel also has a great loose powder that I pop on my T — it’s more natural-looking.

For me, my hair is as important as my face. I’ve worked with Oribe for 20 to 30 years. He’s still one of the best in the business, and when he came out with his own products, they were just superior to anything out there. I use his shampoos and conditioners. He’s also based in Miami, and we do see each other, but he’s always so busy shooting.

I go to Josh Wood in London for my color. He keeps my hair looking modern and relevant. He doesn’t just do a single process. He has encouraged me to use my natural roots. Sometimes he does a sun-kissed look on the ends, but he keeps the color looking strong and natural.

I’ve worn Vétiver by Guerlain — it’s a men’s cologne — for maybe 30 years. I smelled it on somebody once, and then I wanted it for myself. But I’d like to create my own perfume. It’s definitely in the cards.

I really believe in the fusion of Eastern and Western medicines. I do acupuncture and kinesiology — it’s a form of body diagnosis through response of the body. I also do osteopathy. Massage is important to me, not just for relaxation but also for circulation. Nichola Joss does amazing facial and body massages.

About three years ago, I started doing an alkaline diet. I was feeling listless and lacked muscle tone. What I was doing wasn’t working. A nutritionist did some testing and said I was too acidic. I made some minor changes to my diet, like less red meat, and she also gave me this green powder to drink. That’s where the idea for my Super Elixir came from. I worked with that nutritionist, and I put everything that I needed or wanted from vitamins and supplements into one product.

I like to be outdoors, and the way I choose to engage with the outdoors is through sport. In New York City, I run around the reservoir. In Miami, I paddle-board or Jet Ski or run along the beach. If I’m in the mountains, I ski or hike. I like to play tennis even though I’m not very good at it.

For me, it’s more about the sport. It’s not about needing to get a workout in or losing weight. I don’t spend time at a gym. I don’t have a trainer. But I do have friends who I love to do these activities with.


