


On Thursday, Britain votes on whether to leave the European Union. Two of The Upshot’s financial reporters, Neil Irwin and Peter Eavis, discussed the potential consequences of what is being called Brexit.

Peter: Neil, so summer’s coming and that usually means a crisis brewing in Europe. Of course, right now that’s the Brexit vote. Do you think the markets have priced in a vote to leave? And how is Brexit different from Greece crashing out of the euro, the crisis of last year?

Neil: Greetings to The Upshot’s resident Brit, from an American who just likes going to pubs.

The funny thing about Brexit and markets is the gap between the polling evidence, which has decisively swung in the last couple of weeks toward Britain leaving the E.U., and the comparative equanimity of financial markets. Yes, the pound is down since late May, from around $1.47 to $1.42. British stocks are down. British government bond yields are down substantially as well, though that could cut either way in what it’s telling us. But none of this is panic-alarm type of activity in financial markets of the sort we saw surrounding the more intense phases of the Greek crisis. The way I see it, there are two possibilities: Either markets think British voters will come to their senses by Election Day and the polling should be ignored, or investors just think the financial and economic ripples of a “leave” vote are overstated.

But I’m not sure which theory I place more weight on.

Peter: Let’s take up your second option — that investors think Brexit possible but do not fear a broad impact in the global economy and in the markets. I can see a scenario in which that stance makes sense. It’s in the interests of the E.U. and Britain to work out a smooth transition. Leaders would make soothing remarks and central banks would ease policy to offset economic weakness and turmoil in the markets. The storm would pass. But there are gloomier scenarios. The shock of Brexit could reinforce deflationary forces in Europe, which the European Central Bank has struggled to overcome. Over time, Brexit might stoke the popularity of movements in other countries that want to leave the European Union. The prospect of, say, the Netherlands, a member of the euro, voting to leave would be very bearish.

Neil: That’s all true. In general, markets are a whole lot better at pricing in short-term ups and downs — say a possible central bank rate increase, or a bad quarter of earnings — than they are longer-term existential risks. Like in a hypothetical sense, if Brexit is going to subtract 2 percent from British G.D.P. forever and has substantial probability of unraveling the European project, risk assets should be down way more than they are. But in practical terms, I think the people who drive stock and bond and currency markets are thinking in terms of, “Well, if the vote is to ‘leave,’ the Bank of England will do more quantitative easing and protracted negotiations will take place and so forth,” not really offering any informed prediction of the future of Europe.

Peter: Which takes us back to the Greek crisis of last year. The American markets did not have a big freakout in response to the tensions between Greece and the E.U. I think investors bet on a deal even at times that it looked remote. What really caught the markets out was China, and its surprise currency devaluation in August. Investors took a long while to figure that out. The Chinese authorities calmed things down eventually through better communication, and they made it clear that they weren’t going to let the renminbi spiral downward. Global markets picked up till early 2016, when they plunged, then they picked up and now they look wobbly again. Looking at that pattern, it would seem that there are still some significant limits to the power of the central banks, even in the era of quantitative easing.

Neil: I’d draw another parallel: During the standoff over raising the American debt ceiling in the summer of 2011, markets went completely haywire on the latest hints of whether a deal would happen or not and whether a debt default might happen. But by the fall of 2013, when it happened again, the impact on markets was much smaller. I think it’s similar to what happened with Greece. Pessimistic investors who predicted the whole system would blow up lost their shirts, and so became less and less willing to bet against the authorities eventually figuring it out. But frequently it is wild swings in financial markets that help prod government authorities into action, as in 2011 in the United States and also with the bank bailout bill in 2008. But that works until it doesn’t. I wonder if what an anti-Brexit Brit should be rooting for is a 10 percent drop in sterling and a 20 percent drop in the FTSE index in the couple of days before the vote to scare everyone silly.

Peter: That might do it. So far, the “remain” camp has really struggled to get enough people concerned about the economic consequences of Brexit. I have just written an article looking at polls that ask Brits about the repercussions, and a surprising number of people think little will change. In a sense, then, they may be aligned with the markets right now!

Neil: The thing about markets is that they’re really efficient, except when they’re not. And those are the times that are brutal.

Peter: But for it to be lastingly brutal you need more than just surprise. You need surprise that reveals a large flaw. In 2008, it was the extreme fragility of the banking system. I don’t know what that is right now.

Neil: The fear here is that the big flaw will turn out to be that nationalist currents run deeper and European unity shallower than anyone realized. Just maybe the entire superstructure of Pan-European institutions, and the peace, free trade and free movement of people across Europe that we take for granted, will turn out to be temporary. But as an American who has only lived in a world with a peaceful and economically integrated Europe, a force for good in the world, I really hope that’s wrong.

Peter: I do, too. But Europeans are very fond of the European Union as an idea. It’s actually quite impressive how wedded they’ve been to the whole project through the ups and downs of the past eight years. I think it would handle Brexit.


