


HALLE, Germany — On paper, it was Roger Federer’s least auspicious Wimbledon preparation in years. But on his path to recovery from an injury-plagued start to the season, his semifinal losses at two grass-court events in Germany were marked progress.

After his 7-6 (4), 5-7, 6-3 loss to Alexander Zverev here in the semifinals of the Gerry Weber Open on Saturday, Federer tried to take the positives from his last two weeks of match play, in which he uncharacteristically lost before reaching the finals at two Wimbledon tuneup tournaments.

“Looking back on how I felt three, four weeks ago, this is pretty good, obviously,” Federer said. “You’re talking to me after a loss, so clearly it’s always tougher to step back and just to reassess how great everything is after losing. But I must say it’s gotten better and better.”

He added: “I am actually fairly satisfied. If I had known three weeks ago that now I would have played seven matches in 10 days, I would have said, ‘Wow, that would be a dream scenario.’ Now, of course, after the defeat you think: ‘Hmm, shouldn’t I be in the final? Couldn’t I have played the final in Stuttgart?’ But in hindsight, this is probably best so for my body, with a view for Wimbledon and for the remainder of the season.”

Federer, 34, has struggled with back and knee injuries this year, and his record run of consecutive appearances in the main draw of Grand Slam tournaments ended at 65 when he pulled out of the French Open last month.

Federer’s serve and return were forceful against Zverev, but his normally nimble lateral movement was more tentative, causing more errors in his groundstrokes as he struggled to match Zverev’s steadiness from the baseline.

Zverev, 19, became the first teenager to beat Federer in nearly a decade, since Federer lost in August 2006 to Andy Murray, who was then 19. Dominic Thiem, who beat Federer this month in the semifinals at Stuttgart, is 22.

“There’s little things that just have to fall into place, and then you’ll play better, you’ll feel better,” Federer said. “I hope it’s sooner than later, and I know what I need to work on in the next 10 days.

“Clearly, I also need to rest now. It’s been a lot of tennis; this has been seven matches in nine or 10 days now. So it’s been intense, and it’s been busy, and it’s exactly what I needed. At least I have a clear picture now where my game is at, what I need to do, and without Stuttgart and Halle, I wouldn’t have that. So I have more clarity now.”

Federer will return to Switzerland briefly before traveling to London early next week to begin training at Wimbledon, where he has made the final in each of the last two years, losing both times to Novak Djokovic.

Still, Wimbledon, with its grass courts, offers the conditions most suitable for Federer to win his 18th Grand Slam singles title. It is also the first of several tournaments in which Federer, now ranked No. 3, will have to defend a large quantity of ranking points. With his limited play this year, more than half of his ranking points come from his runs last year to the finals of Wimbledon, the United States Open and the World Tour Finals and from his title at the Cincinnati Masters. Without strong runs in those events, Federer’s 14-year residency in the top 10 could be at risk.

With Wimbledon still a week away, Federer said it was too soon to tell if he was ready for another deep run, and a possible eighth title there.

“I definitely need a rest first,” he said, “and once I get back on practice, and after I’ve done that for three, four days, probably by the time the press conference rolls around in Wimbledon on Saturday, I can probably tell you a whole lot more.”

Federer said his losses in the tuneup tournaments would only heighten his awareness of how badly he needed a strong start at his best major.

“I know the danger of the early rounds in Wimbledon or at any Slam, in particular on the grass,” he said. “We’ve seen my two losses now on the grass against Thiem and Zverev. Both could have been avoided; they weren’t. So clearly, I’ve got some work to do. The other guys are doing their job well.”


