


Komal M. Patel, the daughter of Dr. Umangi M. Patel and Mukesh R. Patel of Newburgh, N.Y., is to be married May 29 to Dr. Ravi Navin Shah, the son of Dr. Taru N. Shah and Navin B. Shah of Duluth, Ga. Vimesh Thakar, a Hindu priest, is to lead the ceremony at the Mandarin Oriental in New York.

The bride, 29, received an M.B.A. from Columbia earlier this month. In September, she is to become a health care consultant in the Summit, N.J., office of the Boston Consulting Group. She graduated from Case Western Reserve University and received a Master of Public Health from Dartmouth.

The groom, 31, is a chief resident in the department of psychiatry at the New York State Psychiatric Institute in New York. In September he is to begin working as an assistant professor of psychiatry at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York. He graduated cum laude from Princeton and received a medical degree and an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.

The couple were introduced in October 2012 by a mutual friend amid hundreds of people, mostly in their 20s, at Garba in the City at Chelsea Piers, an annual Indian dance event featuring traditional dance from the State of Gujarat.

“I totally thought she noticed me the way I noticed her,” said Dr. Shah, who was swept off his feet by the sight of Ms. Patel whirling around in a pink and white lengha (a long skirt with a cropped top and pleated scarf draped around her body). “She makes perfect eye contact when she looks at you.”

During one portion of the dance they had been partners for about 30 seconds three or four times. They locked eyes while hitting sticks that they each held for five beats before moving on to the next partner.

Dr. Shah, convinced of their special connection, knew he had to go to a party their mutual friend was giving after the dance, and rushed home to shower and change clothes.

“I’m Komal,” she recalled saying to him when they met at the party. She had no recollection of him.

“I was totally shocked,” he said. “In my mind we exchanged looks. It loomed large in my mind, not in hers. I rolled with the punches.”

But they did connect and spent several hours chatting, she said, learning they were both interested in health care, that members of their families were from Gujarat and that their mothers were doctors and their fathers were engineers.

Later that evening, when he told her he liked her and wanted to take her out, Ms. Patel did not play hard to get. “What are you doing tomorrow?” she recalled saying.

He said that he was surprised, thinking he would have to wait a week to see her.

“I grew up with smart, strong women,” he said. He did not flinch when she told him that she would pick a restaurant — she preferred the East Village while he preferred the West Village. The next afternoon, when she texted him three clues (medieval, middle class and East Village) to guess which restaurant, she had met her match.

“I did not know the Bourgeois Pig served dinner,” he said to her chagrin within 10 minutes of her text. To keep from being upstaged, she playfully changed the reservation to a nearby Mexican restaurant.

The conversation flowed from dinner to dessert and, late into the evening, at a wine bar he took her to in the West Village. “Nobody was getting bored,” he said.

She was impressed, she said, from the beginning with how he is a “naturally happy and positive person.”

“People have better halves,” she said, “but he’s my best half.”


