


The letter from Fidel Castro to the American people read like this:

“I wish to invite the American tourists and the American business men to come back to Cuba.”

“We are back to normal in Cuba, a Cuba where there is liberty, peace and order, a beautiful land of happy people. Our hotels, shops and offices are open and we want our friends from the United States to come and see Cuba, which can now be counted among the countries where freedom and democracy are a reality.”

This was not the invitation that led an American cruise ship to sail into Havana on Monday, the first from the United States to dock there in 40 years. Other forces and figures smoothed those choppy waters. Rather, this invitation, according to a report in The Times, was issued by Mr. Castro in January 1959, shortly after he overthrew the government of President Fulgencio Batista.

Just months earlier, in November 1958, Mr. Castro’s rebels were still fighting hundreds of miles from Havana, and it was Batista who was trying to revive tourism.

“To the visitor, Havana continues to be a charming, cosmopolitan city which is rapidly becoming one of the most modern in Latin America,” The Times reported on Nov. 2.

“Streets are crowded and there is heavy traffic both day and night. Motion picture theatres have good houses. At the big casinos and nightclubs the play over the green tables is heavy. The Sevilla Biltmore Hotel Casino has no limit on any wager in any game and recently two Americans won $59,700 in two hours there at the blackjack table. This is not rumor but an authenticated report.”

When the Batista regime fell, it was left to Mr. Castro to resume the enticements. And he did so with gusto.

A year after Mr. Castro’s letter, the headline “Yankee Tourist Now a V.I.P. in Cuba” ran in The Times along with a photograph issued by the Cuban government showing a bikini-clad model posing seductively on Varadero Beach.

“That secretary of a number of years ago who went to Havana on one of those cruises for $49.50 to spend a few days may be able to do so again,” R. Hart Phillips wrote. “Maybe not for $49.50, but for not too much more than that. This is because Premier Fidel Castro has launched a crash program designed to attract American visitors to Cuba, where tourism is rapidly becoming a state owned and operated business.”

Castro had made himself president of a new tourist organization with “unlimited powers in tourism,” Ms. Phillips reported. “With great enthusiasm, he flies around the island, ordering the confiscation or seizure of hotels and motels, the development of new beaches and the construction of new roads, hotels, motels and other facilities for tourists.

“Strangely enough, Dr. Castro simultaneously talks of an ‘imminent invasion’ by enemies of his regime and of blood flowing in the streets.”

Nevertheless, Ms. Phillips reported, “the American tourist has become, in the second year of the Revolution, a Very Important Person. He is welcomed everywhere he goes. To the visitor, Cuba is a peaceful island where the present Government is striving to remedy all evils of past Governments.”

It may not have worked out quite as planned.


