


As a conservative Republican leader in Utah, Spencer Cox may be an unlikely luminary for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community.

But the lieutenant governor’s speech at a candlelight vigil in Salt Lake City for the Orlando shooting victims has been widely shared on social media, and he said in an interview Thursday that the response has been uniformly positive — including from fellow conservative Republicans.

“I’m hopeful, if nothing else, I can give some cover for other politicians who feel things but don’t say them for whatever reason,” Mr. Cox, 40, said.

In the speech Monday, he acknowledged that as a “balding, youngish, middle-aged, straight, white, male, Republican politician,” he was an unexpected speaker at the event. But he was praised for confronting his past attitudes toward gay people, and apologized for his past treatment of gay students at his small, rural high school.

“There were some kids in my class that were different,” Mr. Cox said at the vigil, which was attended by about 1,000 people. “Sometimes I wasn’t kind to them. I didn’t know it at the time, but I know now that they were gay. I will forever regret not treating them with the kindness, dignity and respect — the love — that they deserved. For that, I sincerely and humbly apologize.”

Mr. Cox said the fact that many among the 49 victims in Orlando were gay shouldn’t matter, “but I’m here because it does.” He said that change would happen through personal change, not through politicians, and praised the L.G.B.T. community for welcoming him at the vigil, despite their political differences.

“You have treated me with the kindness, dignity, and respect — the love — that I very often did not deserve,” he said. “And it has made me love you.”

The decision to invite Mr. Cox to speak at the vigil was not without controversy, said Troy Williams, the executive director of Equality Utah, which organized the gathering. The L.G.B.T. community in Utah has had a largely adversarial relationship with the current administration, which has joined a lawsuit against the Obama administration over the use of bathrooms by transgender people and opposes same-sex marriage.

Mr. Williams said he did not know what Mr. Cox would say when the politician was invited to speak, but said the lieutenant governor had long been open to discussion. He called the result “a beautiful speech.”

“We hope that this will set a new standard of discourse with Republican leadership,” he said.

Mr. Cox said he had mended his relationship with those students he teased in high school. One of them reached out to him after the speech and thanked him, he said.

He said his attitudes changed as he got to know people in the gay community, whom he praised for their patience with him. He said he would sometimes say the wrong things “because I’m not sure how to say the right things, but they laugh and kind of help me through it.”

“When you actually sit around and really get to know someone, it makes it much harder to demonize or discredit people,” he said. “We can have disagreements over policy and still love each other and still be friends, and that’s something I think is getting lost more and more in the partisan world we live in.”


