


As the Irish fiddles began to play on Sunday afternoon, Fiona Kells strapped on her dancing shoes at a festival in Battery Park in Manhattan celebrating the 100-year anniversary of the Easter Rising, a rebellion that started Ireland on its path to independence. The celebration highlighted the inspiration those revolutionaries found in American principles of liberty and their connection to the Irish diaspora — like Fiona and her family — in America.

Of her own accord, the 9-year-old girl stepped in front of the crowd. She tossed her red hair and began to jig with passion. “I feel like I sort of belong here,” she said after the applause died down.

Sunday’s event began at the edge of the Hudson River, as dignitaries from Ireland and America spoke of the connection between the two countries before a crowd dotted with flame-colored hair and Kelly green outfits. Pipers played as flowers were laid before an Irish flag, flown at half-staff, in honor of the members of the insurrection during Easter Week in 1916 who were killed in their attempt to free Ireland from British rule and declare an independent nation.

At the outset of the Easter Rising, the rebels read a text, called the Proclamation of the Irish Republic, modeled after the Declaration of Independence — and going further than that document in its assertion of universal suffrage. On Sunday, that text was recited for the crowd sitting opposite the Statue of Liberty in Wagner Park, near ground that had once been a landing berth for millions of immigrants, Irish included, according to Barbara Jones, the Irish consul general.

For all the Irish culture on display, there were some only-in-New York twists. Peter Quinn, a writer and historian, took the stage and recited a phrase from the traditional Passover song, the Four Questions, in Hebrew, “Why is this night different from all other nights?” linking it to the significance of April 24 in Irish history.

Melissa Mark-Viverito, the New York City Council speaker, spoke of visiting the site of the Rising, the General Post Office in Dublin, with a delegation of council members, and how it stirred thoughts of her Puerto Rican heritage, and that island’s quest for independence.

Also in attendance was George J. Mitchell, the former U.S. senator from Maine, who helped broker the Good Friday Agreement, the peace accord between Ireland, Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom. He posed for selfies with guests, who were grateful for his role in taming the inflamed island two decades ago. “There is largely now peace, there is more economic stability,” Mr. Mitchell said after the ceremony, “But genuine reconciliation, changing what’s in people’s hearts and minds, takes longer, is more difficult, but in the end it’s the most important thing.”

After the ceremony, people went inside Pier A Harbor House to watch Irish films and listen to music and lectures. On the second floor, Patrick Rooney, 54, an electrician, waited for a talk on the role of the “Irish mammy,” or mother, in the rebellion with members of his extended family — a family related to the Connolly clan, a group of brothers and a sister who took part in the storming of Dublin Castle during the Rising. Mr. Rooney’s great-uncle is believed to have fired the first shot in the rebellion, a point of pride for the family for his part in Ireland’s emancipation. But sitting at the event, the family was reluctant to brag about the connection, expressing remorse that their ancestor had also wrought the battle’s first casualty.

“It’s the beginning of Ireland,” Mr. Rooney said. “They took on the empire.”


