


Two longtime employees of the Drug Enforcement Administration were convicted on Thursday of making false statements on security clearance forms about their ownership of a strip club in northern New Jersey.

A Federal District Court jury in Manhattan deliberated for about three hours before finding the defendants, Glen Glover and David Polos, guilty on all counts. They remained in the courtroom for several minutes afterward, conferring with relatives and lawyers, then emerged into a hallway looking grim.

Lawyers for both men said they were surprised by the verdict and would ask for it to be set aside.

“We respect the jury’s verdict, but we don’t think they committed any crime,” said Marc Mukasey, a lawyer for Mr. Polos.

Cathy Fleming, a lawyer for Mr. Glover, said she would renew a motion for a judgment of acquittal that she had made before the trial. If that did not succeed, she said, she would appeal.

Both men were convicted of omitting any mention of the club in 2011 when filling out a federal form that asked for a listing of all employment, including “full-time and part-time work, paid or unpaid.” They were also found guilty of conspiring to hide their connection with the club, the Twins Plus Go-Go Lounge in South Hackensack, N.J.

Prosecutors said the defendants had wanted to preserve the top-secret security clearance they had as D.E.A. employees, which would almost certainly have been revoked had their ownership of the club come to light. Defense lawyers argued that the two had not lied because they considered themselves to be mere investors in Twins Plus, not employees of the club.

Mr. Polos was convicted of a separate count of lying on the form by saying that he had not had “close or continuing contact” with any foreign national, despite a romantic relationship he had with a dancer from Brazil who worked at the club after entering the United States illegally.

Mr. Polos faces up to 15 years in prison. Mr. Glover faces up to 10 years. No sentencing date has yet been set.

The trial was unusual in several respects, hinting at seamy activities at the strip club and placing two experienced federal law enforcement employees in unfamiliar roles as defendants

Mr. Glover worked for the drug agency since 1998, tracking cellphone use as a telecommunications specialist, among other things. He has been suspended since his arrest. Agency officials said a felony conviction would generally make an employee ineligible to work for it.

Mr. Polos, who resigned just before charges in the case became public, had worked for the agency since 1991, most recently helping to supervise the New York Organized Crime and Drug Enforcement Strike Force and overseeing agents who investigated the notorious online drug bazaar Silk Road.

Prosecutors and defense lawyers presented clashing depictions of the defendants. Prosecutors described them as calculating opportunists who tried to compartmentalize “double lives” while working regular shifts at the club, participating in decisions to hire and fire bartenders and dancers and frequently exchanging text messages about club business, even while they were at work in Manhattan.

Defense lawyers presented the two as guileless “blue-collar working guys” who had seen the club as a harmless way to “let off steam” while trying to create “a nest egg.” They had not meant to mislead, both lawyers said of their clients, but had been mystified by a complex government form.

During his closing argument on Wednesday, Mr. Mukasey, Mr. Polos’s lawyer, displayed a tall placard with an illustration of a D.E.A. badge, featuring the letters “U.S.” topped by an eagle with wings spread. He called his client a “dedicated, devoted, die-hard D.E.A. agent” who had risked his life hunting narco-traffickers in Colombia and Thailand.

During her closing argument, Ms. Fleming, Mr. Glover’s lawyer, emphasized his visits to the club had been to monitor an investment, not to work. Referring to a snapshot that showed a beaming Mr. Glover posing with five scantily clad dancers, she asked the jurors, “Does that look like an employee, or does that look like an owner?”

Prosecutors countered with reams of documents detailing text messages and emails they said showed the defendants were intimately involved in running Twins Plus, and referred to a colorful parade of witnesses who had worked at the club and testified that they had suspected dancers there of using drugs and engaging in prostitution.

Those included Joseph Banas, who testified that he thought a dancer had received contraband deliveries just outside the club, and Jeffrey Brown, who testified that he had seen condoms scattered in a room inside the club used for lap dances.

Mr. Brown also testified that he had seen Mr. Polos and the Brazilian dancer Andressa de Lima one day outside the club, and that Mr. Polos had later cautioned him to keep quiet about that. Some “things that you know,” Mr. Brown said Mr. Polos had told him, would be “better left unsaid.”


