


Donald J. Trump plans to attack the character, honesty and authenticity of Hillary and Bill Clinton in the months ahead, in hopes of increasing their unpopularity among voters and deflecting attention from his vulnerabilities.

Here are some of his lines of attack against the Clintons, which he described in a recent interview with The New York Times.

Why Trump Would Attack: Mr. Trump has already used Mr. Clinton’s history of infidelity against Mrs. Clinton to repel criticism that Mr. Trump is sexist. He claims that Mrs. Clinton enabled her husband by staying with him despite the affairs and protected him by trying to blame the women. “We have to destroy her story,” Mrs. Clinton said of one woman, according to the memoir of Mr. Clinton’s former adviser George Stephanopoulos.

Why It Might Fail: Even some of Mrs. Clinton’s harshest critics think that she handled her marital problems with grace, and the opening of old wounds could engender sympathy for her. This line of attack also opens up Mr. Trump, who has been married three times, to questions about his philandering.

_____

Why Trump Would Attack: The Monica Lewinsky scandal raises many questions that could benefit Mr. Trump: Should Mr. Clinton again have a role in the White House after conducting such an affair on the job? Did Mrs. Clinton mistreat Ms. Lewinsky when she called her a “narcissistic loony toon?” And do voters really want to relive the dramas of the 1990s?

Why It Might Fail: Polls from the late 1990s showed that Mrs. Clinton’s popularity soared as the scandal unfolded, suggesting that Mr. Trump might actually help his opponent by bringing up the subject. Mrs. Clinton often responds by calling the controversy old news, and she could be correct that voters are tired of hearing about it.

_____

Why Trump Would Attack: Old questions about how Mrs. Clinton managed in the late 1970s to turn a $1,000 investment in cattle futures into nearly $100,000 with little financial experience is a prime target for Mr. Trump because it fits into the theme that she is “crooked,” a narrative that he has been carefully cultivating. This line of attack also puts the debate on friendly turf for Mr. Trump, a billionaire businessman with plenty of experience investing.

Why It Might Fail: The cattle controversy never amounted to much, and resurfacing it opens up Mr. Trump to rebuttals about his many failed businesses and the lawsuits facing Trump University, which has been accused of fraudulent practices.

_____

Why Trump Would Attack: The issue of Mrs. Clinton’s conducting business on a private email server as secretary of state is relatively fresh fodder for Mr. Trump, and a continuing federal investigation is grist for him to claim that she should be disqualified from the presidency. Mrs. Clinton has been spared much discussion of this in her primary campaign, but the nebulous nature of her email practices gives Mr. Trump the chance to argue, without having any evidence, that she showed poor judgment and had something to hide.

Why It Might Fail: Mrs. Clinton has already expressed regret for her email practices, and the situation is frozen while the F.B.I. conducts its investigation. There is little new to say on the matter, and there has been no evidence that Mrs. Clinton’s private server put national security at risk.

_____

Why Trump Would Attack: The attacks at a United States diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, are a favorite subject of Republicans, and Mr. Trump will surely try to use them to paint Mrs. Clinton as incompetent. He has already said that she was asleep for her “3 a.m. call,” accusing her of failing to respond quickly enough to the attacks, which led to the deaths of four Americans. The episode will also make for powerful television ads.

Why It Might Fail: Mrs. Clinton has already weathered hours of grilling before Congress on Benghazi, and she has her responses well practiced. By bringing it up, Mr. Trump could highlight a lack of foreign policy knowledge.


