


ALBANY — The centerpiece of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s economic revitalization program in Buffalo gained approval for an infusion of state money on Wednesday, even as the initiative continued to be shadowed by a federal investigation into how state officials awarded contracts.

Initially scheduled for last week, the vote to release $485 million in state funds for the project, a solar-panel factory called SolarCity, had seemed destined to move forward with little fuss. But amid news that the plant was delaying its opening and changing the number of jobs it had promised, legislative leaders signaled that they would apply more scrutiny. The vote, once a formality, was postponed while they sought more information from the office of the governor, a Democrat.

But on Wednesday, the commotion surrounding the delay added only a few minutes of questioning to the meeting of the state board that must formally approve the funding, the Public Authorities Control Board, before representatives of the governor and the two legislative leaders voted in favor of the appropriation. But the proxy on the board for the Assembly’s Democratic majority attached several conditions to the Assembly’s approval, including requiring monthly reports on SolarCity’s progress and clarifying what would follow if the project failed to produce the promised jobs.

The proxy, Ashley Ryle, said the extra layer of disclosure would help “ensure the public faith in — and the appropriate level of information on — this critical project.”

Other conditions included specifying that the funds approved by the board were for SolarCity alone, preventing other projects from drawing on them without legislative leaders’ approval. The Assembly also required that a third party review all of the project’s expenditures.

The Assembly majority ultimately supported the grant because SolarCity “remains a critical component to the economic resurgence of western New York,” Kerri Biche, a spokeswoman for Carl E. Heastie, the Assembly speaker, said in a statement.

Brian Kolb, the Assembly minority leader, wrote in a letter that while many questions about SolarCity remained, Mr. Cuomo’s economic development agency had provided few answers.

Representatives of Fort Schuyler Management Corporation, a state subsidiary that oversees SolarCity, had failed to turn up for a briefing with Mr. Kolb and other legislative leaders, he wrote. (Lawyers for Fort Schuyler and the economic development agency did, however, show up at Wednesday’s meeting to describe how public funds were shepherded through SolarCity.)

But Mr. Kolb’s call to “act prudently with public money” had little effect: Mr. Kolb has a representative on the board, Assemblyman Joseph Giglio, but his support was not required for the funding to be granted.

Even so, Mr. Giglio voted yes.


