


WASHINGTON — Senator Ted Cruz of Texas is expected to return to the Capitol this week, the last of four Republican senators battered and beaten by Donald J. Trump to trudge back to the world of meetings over cafeteria cod and roll call votes to name the national mammal.

But Mr. Cruz’s return is more fraught with curiosity than those of the other three, Senators Rand Paul of Kentucky, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Marco Rubio of Florida. He made it the furthest, winning 10 states and coming tantalizingly close to pushing Mr. Trump to a contested convention, only to drop out on the same day the billionaire developer suggested that Mr. Cruz’s father had conspired with Lee Harvey Oswald.

The party’s presumptive nominee had also insulted Mr. Cruz’s wife, baselessly alluded to extramarital affairs and labeled him “Lyin’ Ted.”

Now the man who helped create an outsider movement in national politics, only to have it eat him alive after his rival co-opted the idea, must decide which group among his fellow lawmakers to join. Will he stand with the hold-your-nose set, as Mr. Paul has done, and support Mr. Trump? Or join forces with “Never Trump,” as Senator Graham did on Friday, and publicly decline to get on board?

Or will he take the route of Mr. Rubio, in effect giving a non-endorsement endorsement, saying he will support any Republican nominee, but not explicitly name Mr. Trump?

“I think all of us will be interested to see what position Senator Cruz takes,” said Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, who is more or less in the same place as Mr. Graham. “After he pretty much excoriated Trump on the final day of his campaign, it would be quite a turnabout if he were to support him now.”

Millions of voters are watching, but for now, he won’t say. Mr. Cruz “is currently scheduled to be back in D.C. next week, and that’s as much detail as we’re sharing right now,” his spokesman Phil Novack said on Friday.

The Senate has long been the cradle of presidential ambition, with each of the 100 senators possessed of the capacity to look in the mirror and see the next president of the United States. But those dreams are so rarely realized that Barack Obama was the first to ascend directly from the Senate to the White House since John F. Kennedy.

Mr. Cruz’s return nearly coincides with the arrival of Mr. Trump, who plans to visit Speaker Paul D. Ryan and other House Republicans on Thursday with the goal of unifying the party. Mr. Ryan said last week that he was “not ready” to give Mr. Trump his support.

It is a division Mr. Cruz helped create, by pressing congressional Republicans to defy party leaders and their colleagues to shut down the government and repeatedly hold up basic legislation, giving him the distinction of being the least popular member of one of the world’s most exclusive clubs.

But outside the noise and theatrics of the campaign, Mr. Cruz also finds himself at a potential turning point in his Senate career, both as a returning failed presidential candidate and as an unpopular firebrand who has been most comfortable as a thorn, rather than partner, to other Republicans.

The Senate has a rich history of members whose run for president failed but who came back to effective legislative careers.

From Henry Clay, who ran for president three times in the 1800s, to Hubert Humphrey, who narrowly lost to Richard Nixon in 1968, to Edward M. Kennedy, one of the greatest bipartisan lawmakers of all time, to John McCain, who was defeated by Barack Obama in 2008 and is now an effective chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, also-rans can find their Senate home a great refuge.

“They remember what they liked about the Senate,” said Donald A. Ritchie, a historian emeritus of the Senate. “The fact is United States senators are very influential and powerful people in their own right. Those who come back and are not running again or not at the end of their term hunker down in committee assignments and hopefully have learned a lot that can translate into legislation.”

The Senate’s clubbiness and customs can also make for a pleasant landing after a dispiriting defeat. “The Senate can be a forgiving place for those coming back from a run for president,” said Jim Manley, a former senior communications aide to Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada. “You still have staffers at your beck and call, and everyone still opens the door for you.”

At the same time, even lawmakers who wore their antagonism of leaders with honor can evolve into statesmen in the Senate. This was the case with Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania — now best known for his bipartisan efforts at a gun safety law — and Mr. Flake, who used to irritate House leaders and is now considered one of the most thoughtful members of the Senate.

“Toomey and Flake — when confronted with the way the place works, they moderated,” said James A. Thurber, the director of the Center for Congressional and Presidential Studies at American University. “They changed the institution a little bit, but more the institutions changed them.” In the case of Mr. Toomey, who is up for re-election, “with Trump at the top of the ticket he has to focus on his role in the Senate,” Mr. Thurber said.

Mr. Graham returned to the Senate being, well, Lindsey Graham. He quips, he votes, he goes on television and is funny. “Eating a taco is probably not going to fix the problems that we have with Hispanics,” he told CNN’s Dana Bash last week, referring to Mr. Trump’s photo on Twitter of himself with a taco bowl. “I think embracing Donald Trump is embracing demographic death.”

Mr. Rubio has become more senatorial in a classic sense than he had been in the last two years, going to the floor of the Senate to fight for money to combat the Zika virus, and traveling to the Middle East.

“Marco always believed his purpose in the Senate was to get things done,” said Alex Conant, his former spokesman. “That’s why he joined the immigration reform effort and spent so much time on foreign policy. When the campaign ended, it was easy for him to get back to work in the Senate.”

Mr. Paul’s return has been decidedly different. He has mostly just walked around looking miserable.

What Mr. Cruz will do is anyone’s guess. Right now he has been resting with his family, and no one seems to have heard from him.

“The Senate can change you,” Mr. Manley said, “but if you want to be an effective legislator, 60 votes are key and bipartisanship is necessary if you want to get anything done. Senator Cruz demonstrated zero desire to work with his colleagues before he went on the campaign trail, and I doubt very much he will change when he gets back. And that is a problem the Senate does not need right now.”


