


Rick DiPietro is delighted to say that his 15-month-old son, Milo, often greets the day with a mini hockey stick and ball, which he uses to score lots of goals.

“The only regret is that I wish I had him when I was playing,” DiPietro said recently. “He’s obsessed with hockey.”

Although he said he has not filed retirement papers, DiPietro, 34, has not played a competitive game since nearly two and a half years ago, when he told the Charlotte Checkers of the American Hockey League that he was abandoning a comeback attempt after five games.

“It’s probably safe to say no return is coming soon,” he said.

DiPietro, a goaltender who was the No. 1 overall choice in the 2000 entry draft, was so prone to injury during his 10-year, 318-game N.H.L. career, all with the Islanders, that he adopted as his Twitter handle @HDumpty39, as in the Humpty Dumpty who had a great fall.

He is now on the daily sports-talk show “Hahn and Humpty” on ESPN Radio in New York. He is partnered with Alan Hahn, who used to cover DiPietro and the Islanders for Newsday. A television highlight version of the show is to run on MSG Network this summer.

“He’s a natural, just like his days as an athlete,” said Hahn, who is also an analyst on Knicks telecasts on MSG. “In fact, he treats this job much like he does a sport: He has great passion, puts in great preparation and is a quick study. You rarely see that when a pro athlete moves into this side of the business.”

Three years ago, the Islanders bought DiPietro out of a then-record 15-year, $67.5 million contract that he had signed in 2006. He is to receive $1.5 million annually through 2029.

“I’d rather be playing,” he said. “I’m more disappointed than anything that I wasn’t able to prove to everyone that I was worth the deal.”

His new career has taken an interesting turn. In addition to the radio show, DiPietro was hired by MSG to serve as a commentator before, during and after Islanders telecasts. NBC has taken over for the Stanley Cup playoffs, but DiPietro is working a postgame show on MSG.

“We’ve all been impressed with Rick’s ability to connect and engage with fans with his fresh, bold and insightful analysis,” Andrea Greenberg, president and chief executive of MSG Networks, wrote in an email. “Rick has taken broadcasting very seriously, and we’re happy to have him as part of our esteemed talent team.”

But DiPietro is still very much an Islander. When John Tavares scored in the second overtime against the Panthers last week to lift the Islanders to the second round of the playoffs for the first time since 1993 — nearly eight years before DiPietro’s first N.H.L. game — he was at Barclays Center in Brooklyn, watching the game.

He remembers jumping into the arms of a security guard after the goal. Tavares, the Islanders’ No. 1 overall draft choice in 2009, could well have been a teammate. The 15-year contract DiPietro signed in 2006 would have had several years remaining.

“In a perfect world, I’d be playing for the team, but that didn’t work out,” DiPietro said.

He said he still considered himself to be an unabashed Islanders fan, but he added, “I’m just trying to be objective.”

“It’s something I try to do, regardless of the sport,” he said.

Of the radio show, he said, “The Rangers fans tell me all the time, ‘We hated you when you were playing for the Islanders, but we love you on the radio.’ ”

DiPietro grew up in Winthrop, Mass., near Logan International Airport, and went to Boston University after playing at St. Sebastian’s School in Needham. He was at B.U. for one season, compiling an 18-5-5 record, before the Islanders drafted him.

Hours earlier, they traded goaltender Roberto Luongo to Florida in a four-player deal. Luongo, 37, a first-round pick of the Islanders in 1997, has played in nearly 1,000 games in his N.H.L. career — the most recent, in a twist, being the Panthers’ playoff loss to the Islanders and Tavares.

DiPietro’s playing career was shattered by injuries, especially after he signed the long-term contract. When the Islanders made a gallant last-week run to the playoffs in 2007, a journeyman goaltender, Wade Dubielewicz, led the team to a postseason berth.

“I always thought I would get into coaching,” said DiPietro, who played 175 games after signing the contract.

When Hahn started filling in on a sports-talk show on ESPN Radio two summers ago, DiPietro often called in. Hahn asked DiPietro to come into the studio. The two clicked.

“I like to talk,” DiPietro said. “There’s something in my personality that really enjoys talking.”

For both his radio and television gigs, DiPietro is articulate, but he is also sincere and thoughtful, saying, “When you’re doing a radio show three hours a day, five days a week, you can’t fake it.”

Along the way, DiPietro has gained a new audience. Before the decisive Islanders-Panthers game in the first round, he wore a jacket with a camouflage pattern to emphasize that the Islanders had to battle to move to the next round.

When he signed the 15-year contract, he hoped to lead the Islanders to their first Stanley Cup since 1983. Now, Tavares, 25, drives the team. DiPietro has a much smaller role.

“You’re really trying to capture what it’s like for the people who casually follow the sport and are just tuning in,” DiPietro said. “You teach people the sport.”


