


ROEHAMPTON, England — Ashleigh Barty had her teenage breakthroughs at Wimbledon years ago. On Tuesday, she was happy just to have a spot in the outermost ring of the tournament.

“It’s just a massive bonus that we’re here,” Barty said after winning her first qualifying match, 7-6 (3), 6-3, against Lu Jia-Jing on Tuesday.

“Here,” for now, is the Bank of England Sports Centre, the auxiliary site used for Wimbledon qualifying, with three wins and three and a half miles standing between players and entry into the prestigious All-England Club.

Barty, an Australian, made a name for herself on the main stage at a young age. She won the junior Wimbledon title in 2011 when she was 15 and reached the final in women’s doubles two years later.

But she walked away from tennis in September 2014. She no longer enjoyed the game, the global travel and the workload required at the top levels.

After 18 months away, which included a stint in professional cricket, Barty, now 20, returned, playing several small doubles tournaments in Australia in February and March.

“You obviously have a different perspective on life when you’re 20 compared to when you’re 16,” she said. “It’s a little bit different, and it’s about really accepting that you sacrifice a few things to reap the rewards. There are not a lot of people in the world that get to say they get to walk through the gates of Wimbledon and play on Centre Court. It’s pretty phenomenal, and we’re very lucky to live this life that we do.”

A turning point for Barty came after her cricket season had ended, when she traveled to Sydney to visit Casey Dellacqua, an Australian veteran who had been Barty’s doubles partner for three Grand Slam finals in 2013. After the two hit for a bit, Barty realized how much she missed tennis.

“It was more just talking about life in general, chatting about memories that we had, and you couldn’t wipe the smile off my face,” Barty said. “I knew that this is where I’m meant to be.”

When Barty committed to a singles return, she contacted the coach Craig Tyzzer, and the two began an eight-week training block.

“She worked really hard, and that told me that she’s pretty serious,” Tyzzer said. “From a long way back, she’s in a different place: enjoying it, happy, looking forward to it.”

A full-fledged singles comeback began three weeks ago at a small grass-court tournament in Eastbourne on the coast of the English Channel.

Without a ranking, Barty won six matches through qualifying and the main draw, impressing organizers of the WTA event in Nottingham, which gave her a wild card into qualifying. She won five matches there, losing to top-seeded Karolina Pliskova, who is ranked 17th in the world, in two tiebreaker sets in a quarterfinal.

Tyzzer said Barty’s initiative in this stage of her career, which she refers to as 2.0, had been vital to her success.

“This time it’s on her terms,” Tyzzer said. “Before, she was just talented and kept going with it and didn’t really make a choice about tennis. She walked away and has now made a choice that ‘yeah, I actually want to play.’ And that’s the way it’s been on the road; it’s exactly that. She’s enjoying it; she’s loving being back; she’s enjoying competing and playing. The results are showing it a bit.”

While the early returns on her work have been exciting, Barty hopes to remain committed to the process rather than the results.

“This year we’re using as a development year,” she said. “Every single match, win, lose or draw, there’s something that we can improve on, and it’s about us addressing that straight after the match. I know from today we’ve got a lot to work on. It’s going to be good to get back out there and have another crack tomorrow.”

Barty speaks of her tennis in the first-person plural more than most tennis players, a sign of her comfort in team environments, like the one she relished in cricket. Tyzzer said Barty flourished with other Australian players like Daria Gavrilova and Samantha Stosur training alongside her in Melbourne.

“That’s probably the hardest thing in tennis: A lot of time, you’re out there on your own,” Tyzzer said. “She feels like she’s got a lot of support, and Tennis Australia has been great. Having all the girls around has been really good, and she enjoys that side of it. But still, in the end of the day, you’re out there competing on your own.”


