


It was welcome news Friday when Europe’s economies reported higher-than-expected growth. The region, after all, has had to deal with rolling debt crises, terrorist attacks, an influx of refugees and migrants, and the possibility that Britain may vote to leave the European Union.

Then there is Spain. Across Europe, economic growth has helped bring the unemployment rate down. But in Spain, the rate is 20 percent, according to European Union surveys, and has been above that level for over five years, even as the country’s economy has been recovering.

You’d be forgiven for thinking that such a high level of joblessness, weighing on families for so long, would have caused the country to crack by now. The jobless number is so much higher than the rate for other economic laggards like Italy (11 percent) and Portugal (12 percent).

Certainly, some of Spain’s unemployment is overstated because some workers have off-the-books jobs. And people may feel optimistic because unemployment has fallen in recent quarters, from 25 percent two years ago.

Still, Spanish officials recently said they did not expect the jobless rate to fall below 15 percent until 2019. And there’s the matter of the country’s youth unemployment (those under 25): an almost incomprehensible 45.5 percent.

A new government in Spain — once it is chosen after almost half a year of discord — may end up pursuing smarter and bolder policies that reduce joblessness to levels that exist elsewhere in Europe.

But the chances of that look slim.

Spain’s unemployment is so high partly because of particular local forces that have existed for decades. Marcel Jansen, an expert on labor markets at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, notes that unemployment above 20 percent is not uncommon in Spain. In fact, it has been at that level in three periods since Spain’s transition to democracy in the 1970s. And, ominously, from the previous unemployment rate peak in the 1990s, it took 14 years for it to decline to the wider European level, Mr. Jansen notes.

One cause of the high rate became embedded in Spain’s labor market over the last 40 years. A significant proportion of Spain’s workers emerged from the dictatorship years with ironclad job security. Many of those protections remained, Mr. Jansen said, but much of the new hiring in the democratic era took place through temporary employment contracts. Just before the 2008 financial crisis, around a third of Spain’s workers were on temporary contracts, far higher than the European average.

When the crisis hit, it was very easy to lay off the temporary workers. True, during the recent recovery, the high use of temporary contracts has most likely spurred Spanish firms to bolster their hiring. But the persistence of overly protective labor contracts alongside temporary ones with too few protections has probably also created inefficiencies within Spanish companies that have dampened economic growth.

Mr. Jansen’s preferred solution is to introduce a new contract that could increase protections for temporary workers and loosen them for many permanent workers. But he said Spain’s politicians had shown little support for this idea.

Something else is making matters worse right now. Much of Spain’s working-age population does not have an education beyond high school. And many of those people have remained unemployed for multiple years after the financial crisis of 2008. (Nearly a fourth of the unemployed have been without work for four years or more.)

Such workers are increasingly losing contact with the industries they worked in, and that will make it even harder for them to find jobs. And hiring in Spain’s construction industry, a big employer before the crisis, is not likely to return to precrisis levels anytime soon. Mr. Jansen says helping the long-term unemployed requires a substantial overhaul of Spain’s retraining programs. But this costs money, and Spain has one of the largest budget deficits in Europe.

This is where we bump into the big economic debate that looms over the Continent. On one side are those who insist that struggling countries must pursue policies that cut government spending and free up markets, to spur strong and sustainable growth. As we have learned, Spain’s labor market could certainly do with some big changes. But as we have also seen, these changes are far from imminent. They are expensive. They threaten entrenched interests. Spain’s leaders are so divided that they can’t form an administration that could attempt bold moves.

Economists on the other side of the debate emphasize the need for the European Union as a whole to come together to introduce big top-down actions. Such policies include debt forgiveness and far greater fiscal stimulus. Spain’s sky-high unemployment has not moved Europe’s leaders to take such steps by now. Then again, Europe can’t count on Spain — or any country — to tolerate this high level of joblessness forever.


