


Any discussion of the favorites for the 100th running of the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday must start with Simon Pagenaud. Based upon the success he has had this year, the discussion may end there, too.

Pagenaud turned 32 on May 18, days after winning the Grand Prix of Indianapolis, his third victory in a row in the IndyCar Series. He finished second in the first two races of the season and holds a sizable lead in the season point standings over Scott Dixon, the reigning IndyCar Series champion.

Pagenaud wins even when he loses lately. Although he qualified a disappointing eighth for Sunday’s 500 after turning in better speeds in practice, he earned bonus points for qualifying among the top nine. Dixon, whose qualifying run was the 13th fastest, did not, allowing Pagenaud to extend his lead to 78 points.

This season has come together spectacularly in a way that Pagenaud’s inaugural, winless season with Roger Penske Racing in 2015 did not.

“It’s all the preparation that we put in last year,” Pagenaud said. “All that work that happened in 2015. It wasn’t visible in terms of results. But we built a really strong team, with really awesome people.”

He added: “Like Roger likes to say, it’s all about people. We kept exactly the same people on the team. Consistency makes a big difference in racing; I believe that. And this year, the results of 2015 are showing.”

Penske’s belief in Pagenaud was unshakable through that frustrating 2015 season. Noted for his eye for up-and-coming talent, Penske jumped at the chance to hire Pagenaud, a Frenchman who broke into IndyCar racing in 2011.

Penske’s move seemed impulsive because at the time he had no car, no personnel and no sponsor for a fourth car on his team, which also includes the Indy 500 winners Helio Castroneves and Juan Pablo Montoya and the former series champion Will Power.

“Simon is a very special talent,” Penske said. “I couldn’t pass up the opportunity. He’s proving now what a correct decision that was.”

Pagenaud showed noteworthy consistency in three seasons with Schmidt Peterson Motorsports, being named rookie of the year in 2012 and scoring among the top five in the driver standings each year. He won four races, including the inaugural Grand Prix of Indianapolis in 2014, which got Penske’s attention. Pagenaud ran away from a field that included Penske’s three regulars and Ryan Hunter-Reay, who went on to win the Indy 500 that year.

Now, Pagenaud believes he is with the best team in the sport, with the best equipment and personnel. The results, he added, were bound to come.

With his teammates trying to outdo one another, he said, “it pushes us to the limits even further.”

Power qualified sixth for the 500, Castroneves eighth and Montoya 17th. James Hinchcliffe, who was severely injured in a crash during practice for last year’s 500, won the pole position with a four-lap effort of 230.760 miles per hour, compared with Pagenaud’s 229.115 m.p.h.

Pagenaud, who had exceeded 230 m.p.h. in practice, said he was not worried about the speed difference.

“We set our car up for colder weather for qualifying, and we guessed a little bit wrong,” he said. “The qualifying day was hot, and the track became greasy. It is really hard for our engineers to find the right balance of aerodynamics versus drag.”

Pagenaud is off to the best start of any IndyCar Series driver since Dan Wheldon won four of the first five races, including the Indy 500, in 2005. Dixon was the last driver to win three races in a row, in July 2013.

“Three in a row is pretty incredible these days in IndyCar,” Pagenaud said. “This car is magical.”

Pagenaud’s victory two weeks ago was the 181st for Penske in 50 years in motor sports, and it was the team’s 19th at Indianapolis Motor Speedway alone, counting one win for Penske’s Nascar driver Brad Keselowski.

“That means we’re going for win No. 20 in the 100th Indianapolis 500 in the 50th year of Penske Racing,” Penske said. “I like round numbers.”


