


BAMAKO, Mali — Officials in Mali said on Friday that they had arrested a member of a group linked to Al Qaeda that has claimed responsibility for attacks that killed dozens in Mali, Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast.

The suspect, Fawaz Ould Ahmed, was captured by members of the security and intelligence services in Bamako, the capital of Mali, on Thursday as he was preparing to carry out an attack, said a Security Ministry spokesman, Amadou Sangho.

“We found him with grenades and a small suitcase containing weapons,” Mr. Sangho said. He said Mr. Ould Ahmed was behind attacks on three hotels and a restaurant in Mali.

Mr. Sangho said Mr. Ould Ahmed was a member of Al Mourabitoun, a militant group allied with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.

Beginning with an attack on a restaurant in Bamako, La Terrasse, in March 2015 that killed five people, the two groups have teamed up to strike civilians at locations frequented by Westerners.

In August, 17 people were killed in an attack on the Hotel Byblos in the town of Sevare, and 20 people were killed in a raid on the luxury hotel Radisson Blu in the capital in November.

Attacks on a restaurant in Burkina Faso’s capital, Ouagadougou, and a beach resort town in Ivory Coast in January and March of this year left dozens more dead.

There were no casualties in last month’s attack on the Hotel Nord Sud in Bamako, which serves as the headquarters of the European Union’s military training mission in Mali.

Al Mourabitoun and Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility for all the attacks, but Mr. Sangho linked Mr. Ould Ahmed only to attacks inside Mali.

Islamist violence is on the rise across West Africa despite a 2013 French-led military intervention that sought to drive militants out of northern Mali, which they had seized a year earlier.

Before Mr. Ould Ahmed’s capture, Malian officials had claimed to have arrested a number of people suspected of being militants over the past month, who they say organized or carried out the assaults.

Some experts question the importance of the recent arrests. Five scholars who focus on Islamist militant groups in the region said in interviews that they had never heard of Mr. Ould Ahmed.


