


ARLINGTON, Tex. — One end of the visitors’ clubhouse at Globe Life Park here contains the cubicles of all 12 of the Yankees’ pitchers. The setup allows them to pore over scouting reports together, make sure they do not forget about meetings and chat with like-minded souls.

What they don’t do is talk about how their arms feel.

Arm injuries are plaguing the current generation of pitchers, and the Yankees are no exception. They have already lost two pitchers in their system to Tommy John surgery — relievers Nick Rumbelow and Branden Pinder, who was to have his operation Tuesday — and the top prospect James Kaprielian was shut down indefinitely on Monday with elbow inflammation.

Few of the pitchers in the clubhouse on Tuesday had not endured an operation or a lengthy stay on the disabled list. Five had had Tommy John surgery, one had had reconstructive shoulder surgery, two more had had bone chips or spurs removed from their elbows, and one had needed six months of rest.

Only Andrew Miller, Chasen Shreve and Tuesday’s starter, Luis Severino, had avoided serious injuries — and Miller spent a month on the disabled list last season with a forearm strain.

“We never talk about it — it’s bad luck,” Ivan Nova, who had Tommy John surgery two years ago, said before Tuesday’s game against the Texas Rangers. “Whatever comes out of the mouth can make it real.”

When Nick Goody, who had Tommy John surgery in 2013, overheard a reporter asking reliever Johnny Barbato about the elbow strain that had caused him to miss half the 2014 season, Goody cringed and thought to himself, “Oh, man,” he said.

Although research is far from conclusive, two factors seem to be contributing to the surge in arm injuries: players’ pitching too much as adolescents, when their arms are still developing, and an increase in velocity.

Given the speed of the Yankees’ pitches, perhaps it is not surprising that the team has had so many arm injuries in the last two seasons. According to FanGraphs, the Yankees’ average fastball velocity this year (93.6 miles per hour entering Tuesday) leads the major leagues.

At least nine Yankees pitchers have had elbow surgery — six for the Tommy John procedure — starting with Nova, who was injured on April 19, 2014. Last season, the top five Yankees starters all spent time on the disabled list.

“It’s just the nature of the business,” General Manager Brian Cashman said in a telephone interview. “Pitchers are going to get hurt. Throwing a baseball is not a natural motion, so whether it’s major league talent, a high-end prospect or a no-name guy, it’s going to happen. It’s just a matter of when.”

That kind of thinking has led the Yankees to stockpile arms. It is why, Cashman said, the Yankees traded Justin Wilson, a valuable reliever, to Detroit in the off-season — so they could acquire the Class AAA starters Luis Cessa and Chad Green. Two being better than one.

In the last amateur draft, the Yankees took pitchers with 24 of their first 37 picks, although Cashman said the team was simply choosing the best available player with each selection.

The Yankees monitor workloads, and last season they limited the innings of Severino and Adam Warren, who had not experienced a regular major league workload, as well as Michael Pineda, who was in his first full season after returning from shoulder surgery. The team also made sure that Masahiro Tanaka, who missed time in 2014 with a small elbow-ligament tear, pitched on five days’ rest as frequently as possible.

“It’s every team now; it’s not just us,” Girardi said. “We have hard throwers; it’s going to happen. It just seems like it’s from overuse, and a lot of the overuse comes from when they’re younger.”

The Yankees broadcaster and former pitcher David Cone said the prevalence of major league pitchers with previous arm injuries had probably provided a false sense of security.

“They’re glad it’s an elbow and not a shoulder,” Cone said.

“But anytime you have to drill two holes in somebody’s elbow as an anchor to attach a transplanted ligament, there’s a risk involved there,” he continued, describing the Tommy John process.

Goody, who grew up in Orlando, Fla., said he played baseball year round while growing up, although he did not become a pitcher exclusively until he was in college. When he tore ligaments in his elbow, he said, it was a transformational experience.

“You go from everything in the palm of your hand to. ...” he said, letting the thought trail off.

Goody said that his faith grew and that he realized his body and mind could handle more than he might have thought.

“You don’t get to play,” he said. “You’re watching everybody do what you’ve wanted to do your whole life, and you’re on the table bending your elbow trying to get a range of motion. We’re all competitors — we love to compete — so I’ll just say it was a really, really tough year.”

Barbato counts himself as fortunate not to have had surgery. As a minor leaguer in San Diego’s system in June 2014, he threw a curveball, felt his arm tingle and then threw two fastballs with a dramatic dip in velocity. He went on to pitch one inning in the instructional league, which was enough for the Yankees to trade for him.

Nova recalled a similar story — with a different outcome. He threw a slider at Tampa Bay, felt a twinge in his elbow and subtly shook his arm. But the coach Tony Pena noticed and alerted Manager Joe Girardi. A magnetic resonance imaging test confirmed that Nova needed surgery.

Nova, who will be a free agent after this season, said his injury did not change the way he thought about the business of baseball. He was philosophical: A pitcher can get hurt anytime, but so can position players and anyone else who plays sports.

Nova did, however, allow for one difference.

“When God created us,” Nova said, “he didn’t say, ‘I made you to pitch.’ ”


