


AMERICAN IMPRESSIONISTS dabbed and flicked paint on their canvases to suggest spires of purplish blue hollyhocks and cascades of poppies. For its spring show, the New York Botanical Garden has lined a gallery with about 20 artworks produced around 1900 and filled a conservatory corridor with the kinds of living plants that appeared in the paintings. The effect of the two-part exhibition “Impressionism: American Gardens on Canvas,” which opens on Saturday, is as jolting as the moment in any show — “Sunday in the Park With George,” for instance — when portrait subjects come to life.

“Our tableau vivant is quite vivant,” Todd Forrest, a vice president at the garden, told me as I caught my breath at the entrance to the tunnel of flowers.

The petals have so many crinkly and glossy textures and high-resolution stripes and speckles that I could scarcely imagine how any trained painter had managed to squint and resist the temptation to render them with botanical accuracy. I sat on a rocking chair in the greenhouse’s simulation of a weathered New England porch. A catbird scooted past. I admired the kind of bowers and birch groves that had captivated a generation of artists, and I would have stayed there all morning except that I could not find a way to rock and take legible notes at the same time.

The greenhouse arrangements were designed by a horticulture team led by Francisca Coelho. The poetic plant list ranges from asters to zinnias, from wallflowers and cosmos to gillyflowers, tree mallows, trailing lobelias, globe amaranths, toadflax and perennial sage.

The flower beds are meant to resemble plantings around artists’ haunts in the Northeast. These include the home turned intellectual salon of the writer and painter Celia Thaxter on remote Appledore Island off the Maine coast; Florence Griswold’s boardinghouse for artists in Old Lyme, Conn. (now a museum, exhibiting American Impressionist garden paintings this summer); and various artists’ homes on Long Island and in Connecticut, Pennsylvania and New Hampshire.

The guest curator, Linda S. Ferber, gathered canvases that show the artists’ colonies as well as some industrialists’ estates and New York City parks. In Childe Hassam’s painting of a Central Park pond, two swans warily observe the shoreline strolls of women and children in long skirts. Hassam also painted Mrs. Thaxter’s flower beds. John Singer Sargent depicted classical statuary on Rockefeller lands, and William Merritt Chase posed his family on the Hamptons dunes. (Ms. Ferber pointed out that the children sprouted like colorful flowers in the monochrome undulations of the scrubland.)

Among the lesser-known artists represented in the exhibition are William de Leftwich Dodge, who painted his Long Island home’s lavish fountains, trelliswork and balustrades; and Maria Oakey Dewing, who meticulously portrayed her own pale roses. A scene of Thomas and Mary Moran’s vine-engulfed house in East Hampton, N.Y. (the building is now being restored), was by Theodore Wores, a San Francisco native who also worked in Japan, Hawaii and around the American Southwest. The show includes two Old Lyme landscapes by Matilda Browne (the Griswold museum will devote a retrospective to her next year), one of them depicting her suffragist friend Katharine Ludington in the midst of toppling peonies.

The artists here often painted from the viewpoint of a hard-working gardener, crouched down. They tended to crop tightly, rather than aim for sweeping views, and there is deep nostalgia in their glimpses of gabled Colonial buildings in the backgrounds. Partly in reaction to densely industrialized cities, Ms. Ferber said, “The garden was really seen as an emotional retreat.”

A visitor would be best off starting in the conservatory, heading over to the exhibition in the library (don’t forget to admire a new row of peonies along the path) and then returning to the greenhouse. The flowers have been propagated to represent the highlights of April to July all at once; the Impressionists would most likely have been overwhelmed by the shapes, colors and scents.

“We compress all the seasons into one,” Mr. Forrest said.

There is no sense of the passage of time. There will be little evidence of the inevitable fading and withering of the petals, the summer bug infestations and droughts to battle. As in a painting, everything is always at its peak.


