


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

If you were feeling kind, you could, perhaps, call Spencer Pratt an early adopter of burgeoning art forms. Pratt, known for hijacking his way to a starring role on MTV’s “The Hills,’’ created his first, short-lived reality show in 2005. It was Pratt who put Kim Kardashian in front of a reality-TV camera for the first time. And in early 2009, he joined Twitter — a year before Kanye West, six years before Barack Obama and two months before his wedding to Heidi Montag would be shown on MTV in prime time.

A postmodern pioneer, Spencer Pratt didn’t just dabble in reality television: He was its first truly compelling, thoroughly loathsome villain. Destroyer of the central female friendship of “The Hills,” waster of opportunity, staunch believer in pseudoscience — Pratt became the rat from whose manic scurrying America couldn’t look away. When “The Hills” ended, he wasted his money, lost his limelight and was arrested for trying to take hunting gear on a plane in Costa Rica. Pratt didn’t have fans, but he was famous, a contradiction in terms usually reserved for legitimate outlaws, not random L.A. bros.

You would think oblivion would be welcome at that point. But for the first few years that Pratt was on Twitter, it seemed he was begging America to keep believing the myth of his screwball villainy. He did little else but retweet tabloid coverage of his marriage, spew vitriol about cast members of “The Hills,’’ brag about various crystals he had acquired and taunt people he had bested. In 2013, he gave the account over to two performance artists who used it to write a pretentious and vacuous paper about exploitative fame and the internet. Side by side with the rise of love-to-hate-them reality-TV celebrities, Twitter was becoming an increasingly formidable social-media forum, cultivating a similarly self-contradicting culture of hate-follows, hate-faves and subtweets.

Gradually, over the space of several quiet years for Pratt and Montag — spent deep in the shadows of MTV’s juggernaut “Jersey Shore,’’ the “Real Housewives” empire and the rocket-powered rise of the Kardashians — Pratt started using Twitter for something new. To pass his hours, and to wrangle whatever attention he still could, Pratt started creating low-risk, no-reward content: He started tweeting more — about life, about food, about losing just about everything but his wife and his ability to comment semi-authoritatively on the reality stars that were, by then, eclipsing him.

He embraced the emotional nakedness of our generation’s online personal brands, and started imbuing his confessions of loneliness with the wit that makes them worth the internet’s time. Now he confronts the questions others neglect — “Why u need a squad,” he asks — and finds his fulfillment in curious places: “Fun for me is Apple tips app.” Pratt-in-2016 is forthcoming about his insecurities (his infamously “flesh-colored” beard and skin that isn’t as good as Angelina Jolie’s or Mark Zuckerberg’s) in a way that stands in stark contrast to his “Hills’’-era bravado. A tweetstorm about the death of his grandmother works its way through every stage of social-media grief. Shock: “Why life gotta be such a trip?” Sincerity: “Few things as awful as hearing mom cry.” Self-interest: “Only one who repped Speidi” – the popular celebrity portmanteau for Pratt and his wife – now dead.” Surrender: “We all gotta walk the plank.” Then, a solution: “I need more good news like this,” tweeted in response to news about Blac Chyna’s engagement to Rob Kardashian.

In Cormac McCarthy’s “The Road,’’ a father tells himself, post-apocalypse, that there is only one way to stay human: “Where you’ve nothing else, construct ceremonies out of air and breathe upon them.” Today, with nothing resembling fame left to him, save the near-million people who are still subscribed to his tweets by accident or by joke, Pratt treats Twitter like a one-man Off-Off-Off-Off-Broadway show. He regularly bemoans the fact that, by maintaining this account, he’s “out here bleeding soul for free,” but his impulse is still to create . . . something. His Twitter hews so closely to the paragon of what people online would call a “good” feed (one part “weird twitter,” two parts social justice, eight parts Chipotle), it’s hard to believe it happened by accident. It looks like a pet art project, that blog you start just so you can “maintain a creative outlet.” It resembles a ritual — a nonfamous person executing the ceremony of fame that is left to him, the ability to make his personal feelings available on the Twitter feeds of a million people.

Pratt is aware of its his own irrelevance and the hilarity of talking about it (“Good thing about being irrelevant is nobody calls you for [expletive]”). But something tells him that he is good at what he is doing: For the last several months, he has been angling for a job as a social-media manager, going so far as to respond directly to a job posting from Entertainment Weekly. The unlikely marriage of resignation and unsinkable hope on display on his Twitter is most likely familiar to anyone who has ever languished just outside the frame and felt that they were rotting.

At the end of the series finale for “The Hills,’’ the cameras cut to a soundstage: It wasn’t reality, it was just television (afterward, Kristen Cavallari, a cast member, said that “almost all of it” was scripted). But we never dropped our perception of Pratt as a villain, which is what makes today’s Twitter confessions hard to place. Is he putting on a carefully curated show? Looking for attention? Genuinely sad?

Mostly, Pratt appears to be biding his time in the only place where he has an audience, albeit one that could not possibly care very much about him. As a general rule, Spencer’s followers do not speak to him. They do not like his tweets, and they do not retweet them. When they do speak, it’s often unkind; if a tweet of his gets three replies, one of them will be “shut up.”

The current equivalent of Spencer Pratt is, perhaps, Jax Taylor, the indisputable villain of “Vanderpump Rules’’ — a perpetually red-faced pathological liar, serial cheater and terrible friend. Yet Taylor’s affable social-media presence humanizes him, making it possible to watch the show without believing that he’s truly a sociopath; he mostly dotes on his girlfriend, his dog, his friends and the brands that hook him up with free stuff. There were no such back channels available while “The Hills” was on the air, and no one-on-one time with the cameras for any of the stars either. Pratt is angling for that humanizing quality time now, with mixed success that often devolves into frustration.

Pratt doesn’t want forgiveness, exactly: “If I had talent you would all be [expletive],” he proclaims, vaguely and aggressively to anyone who is reading. He just wants to be welcomed back into the exalted fold of popular culture.

There’s a difference between love and attention, and the fact that Spencer tweets at all — about “King Kylie,” “Friday Night Lights’’ and zits — betrays the fact that he will settle for the latter. His Twitter recklessly, ruthlessly epitomizes that familiar stereotype of the generation we share: He believes wholeheartedly in his own specialness, even as he becomes increasingly disillusioned with a world that is poorly equipped to notice it.


