


When Blac Chyna, a businesswoman who is engaged to Rob Kardashian, and Kylie Jenner, an entrepreneur and Kardashian scion, were ready to announce the end to a well-publicized feud, they did so the new-fashioned way. They face-swapped on Snapchat. Fans most likely had an inkling that the fate of their relationship would end in public symbiosis; this confirmed it.

Face-swapping is a feature that became available on Snapchat in February. Using an object recognition algorithm in the Snapchat app, your phone camera lens focuses in on your face and that of another person also visible in the frame, and swaps them.

It has become wildly popular in the last few months, with thousands of users sharing on social media pictures of their faces swapped with babies, pets and cultural icons like the character on the Starbucks cup.

Last week, Snapchat released an update to the feature that lets you face-swap with any image that lives on your phone. So now people are face-swapping with Harper Lee, the Michael Jordan crying meme, Beyoncé and President Obama.

Even Hillary Clinton has jumped on the bandwagon. Last week, her campaign posted to its Snapchat feed a story which used the face-swap function to superimpose onto the head of the Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump the faces of Abraham Lincoln, Dwight D. Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan.

In planning coverage of last week’s National Football League draft, ESPN’s social media team discussed its desire to have a star athlete pose for a face-swap. “We saw this as a trend our fans enjoy and had the idea to try it,” said Steve Braband, a network social media producer. When Kristen Scott, a production assistant, heard Joey Bosa, an Ohio State defensive end, being asked on the red carpet about athletic similarities to J.J. Watt, a Houston Texans defensive end, she asked Mr. Bosa if he’d submit to a Snapchat face-swap. Mr. Bosa obliged. “He thought it looked hilarious,” Mr. Braband said, “and he showed it to his mother.”

Soon after Snapchat introduced its face-swapping capability, Max Campbell, 24, came across a video in which a young girl was trying to face-swap with another person but her camera accidentally zeroed in on a poster of the Mona Lisa.

“That was the first time I saw art-swapping,” said Mr. Campbell, a photography coordinator for The New Yorker. He decided he wanted to do a lot of it himself, and needed a venue that provided ample opportunity.

He quickly settled on the Metropolitan Museum of Art and is now aiming to take a face-swapping selfie with every possible work of art there. “Everyone at the Met is taking selfies anyway, it not even conspicuous anymore.” he said.

Eimear Kelleher, 26, a marketer who lives in Brooklyn, began to swap her own face with the well-preserved visages of the “Real Housewives” to delight her friends. “Me and my roommates are obsessed with them, so I knew they would get a kick out of it,” she said. “It’s pure entertainment.” Though Ms. Kelleher has face-swapped images of Bethenny Frankel, Lisa Vanderpump, Erika Jayne, Sonja Morgan, Lisa Rinna and Dorinda Medley, among others, she is most taken by how she looks with Kyle Richards’s face superimposed onto hers. “If I could look like that in 20 or 30 years, I wouldn’t complain.”


