


Over the past few days, Mets Manager Terry Collins had a feeling it would come to this — that neck surgery to repair David Wright’s herniated disk was inevitable and would be one more blow for the team’s cornerstone third baseman.

On Thursday, Collins’s apprehensions proved to be accurate, with the Mets announcing that their 33-year-old captain would have surgery, which was performed later in the day, with the operation done in California by Dr. Robert Watkins, an orthopedic spine surgeon. Wright had been sidelined since May 28, and the surgery could keep him out the rest of the season.

Wright, who joined the Mets as a rookie in 2004, became a model of elite consistency in the seasons that followed and then gradually began having trouble staying on the field, is now facing new questions about his future as a player.

“It’s hard to watch,” Collins said before the Mets played the Pittsburgh Pirates at Citi Field on Thursday. “Because in your mind, you know how good he is — at least how good he was.”

The Mets and Wright had been hopeful that weeks of rest and anti-inflammatory injections would allow him to avoid surgery, but that did not happen.

“After trying every way to get back on the field, I’ve come to realize that it’s best for me, my teammates and the organization to proceed with surgery at this time,” Wright said in a statement issued by the team. “My neck simply did not respond to any of the treatments of the past few weeks.”

Though he called the turn of events “incredibly frustrating and disappointing,” Wright said, “I am determined to make a full recovery and get back on the field as soon as I can to help the Mets win.”

Wright was already dealing with spinal stenosis, a daunting and chronic back condition that was diagnosed last season and required him to go through extensive pregame preparation to enable him to play. The neck setback has only intensified the challenges he faces in remaining a productive player.

Because of his stenosis and disk problems, Wright has played in only 75 games over the past two seasons. This season, he was hitting just .226 with seven home runs and a .788 on-base-plus-slugging percentage through 37 games.

In addition, Wright’s defense at third base has gradually become a concern because of the sidearm throws he has been forced to make to first base.

None of this, of course, has escaped his manager.

“You feel bad for a guy who is good as he is who had to go through what he went through just to go out and play every night,’’ Collins said. “Then some of the skills are diminished a little bit due to some of the injuries.’’

The Mets said Wright’s timetable for a possible return to the roster hinges on how well the procedure goes and his recovery time. However, in a number of past instances, players have missed at least three months after surgery similar to Wright’s. In late May 2014 Prince Fielder, the Texas Rangers’ first baseman, had fusion surgery on a herniated disk in his neck. He did not return that season.

A similar recovery timetable for Wright would make his return this season unlikely.

In Wright’s absence, the Mets have primarily used Wilmer Flores at third base, and so far he has done well. Entering Thursday night’s game, Flores was hitting .320 with five extra-base hits and a .835 O.P.S. in 16 games since May 29.

Collins said Flores, with some help from the recently acquired Kelly Johnson, would continue to handle third base for now. But the team has not ruled out other possibilities, like a position change. Second baseman Neil Walker, who has not played third base since 2010, has volunteered to move across the diamond if needed.

“I want what’s best for the team,” said Walker, who has yet to take any pregame ground balls at third base.

Collins was appreciative of Walker’s offer but said the Mets need to carefully consider any downsides of such a move, including breaking up the solid double play combination that Walker and shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera have established this season.

General Manager Sandy Alderson noted that full-time third baseman are not typically available this time of year.

The Mets may need help at more than one position, as Wright is part of a growing list of injured players. Outfielder Juan Lagares’s nagging injury, a sprained left thumb, landed him on the disabled list Thursday. The Mets recalled infielder-outfielder Ty Kelly from Class AAA Las Vegas and now must weigh whether Lagares needs rest, rehab or surgery.

But regardless of the approach taken with Lagares, he is expected to return, healthy, at some point. Wright is far more of an uncertainty. He is owed $87 million through the 2020 season, but how much longer he can keep going is anyone’s guess.


