


Were it a kinder world, Mikhail Bulgakov’s incandescent novel “The Master and Margarita” would be commemorating its 75th rather than 50th anniversary, for the author completed it in 1940, just as his own brief life was ending. But in the Soviet Union of the time — then concluding one of the most grotesquely violent decades in history — the fate of authors like Bulgakov was so precarious that he was fortunate to die of natural causes. Having finished the book, he reportedly said to his wife from his deathbed: “Now it deserves to be put in the commode, under your linens.” She did not even try to get it published. A censored version finally appeared in 1966-67.

The novel spans several spring days in 1930s Moscow during which the capital is visited by the Devil himself, trailed by a piebald entourage including an easily insulted giant cat with a fondness for vodka and guns. Registering himself as a foreign “artiste” specializing in black magic, Woland (as the novel’s Devil is known) proceeds to expose, via a series of séances at the Variety Theater, the greed and servility that rules even socialist Moscow. But this is a warm-up. Woland is in ­Moscow for Margarita, an unhappily married woman who once loved the Master, the author of a novel about Pontius Pilate’s consignment of Christ to the cross, chapters of which appear in Bulgakov’s novel. The Master burned most of the manuscript after it was turned down by a publisher and committed himself to a mental asylum. At Woland’s invitation, Margarita goes through hell — literally — to search for her beloved.

But this tells you nothing. “The Master and Margarita” is one of those novels that, even in translation, make you feel that not one word could have been written differently. I’ve read it half a dozen times now, in three translations and in the original, and its mystery has only increased. It’s like those 10-ruble notes that Woland rains down on his audience at the Variety — they change into bottle labels the next day. You try to hold the novel’s face, and it turns away once again.

With his plays mostly banned, Bulgakov used every freedom inside the covers of ­“Margarita,” and its pages bristle with a deeply informed indifference to every dogma, whether historical, religious, political or artistic. ­Bulgakov’s earthbound Christ ignores the mythology of the Gospels and Soviet atheism both, as does a Satan figure who is munificent and majestic rather than petty and evil. The Pilate narrative is equally dark on the rules: It migrates from one teller to another, from speech to novel inside a novel to dream. Few novels have incorporated fantastical elements into straight realism, the absurd into the sane, as hilariously and boldly as this one. (Long before there was Latin American magic realism, there was Soviet magic realism. It was a lot funnier.)

But what other style could fit a world where heaven was now, indeed, hell? What kind of diabolical sorcery could compare with the disappearance of millions by Stalin and his security apparatus? The novel’s galling play was to propose that, in a place like the U.S.S.R., justice was with the dark forces: the gospel according to the Devil.

Initially, Bulgakov’s talent exonerated his politically questionable background. The author epitomized the Russian intelligentsia snuffed out by the Bolsheviks, of which his contemporary Nabokov was also a member — impossibly cultured, preoccupied with the fate of the nation, conservative but not reactionary, liberal but not revolutionary, molecularly Russian but open to Europe and, above all, fastidiously humane. Even Stalin counted himself an admirer — he attended one of Bulgakov’s plays 15 times. And when Bulgakov reached a nadir and burned an early draft of “Margarita,” it was to Stalin he wrote, asking permission to emigrate if his country could not find use for his talents.

Bulgakov could not bend. It wasn’t for lack of trying — he didn’t believe that a Russian writer could function outside his homeland, and tried sincerely to write a play with the right message. (The closest he came, a play about Stalin’s early years, was banned by the dictator himself.) But Bulgakov’s great fortune was that for some reason, he was allowed to live, though relatively little of his work reached the public, a death of a different kind. “For me, not being allowed to write is tantamount to being buried alive,” he wrote to Stalin.

“Margarita” has too many achievements to list, but the way it keeps faith in love and art even in moments of unspeakable humiliation and cruelty must be the greatest. In my home it stands on that small shelf of titles reserved for the most difficult days. Although sacred to Russians, the novel has been something of a cult classic in America. Maybe it’s the humor: America grew up on vaudeville and slapstick, more youthful and accessible forms, whereas Russian humor is winking and wry, at home between the lines. It’s time for “The Master and Margarita” to rise to its rightful place in the canon of great world literature. Let it inspire American authors with its openness to sentiment, its dedication to the loftiest questions. In the last century it has, surely against its own wishes, proved bitterly prescient about the way of the world again and again. May the 21st prove its political preoccupations obsolete. But as literature, it will live forever.


