


Aaron Sanchez allowed two hits in seven innings of one-run ball on Sunday, and Jose Bautista drove in two runs with a homer and a double to lead the Toronto Blue Jays over the host Boston Red Sox, 5-3.

Sanchez allowed no hits until Marco Hernandez’s broken-bat single with two outs in the fifth.

Edwin Encarnacion added two singles and an R.B.I. for the Blue Jays, who had lost two straight. Kevin Pillar had three singles and made two nice catches in center after being dropped from leadoff to eighth in the lineup.

Travis Shaw hit a two-run homer off closer Roberto Osuna for Boston, which had won three straight.

PHILLIES 3, NATIONALS 2 Freddy Galvis hit an R.B.I. double off Jonathan Papelbon with two outs in the 10th inning to lift the host Phillies, ending the Nationals’ seven-game winning streak.

Bryce Harper set a career high by homering in his fourth straight game, hitting a solo shot against Jeanmar Gomez for a 2-1 lead in the 10th. The Phillies then rallied off Papelbon, their former closer.

Pinch-hitter Andres Blanco hit an R.B.I. single with two outs to tie it. He scored when Galvis drove a ball over left fielder Jayson Werth.

RAYS 3, WHITE SOX 2 Matt Moore struck out 10 over six and one-third innings, allowing two runs and five hits, and Brandon Guyer tied a career high with four hits in St. Petersburg, Fla.

Alex Colome got five outs for the Rays’ first save this season.

DODGERS 3, GIANTS 1 Kenta Maeda pitched seven strong innings for the host Dodgers and Joc Pederson drove in the tying and go-ahead runs with a fifth-inning homer.

Maeda extended his shutout streak to 142/3 innings before Joe Panik ended it with a third-inning homer.

BRAVES 6, MARLINS 5 The rookie Mallex Smith hit an R.B.I. single against Edwin Jackson with two outs in the 10th inning as Atlanta completed a three-game sweep after having arrived in Miami 0-9.

Atlanta blew a 5-0 lead, and Ichiro Suzuki’s R.B.I. single on an 0-2 pitch from Jason Grilli with two outs in the ninth tied the game for Miami.

TWINS 3, ANGELS 2 Oswaldo Arcia’s single down the left-field line scored Byron Buxton in the 12th as Minnesota completed a three-game sweep in Minneapolis.

Kyle Gibson gave up two runs on four hits in seven innings for the Twins, who have won three straight after starting 0-9.

PIRATES 9, BREWERS 3 Andrew McCutchen homered for the second straight day, and Matt Joyce and Gregory Polanco each had three of host Pittsburgh’s 17 hits.

Juan Nicasio allowed three runs over six innings for Pittsburgh, giving up all the Milwaukee offense in the fourth.

Zach Davies was pounded by the Pirates for the third time in seven career starts.

ASTROS 5, TIGERS 4 Jose Altuve led off Houston’s first inning with a home run and had three R.B.I., and George Springer also hit a solo homer as host Houston won its first series this season.

Mike Fiers gave up four runs and seven hits in five and two-thirds innings with five strikeouts. Anibal Sanchez was tagged for five runs — four earned — and eight hits in five innings with eight strikeouts.

CARDINALS 4, REDS 3 Eric Fryer had three hits, including a go-ahead double with two outs in the eighth off Ross Ohlendorf in St. Louis. A backup to the All-Star catcher Yadier Molina, Fryer got his first start this season and is 6 for 6 at the plate.

Matt Carpenter and Jedd Gyorko homered for St. Louis, which has won three of its last four.

Trevor Rosenthal struck out his last two batters in a perfect ninth for his third save.

ROCKIES 2, CUBS 0 Nolan Arenado homered twice off Jon Lester, and Tyler Chatwood pitched seven innings in combining with Miguel Castro and Jake McGee on a three-hitter in Chicago.

Jason Heyward doubled with one out in the ninth, and Anthony Rizzo was hit by a pitch with two outs before McGee struck out Kris Bryant for his third save.

DIAMONDBACKS 7, PADRES 3 Arizona’s Yasmany Tomas homered twice, drove in three runs and scored three times in San Diego.

Brandon Drury had a two-run homer and a triple and scored twice for the Diamondbacks.


