


OJAI, Calif. — Always a bit low key about its high ambitions, the Ojai Music Festival barely made reference at its opening events on Thursday to the most striking element of this year’s four-day program: Nearly all of the work is by women.

Other organizations would have screamed that from the rooftops. (The Lucerne Festival, coming up in August in Switzerland, has branded itself “Women on the Podium.”) But Ojai, its vibe as luxuriantly relaxed as its sunny, secluded hometown, talks quietly. At 70, as dependable a source of new, intriguing music as any annual event in America, Ojai never seems to sell itself too hard.

Its reliability is something of a paradox, since each year the festival changes music directors. Over the past few years, the post has gone from a choreographer (Mark Morris) to a pianist (Jeremy Denk) to a percussionist (Steven Schick); this year, the leader is the stage director Peter Sellars. (A constant, for over a decade, has been the artistic director, Thomas W. Morris, who shares the planning.)

Mr. Sellars first made his name in the 1980s with vividly updated productions of Mozart operas, including “The Marriage of Figaro” set, yes, in Trump Tower. But he has pared down his aesthetic in recent years to more timeless stylizations, like the spare Bach “St. Matthew Passion” that the Berlin Philharmonic brought to New York in 2014. He has long been John Adams’s key partner on both librettos and stagings, and has also been a frequent collaborator with Kaija Saariaho, whose “L’Amour de Loin” arrives at the Metropolitan Opera this fall.

Ms. Saariaho, born in Finland in 1952, is the star of this year’s Ojai. The American premiere of a chamber version of her 2006 oratorio “La Passion de Simone” was the main offering on Thursday, while the festival’s biggest loss was the cancellation, reportedly because of lack of sufficient rehearsal time, of what was to be the weekend’s centerpiece: Mr. Sellars’s production of Ms. Saariaho’s new, Noh-inspired “Only the Sound Remains.”

Sober yet seething, “La Passion de Simone” is a more or less static reflection on the life and work of the writer and activist Simone Weil, the great secular saint of self-abasement who in 1943, at just 34, starved herself to death in a radical act of solidarity with those suffering under German occupation. She was given to cheerful sayings like: “Nothing that exists is absolutely worthy of love, so we must love what does not exist.”

Susan Sontag once wrote of Weil: “No one who loves life would wish to imitate her dedication to martyrdom nor would wish it for his children nor for anyone else whom he loves.” Mr. Sellars put it slightly differently in a talk on Thursday afternoon: “She’s the friend you can’t stand but you need in your life. Someone has to say those things.”

Ms. Saariaho and her librettist, Amin Maalouf, fashioned a Christ-like structure for a Christ-like subject. Patiently gaining power, if not much depth, over the course of its 75 minutes, “La Passion de Simone” is organized into 15 “stations” — as in “stations of the cross” — that offer oblique commentary on Weil. Our guide is a nameless woman, here the noble young soprano Julia Bullock, who both embodies (and quotes) Weil and stands apart from her, an awe-struck, agonized sister who addresses her, or perhaps her memory, in the second person (“you have always been incapable of loving yourself”).

Her vocal lines are surprisingly even-keeled, as if the expressions of a person trying desperately to keep mighty emotions under control. Extremity emerges more often from the instrumental ensemble, which Ms. Saariaho reduced from a full orchestra to a complement of fewer than 20 here, conducted by Joana Carneiro. This leaner group still made an impact (if also, in the amplification of the endearing outdoor Libbey Bowl, a rather muddled, fractured one). “You had such a thirst for sacrifice,” Ms. Bullock sang at one point, and the orchestra answered with loud whoops, then a sudden drop to a sad, lonely whistle. A massive scraping sound traveled through the ensemble in the 12th station; the final one began with savage fanfares.

But among the most memorable moments were the subtlest, as when Ms. Bullock trilled over the barest hint of high strings, bells and softly tolling drum. A full chorus in the original version was reduced to a vocal quartet that chimed in with floating, crystalline harmonies.

Mr. Sellars’s staging was simpler than his 2006 original: It placed Ms. Bullock on a platform above the other performers, where she shared the stage with just a box of shifting colored light — both a shrine and a coffin. Tender even in full cry, she was a presence simultaneously youthful and mature: a compelling vehicle for Ms. Saariaho and Mr. Maalouf’s restrained work.

Late Saturday night, Ms. Bullock will interpret songs of Josephine Baker in a new production that features music by Tyshawn Sorey and will interweave texts by the poet Claudia Rankine. Ms. Rankine’s work is also the source for Caroline Shaw’s new “This might also be a form of dreaming,” which has its premiere planned for Saturday afternoon. Works by Leila Adu, Du Yun, Tania León, Christine Southworth, Carla Kihlstedt, Pauline Oliveros and others fill the rest of the weekend, in addition to two programs of Ms. Saariaho’s intricate, glinting chamber music.

Given this year’s immersion in female composers, it is particularly conspicuous that Ojai’s artistic directors over the past 70 years have been almost entirely male; Dawn Upshaw, in 2011, has been the only woman to hold the post on her own. While the festival has clearly taken note of this disparity — three of the next five years will be led by women — it has, characteristically, not spoken too loudly about it.

That’s not shame; it’s modesty. But with women still struggling to gain an equal footing in roles of artistic leadership in roles in the music industry, the festival’s commitment in this regard deserves to be publicized, as does Mr. Sellars and Mr. Morris’s inspiring program this year. If Ojai won’t make a big deal about it, I will.


