


Donald J. Trump and Speaker Paul D. Ryan spoke by phone on Wednesday night, hours after reports circulated that Mr. Ryan, the highest-ranking elected Republican, was on the verge of endorsing the presumptive Republican presidential nominee.

But the call was set up days ago, according to one person briefed on it who was not authorized to speak publicly. And aides to Mr. Ryan made clear that he would not offer an endorsement in the call.

Any such anticipation is “absolutely untrue,” said Zack Roday, a spokesman for Mr. Ryan’s political operations. “The purpose of the call tonight is for the two of them to continue their conversation about unifying the party. We never gave any indication that the call was about an endorsement.”

A spokeswoman for Mr. Trump did not respond to an email seeking comment. News of the call was first reported by Bloomberg Politics. Earlier Wednesday, Bloomberg Politics and ABC News, citing sources close to the Trump campaign, said that Mr. Ryan was going to endorse Mr. Trump.

This month the speaker jolted the Republican political establishment by telling CNN that he was not yet ready to support Mr. Trump as the party’s nominee. The two have since met, and Mr. Ryan has made clear his concern with Mr. Trump’s stance on some issues, as well as his language on the campaign trail.

In a meeting with a few dozen Capitol Hill reporters on Wednesday afternoon to discuss his coming policy agenda, Mr. Ryan repeatedly said he was not ready to endorse Mr. Trump and that their staff members continued to talk about policy ideas and other issues.

“I don’t have a timeline in my mind, and I have not made a decision,” Mr. Ryan said. “Nothing has changed from that perspective, and we’re still having productive conversations.”

Mr. Ryan declined to weigh in on some of Mr. Trump’s more caustic comments of late, but he did defend Susana Martinez, the governor of New Mexico and chairwoman of the Republican Governors Association, whom Mr. Trump sharply criticized in a speech in her state on Tuesday night. Ms. Martinez has refused to endorse Mr. Trump.

“Susanna Martinez is great governor,” Mr. Ryan said. “She turned deficits into surpluses. She cut taxes. She’s a friend of mine. I think she’s a good governor, I’ll leave it at that.”

Mr. Ryan did, however, go on at some length about his displeasure with Mr. Trump’s apparent lust for executive power.

“This is one of my big concerns,” he said.

Mr. Ryan is a product of the conservative movement, and he has sought to lay out an agenda for the party for many years. Yet he faces crosswinds within his own Republican conference, from House members whose districts support Mr. Trump and who worry about their own future races.


