


The Bronx Museum of the Arts, whose attendance has quadrupled since it instituted free admission in 2012, announced Wednesday that it had started a $25 million capital campaign to renovate and expand its building along the Grand Concourse and to establish an endowment for the first time.

The building project, which has already received around $7 million from the mayor’s office, the New York City Council and the Bronx borough president’s office, will be overseen by the architect Monica Ponce de Leon, dean of the School of Architecture at Princeton University and a co-curator of the United States pavilion for the 15th Venice Biennale of Architecture, which opens to the public on Saturday.

The museum, founded in 1971, last expanded in 2006 with a widely admired $19 million north-wing addition designed by the Miami-based firm Arquitectonica. But the museum’s various parts have never been knit together well and some spaces are awkward and underused, said Holly Block, its director. So the rebuilding, which will add some exhibition room and create a new glassed-in space for educational and public programs at the corner of 165th Street and the Grand Concourse, will make the museum feel like a visual and architectural whole for the first time, she said.

“We’ve been very secret about this, because we didn’t want it to be public until we were sure,” Ms. Block said. “It’s so great for the Bronx to have any kind of capital projects like this. And we’ve been waiting a very long time.”

“When you walk or drive up the Grand Concourse it will be very clear what this building is,” she added. “Right now there’s a lot of confusion. A lot of people think maybe it’s corporate offices.”

The first phase of the rebuilding project is expected to be completed by 2020, and the museum will remain open during the work. (Before the museum ended its $5 suggested admission policy, its attendance was roughly 25,000 visitors a year; it has increased to more than 100,000 a year now and exhibitions like the recent retrospective of the work of the painter Martin Wong have drawn sizable crowds.) The creation of a $10 million endowment, which will give the museum more stability in its operational budget and programming, will be accomplished mostly through private funds, which are being raised now.

In a written statement about the project, Mayor Bill de Blasio said, “The Bronx Museum of the Arts was born in 1971 out of a belief that all residents of our city deserve to have a major cultural institution that’s a part of their community fabric.” He added that his administration was “proud to invest in this project that will bring the talents of a remarkable architect to help build an even stronger institution.”


