


LOS ANGELES — Terry Collins, the Mets’ manager, was coming to the close of his postgame interview in a hallway at Dodger Stadium on Wednesday night when he dropped a potentially alarming bit of news.

Noah Syndergaard, who had just pitched an excellent game with six strikeouts over eight innings, recently had his right elbow examined, Collins said.

Obviously, a worrisome sign for the Mets.

Syndergaard is among the most productive sluggers on the Mets. On Wednesday night, he hit two home runs, giving him three homers in only 28 games in National League parks.

While Syndergaard’s real value is as a pitcher, Collins said he considered Syndegaard, Jacob deGrom and Steven Matz candidates to pinch-hit. But any issue with their elbows is something worth fretting over.

John Ricco, the Mets’ vice president and assistant general manager, said Syndergaard had a magnetic resonance imaging test and saw Dr. David Altchek about 10 days ago. No troubles were revealed and Syndegaard has pitched twice since with no problems.

“Noah is one of these guys who is really in tune with kind of how he feels from start to start,” Ricco said. “Coming out of his start against the Giants, he said something just didn’t feel right and he wanted to have it checked out. Altchek took a look and there was nothing to be concerned about.”

Syndergaard, speaking after his two-homer performance, said the reason for the test was “all precautionary.”

He threw 95 pitches Wednesday and pitched well, but it was his batting that stood out; he became only the second Mets pitcher to hit two homers in a game, and the first in over three decades.

Walt Terrell hit two against Ferguson Jenkins of the Cubs at Wrigley Field in 1983.

Syndergaard did it four days after Bartolo Colon hit the first home run of his 19-year career. Syndergaard’s second homer was a three-run shot, giving him four R.B.I. That tied a Mets record for pitchers, last achieved by Steven Matz a season ago.

Syndergaard said on his Twitter account that the home runs were “a direct result of Bartolo inspiring me to be a better man.”

Nicknamed Thor for his Norse heritage and his mighty fastball, Syndergaard produced all of the Mets’ offense in the 4-3 victory and improved his record to 3-2. Asked how he felt rounding the bases after he saw the second ball go over the wall, Syndergaard was far more expansive about that experience than he was about his visit to the doctor.

“It felt like it was a dream,” he said. “It’s not real. I don’t think I ever hit two home runs when I played Little League.”

Syndergaard also became the first major league pitcher to hit two home runs in a game since Aug. 18, 2007, when Micah Owings hit two for the Arizona Diamondbacks.

Syndergaard had a chance to add to the total when he went to the plate in the sixth inning against relief pitcher Chris Hatcher. The bases were loaded. There was nowhere to put this imposing basher.

With Dodger Stadium buzzing, Syndergaard took a hack at a 97-m.p.h. fastball and ripped it foul into the seats in right field, far enough and hard enough to excite the fans.

“I was going for it,” Syndergaard said.

After a couple more big swings, Syndergaard struck out on a 96-m.p.h. heater, and the Dodgers fans rose and applauded as if Hatcher had just struck out Albert Pujols with the bases loaded. Joe Blanton struck out Syndergaard in his final at-bat.

Wednesday night was Syndergaard’s 31st career start, but three of those were in American League parks, in which he did not bat, meaning he is averaging a home run every 9.3 games, impressing everyone with his feats both on the mound and at the plate.

“He’s a big, strong kid,” his teammate Neil Walker said. “He’s Thor.”


