


The executive director of the civilian agency that oversees the New York Police Department on Tuesday dropped her lawsuit accusing its former chairman of using sexist remarks.

The lawsuit was brought by Mina Malik, the executive director of the Civilian Complaint Review Board, and her deputy, Robia Charles. The suit prompted the agency’s chairman at the time, Richard D. Emery, to resign on April 13, a day after it was filed.

The women, in a statement from their lawyer, cited Mayor Bill de Blasio’s “swift and decisive action” in accepting Mr. Emery’s resignation in their decision to voluntarily dismiss the case. The lawyer, Douglas H. Wigdor, said Ms. Malik and Ms. Charles were doing so without prejudice, meaning they reserved the right to refile the lawsuit.

“We hope that the filing of this lawsuit sends a powerful message to all of those who silently suffer at the hands of discriminatory and retaliatory employers that the legal system can create positive change,” Mr. Wigdor said. “By dismissing the case without prejudice, my clients reserve the unfettered right to reinstitute the proceedings should they be mistreated or retaliated against in any way.”

Ms. Malik, who joined the agency in January 2015, had accused Mr. Emery of retaliation after she reported what she said were sexist remarks to the city’s Law Department and Equal Employment Opportunity Office.

Mr. Emery, whom the mayor appointed in July 2014, said in a statement that he was not surprised that Ms. Malik and Ms. Charles had voluntarily dismissed the case, which he called “frivolous and a distraction.”

In an interview, he acknowledged using strong language in a meeting in September where Ms. Malik was not present, but said he had not disparaged her.

“It had to do with the Police Department seeking a lower penalty in a case that was egregious,” Mr. Emery said.

His top position at the review board had been a source of tension for Mr. de Blasio as the mayor sought to mend relations with rank-and-file officers. When the women filed their lawsuit, Mr. Emery was already in the cross hairs of police union officials. They had been calling for his removal over his law firm’s role in representing plaintiffs in federal lawsuits against officers and derogatory comments he is accused of making about the police.

After Mr. Emery’s resignation, the mayor appointed Deborah N. Archer, a member of the agency’s board, as acting chairwoman until a replacement is named.


