


Ballet is extreme. That’s exactly why the choreographer Katy Pyle loves it.

But Ms. Pyle has invented something new: ballez. It sums up her company, her movement practice, her teaching and the way she envisions the future of ballet. She is showcasing stories of, as she puts it, lesbian, queer and transgender people in the unlikely world of tutus and tiaras. Ballet is exclusive; ballez, made up of dancers who identify in myriad ways, is not.

“I just don’t believe in neutral,” Ms. Pyle said in an interview after a recent rehearsal. “I want to use this form to show that people are still carrying these subconscious judgments and ideas about how we should behave in relation to each other, how we should look and move, and what’s possible and what’s allowed.”

Ballez, which is also the name of her company, aims to nurture as well as empower. A typical ballez class includes the usual exercises and combinations but begins with students sharing their names and a preferred gender pronoun; ballet barres are placed in a triangle so the students are closer to one another. And there are no mirrors.

“The emphasis isn’t on technical perfection,” said Madison Krekel, a member of the company, which has some dozen dancers. “It’s about using what you have and, most important, using it to see each other in the room and to really receive each other.”

As the director, Ms. Pyle may be in charge, but she’s not interested in hierarchy. Her own history has led her to this point. Persuaded to quit ballet as a teenager — she was repeatedly told that she was too big and too strong — she has reimagined it on her own terms. In Ms. Pyle’s works, female heroines may fall in love, but they’re not weak, timid or virginal; they stand up for themselves. They’re fighters. And they can love whomever they want.

“I have been really angry about not being allowed into this world that I deeply committed myself to as a young person,” she said. “It’s been this knot inside of me. But because ballet was cut off from me as a really young person, it’s still a playful space in my memory.”

Transgenderism may be in the public eye right now, but Ms. Pyle has been focused on the subject for some time. Her new “Sleeping Beauty & the Beast” is to have its debut on Friday, April 29, in the La MaMa Moves! Dance Festival. Three years in the making, the production is Ms. Pyle’s second reimagining of a classical ballet; her first was “The Firebird, a Ballez” in 2013. Nicky Paraiso, who programs the La MaMa festival, recalled being impressed that Ms. Pyle had found a way “to tackle the ballet form with dancers of different shapes and sizes and sexualities,” he said. “It was completely beautiful.”

Just as with “The Firebird,” there is a sense of whimsy in Ms. Pyle’s “Sleeping Beauty & the Beast.” But there’s history, too, in the ballet, which explores two eras of activism on the Lower East Side. The first act takes place in 1893 and is set in the garment industry; the second comes 100 years later, during the AIDS crisis.

For Ms. Pyle, who is 35 and a lesbian, 1993 was an important year for lesbians in the news media. Cindy Crawford shaved K. D. Lang’s face on the cover of “Vanity Fair”; Melissa Etheridge had a hit record, “Yes I Am.”

“It was the very fluffy stuff — that’s what I was aware of as a 13-year-old in Texas,” she said. “It was this moment of, ‘Oh this reality exists.’ I had no idea. I remember asking my mom what a lesbian was and not getting an answer. She’s cool now.”

In the classic ballet “Sleeping Beauty,” the baby princess Aurora is placed under a curse by the evil fairy Carabosse: When she pricks her finger with a needle, she’ll die. But the Lilac Fairy changes the spell so that Aurora will only fall asleep. A hundred years later, a prince awakens her with a kiss. In Ms. Pyle’s version, Aurora’s father owns a Lower East Side garment factory, and the three fairies — Violet, Scarlet and Azure — are played by men and are the factory’s designers. The second act, in 1993, takes place in a lesbian club. As Ms. Pyle said, it was time when “activism and sex and death and club culture were also overlapping.”

Ms. Krekel, who plays Aurora, said the dancers in Ms. Pyle’s group connect as “the misfits of ballet.” When she was growing up, she said, she was the only black girl in her class. “We’ve been in love with the form in some way, but never fit into that classical trajectory.”

She added that her Aurora reminds her of how she was as a teenager. “Angsty, questioning her parents, her desires, trying so hard to find her truth in whatever way she can,” Ms. Krekel explained. “Katy always says in rehearsal, ‘I don’t want you guys to ever feel like you need to embody this way of dancing like a ballet dancer.’ She is always trying to make sure that we’re highlighting our personalities and what lives inside of us.”

Then there is the Beast, played by Jules Skloot, a union organizer in the first act and the Beast in the second. Loosely based on Leslie Feinberg, the American transgender activist and writer, the Beast is Aurora’s prince. But the character also refers to some of what Ballez stands for: shining a spotlight on society’s outcasts.

While not a parody in the vein of what the all-male Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo might create, the production plays with ideas of femininity and masculinity.

“I feel like the feminist take on ballet has been more like, let’s do something that’s gender neutral, and let’s take affectation out of ballet, and that is where I have a problem,” Ms. Pyle said. “There’s a lot of fun and a lot of playfulness in having a gender. It’s enlivening to me to play with that and to include sexuality. It creates a wider scope of possibility. And that’s how I see the world.”


