


Allegra Irene Fanjul, a daughter of Catherine Fanjul and Andres B. Fanjul of Palm Beach, Fla., was married May 28 to Calixto Garcia-Velez IV, the son of Mayli Garcia-Velez and Mr. Garcia-Velez III of Wellington, Fla. The Rev. Brian King performed the ceremony at St. Edward Catholic Church in Palm Beach.

The bride, 25, designs jewelry and writes a blog for her own company, Very Allegra in Palm Beach. She graduated from Florida Atlantic University.

Her father is a principal and senior executive of two companies in West Palm Beach, Fla.: the Fanjul Corporation, which operates sugar mills and resorts, and Florida Crystals Corporation, which owns land, sugar- and rice-processing facilities and a distribution center. The Fanjul family, formerly a major sugar producer in Cuba, moved to Palm Beach County after the 1959 revolution. Her mother is on the boards of the Catholic Charities of the Diocese of Palm Beach and St. Mary’s Medical Center in West Palm Beach.

The groom, 26, is a client risk adviser at Celedinas Insurance Group in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., a brokerage division of the Marsh & McLennan Companies. He also graduated from Florida Atlantic.

The groom’s mother is a founding associate of Equestrian Sotheby’s International Realty in Wellington. His father is the director of CGV Global Consultants, a business consulting company in Wellington, and a horse breeder and professional polo player.

The couple first met at a sixth-grade birthday party in 2002. “I was only age 11 but thought he was cute and nice, and we liked each other right away,” Ms. Fanjul said. “While he denies it, he told his mother that he was going to ‘marry that girl.’ ”

But it was not until the summer of 2009 that Ms. Fanjul and Mr. Garcia-Velez had their first date: a birthday party for Mr. Garcia-Velez’s mother. “We have big Spanish families and like to hang with both sides,” Ms. Fanjul said.

She added, “When he drove me home, we had our first kiss.”

Mr. Garcia-Velez was so taken with her that he decided to drop the California college in which he had enrolled and chose to study in Florida instead. “I knew I would have to come back to Florida because she was the one,” he said.

During their courtship, Mr. Garcia-Velez was at Florida Atlantic during the school year, but his summers were spent playing polo professionally for the Grant’s Farm Manor polo team in Santa Barbara, Calif.

Those separations were difficult for the couple. “It was difficult to go from spending so much time together on a daily basis to him being on the opposite side of the country for three months,” said Ms. Fanjul, who traveled to see him several times each summer. “Being long distance was definitely a challenge, but we were able to build our relationship and make it stronger on the grounds of trust and true love.”

Mr. Garcia-Velez eventually decided to quit polo and come back to Florida year-round. “This was also a hard transition, but he knew that I supported him in every way possible,” Ms. Fanjul said.

Mr. Garcia-Velez proposed July 18 in Southampton, N.Y. Earlier that day, Ms. Fanjul had been hosting a trunk show of her jewelry in Sag Harbor, N.Y. After she changed clothes and walked into the garden of the Meadow Club, Mr. Garcia-Velez surprised her with a ring.

“He got down on one knee and proposed with a beautiful cushion-cut single diamond with a band of diamonds,” she said. “I was so excited. And both of our families were there to celebrate.” (Which the groom had secretly arranged.)

At their wedding, the bride wore a strapless gown with caviar beading from the final collection designed by Oscar de la Renta.


