


Have we reached peak sleep? Countless studies confirm the importance of eight solid hours. Pajama suits have migrated from the boudoir to the boardroom. And new elixirs, decadent sheets and calming bedroom things perfect the art of a good night’s rest.

Earlier this year, the bedding-obsessed 27-year-old Nell Diamond launched the online store Hill House Home with five collections of painstakingly researched Italian- and French-made white cotton sheet sets, a blog devoted to the culture of sleep — and a sweet signature pillowcase that’s mini and monogrammable, shown above in the brand’s new colors collection, available later this week. (Coincidentally, the blue French bulldog Gus, a model for the brand, is owned by T’s senior online editor, Isabel Wilkinson.)

Another cool-girl entrepreneur, Alexandra Suhner Isenberg — the Canadian-born, Sweden-based designer behind the Sleep Shirt, a line of cult-favorite nightshirts inspired by a 19th-century chemise — also recently introduced a new web store. Called Into the Bedroom, it offers all the ambient trappings of a cozy place to lay your head: quilts, candles, hampers and mugs in soothing colors and motifs.

Beginning next month, the San Francisco-based online retailer Ayla, which specializes in nontoxic beauty products, will begin offering Les Fleurs de Bach Authentiques sleep elixir from the French wellness company Elixirs & Co. The organic, flower-based remedy promises to lull you into a deep sleep, and keep you there. $37, aylabeauty.com.

The newest collection from the modern sleepwear retailer Lunya features technical fabric designed to increases oxygen, regulate body temperature, promote cell growth (to heal injuries more quickly) and improve blood flow — all while you snooze. $62-$68, lunya.co.

The supermodel Elle Macpherson made a name for herself in the wellness industry with WelleCo, an alkalizing greens supplement and vegan protein powder. And in June, she will introduce a calming lavender-laced pillow mist and tea (which also contains Valerian root, a natural remedy for insomnia). $59-$69, welleco.com.


