


On the screen, a young woman, just awake, smiled and rose from bed, chatting to her audience about starting her day, pausing occasionally to take long drags from an electronic pipe, pronouncing herself to be high.

She was using Facebook Live, the new feature that invites friends to watch a user “go live.” Her name was Shaniah Lord, 19, from the Lower East Side of Manhattan, and she was a frequent and enthusiastic chronicler of the mundane (“Sunday, fun day, nothing better to do. I’m bored.”) who sometimes tried to scare up some excitement (“Let’s go get drinks,” “I’m by mad bars.”)

On this day, March 26, her live feed took some strange turns. Looking back, her sister, Shaquana Lord, 28, called it “a cry for help.”

In the video, Ms. Lord reached for something off-camera. It was a woman’s New Jersey driver’s license, and she held it up to the screen.

“Anybody know a white girl that looks like this?” she asked. “We could get money.”

Several minutes later, she approached the camera again, this time with a black purse, and pulled out a handful of gift cards.

“Holler at me,” she sang, “if you need a giftie.”

Then she seemed to catch herself, saying: “I don’t need to be on Facebook like this. I’m not that type of person.” She added, “People don’t like me because I get money.”

There is no mention of theft in the video, or of how the cards and the license came to her. Ms. Lord, who grew up in Queens and sometimes lived with her grandmother on Stanton Street in Manhattan, had been arrested before, in January, and was charged with stealing a purse from a boutique a few blocks away. That case was pending. But her family hoped she had turned things around.

Her sister said the pictures Ms. Lord frequently posted suggesting a glamorous life — a new ring, new nails, selfies in boutiques — hid a need for attention. She was running around with the wrong crowd, her sister said, and her actions in the video may have been for show.

“Just because she had them doesn’t mean it was hers,” Shaquana Lord said.

When, a few days after the video, Ms. Lord was arrested again, it turned out to be a case of mistaken identity. A woman had stolen a wallet from the Once Upon a Tart cafe in SoHo, but after Ms. Lord was arrested, it became obvious from security video that the thief was a different, much taller woman. Ms. Lord returned home and to Facebook as if nothing had happened.

On the day she was released from jail, she seemed to have celebrated an older cousin’s birthday, posting a picture and adding, “It ain’t over yet thoooo!” A few days later, she wrote, “Life is really beginning to pick back up for me. I love it.”

But away from Facebook, things were very different, the police said. In fact, life seemed more to resemble the March 26 video, with the gift cards and license, than the posts expressing hope. Looking back, that video seemed to all but announce, like an overture to a concert, the direction in which she was headed.

On April 21 around 2 a.m., a woman in the Greenwich Treehouse bar in the West Village realized her purse was gone, her iPhone with it, the police said. The woman used the Find My iPhone app and tracked it to an address on West 14th Street — another bar, McKenna’s Pub. She went there and recognized a woman from the first bar, she told the police. She told a doorman, who alerted the police.

The suspect was arrested. It was Ms. Lord. The police recovered the woman’s purse and more.

There was a backpack that had been reported missing two hours earlier from Bill’s Bar and Burger on Ninth Avenue, with a laptop and wallet. Its owner had been eating, the bag on the floor, and looked down to find it missing. Officers also found property from a purse that had been taken from a couch at Gaslight Lounge in the meatpacking district the night before, the police said.

Ms. Lord was charged with grand larceny. She remained at Rikers Island last week, her Facebook page dormant and her sister hoping her life stabilizes.

“In the family, she’s the one that’s full of life,” Shaquana Lord said. “She got a whiff of the outside world, and she was going to do what she was going to do.”

Ms. Lord would seem to agree. In that video, she raised one more item to the camera: a passport. She flipped through the pages and sang, “Come see the world with me.”


