


The Yankees and the Tampa Bay Rays were tied, 2-2, in the ninth inning on Saturday when Brett Gardner stepped to the plate and began assessing ways to score a third run.

In the seventh inning, Gardner had driven in the tying run for the Yankees on a fluke single. With two outs and the Yankees’ best pitchers most likely finished for the afternoon, Gardner began thinking innovatively.

Facing reliever Erasmo Ramirez, Gardner wanted to surprise the defense and bunt for a hit, steal second and let Carlos Beltran, perhaps the Yankees’ best hitter so far this season, attempt to drive him in.

But the infielders began creeping in. Soon, the count was 3-1, and Gardner guessed that Ramirez would not want to walk him to face Beltran. So he envisioned a pitch near the plate coming his way.

Gardner guessed correctly, and he crushed a home run over the right-field wall, sending the Yankees to a 3-2 win at Yankee Stadium.

Yankees starter Masahiro Tanaka had perhaps his best outing so far this season, throwing a season-high 97 pitches, striking out seven in seven innings and allowing two runs. Including the dependable bullpen duo of Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller, the Yankees’ arms carried the team before Gardner registered his sixth career walk-off hit and his second homer of the season.

“When you use Miller and Betances, you want to win those games, and Gardy came up with a huge hit,” Yankees catcher Brian McCann said.

Betances struck out two of three batters in the eighth inning, and Miller pitched a scoreless ninth. During the first eight games of the Yankees’ current homestand, Betances and Miller have struck out 22 of 33 batters. Betances has recorded 21 of his last 24 outs by strikeout.

The back end of the bullpen has been one of the few high points this season for the Yankees, who continued to struggle against left-handed pitching.

On Saturday, the Yankees faced a left-handed starter for the fourth time in five games, and they were largely stymied during the major league debut of Blake Snell, the Rays’ top prospect.

Snell, 23, had shined at Class AAA Durham, going 7-3 with a 1.99 E.R.A. in 12 starts since joining the team in the 2015 season.

In the first inning on Saturday, toeing the third-base side of the rubber and inhaling deeply before each windup, Snell looked jittery. After retiring the first two batters on fly balls, he walked Beltran on four pitches. A single by Mark Teixeira moved Beltran to third, and with Alex Rodriguez at bat, Snell skipped a wild pitch past catcher Hank Conger, allowing one run to score.

More composed in the second inning, Snell struck out the side. He finished with 90 pitches over five innings, striking out six and allowing two hits and one run.

“You can see why there’s so much buzz about him,” Gardner said. “I’m not looking forward to having to continue to face him.”

The Rays scratched out a run in the fourth on doubles by Logan Morrison and Corey Dickerson. With two outs, Dickerson lifted an 0-2 pitch from Tanaka to left field, and Gardner, playing shallow, could not recover in time as the ball sailed over his head.

Off the bat, Gardner thought he could make the catch, but he said that he should have been playing deeper.

In the fifth inning, Kevin Kiermaier’s high fly ball to right field smacked into the foul pole for a home run, putting the Rays ahead, 2-1.

Gardner atoned for his defensive misjudgment in the seventh, though, when the Yankees tied the score without getting a hit past the infield.

McCann led off with a walk, and Chase Headley also walked after Starlin Castro flied out to center field. Didi Gregorius struck out swinging on a 3-2 pitch out of the zone, but Jacoby Ellsbury was awarded first base on a catcher’s interference call to load the bases.

Saturday was the third time this month that Ellsbury had reached base on catcher’s interference.

“That gave us an opportunity to set it up for Gardy,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “He waits a long time with two strikes and protects.”

Gardner then hit a liner that deflected off pitcher Xavier Cedeno. The ball pinballed toward second base, but second baseman Logan Forsythe had already broken toward the hole. All runners were safe, and the Yankees had tied the game.

“That’s not how you would draw it up, but at this point we’ll take it any way we can get it,” said Gardner, who finished 3 for 5 with two R.B.I., his first multiple-R.B.I. game of the season.

INSIDE PITCH

AARON HICKS has inflammation in his left shoulder and will be inactive for four to five days. Before the game, reliever BRANDEN PINDER was found to have a partial tear of the right ulnar collateral ligament in his elbow. Joe Girardi said that Pinder had not yet decided whether to rehabilitate the injury or undergo Tommy John surgery. Earlier this month, reliever Nick Rumbelow chose the procedure after incurring a similar injury.


