


WASHINGTON — With their nomination contests finally locked up, Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump sought to rev up their core supporters on Friday during dueling speeches in which each cast the other as unfit for the presidency.

Mixing policy arguments with personal attacks, the presumptive nominees clashed from across the capital as they previewed the arguments they will take to the country over the next five months.

For Mr. Trump, who suffered perhaps the most damaging week of his yearlong campaign, a forum for evangelical Christians proved to be an unlikely haven, while Mrs. Clinton was greeted with cheers and pink “Hillary” signs as she vowed to protect women’s rights from Mr. Trump and the Republicans.

“Anyone who wants to defund Planned Parenthood and wipe out safe, legal abortions has no idea what’s best for women,” Mrs. Clinton said of Mr. Trump at a Planned Parenthood Action Fund event here. “After all this is a man who has called women ‘pigs,’ ‘dogs’ and ‘disgusting animals.’”

Her first major address since securing enough delegates to clinch the nomination served Mrs. Clinton on two fronts as she looks to mend fissures within the Democratic Party while turning to the general election. It allowed Mrs. Clinton, the first woman to secure a major party’s presidential nomination, to demonstrate that a bedrock progressive cause was a top priority, and it gave her a forum to press her advantage with female voters against Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump, whose attacks on Megyn Kelly, Carly Fiorina and Heidi Cruz during the primary campaign were widely condemned, boasts that he would be better for women than Mrs. Clinton, but polls so far show that women disagree. A Gallup survey in April found that 70 percent of women in the country viewed him unfavorably.

Mrs. Clinton, who had a private meeting earlier in the day with one of her party’s most effective critics of Mr. Trump, Senator Elizabeth Warren, did not confine her own critique of him to women’s issues. She assailed Mr. Trump for accusing a federal judge, Gonzalo P. Curiel, of being biased because of his Mexican heritage, and she scolded Mr. Trump for disparaging a disabled reporter. His promise to make America great, she said, would set the country back decades.

“Donald Trump would take us in the wrong direction on so many issues that we care about,” Mrs. Clinton said. “He does not see all Americans as Americans.”

While Mrs. Clinton went on the offensive, Mr. Trump was relatively restrained in front of a group of evangelical activists as he looked to regain his footing amid the bipartisan backlash he has faced over his comments about Judge Curiel, who is presiding over a lawsuit against Trump University.

Before the Faith and Freedom Coalition’s Road to Majority Conference in Washington, Mr. Trump promised to “uphold the sanctity and dignity of life” and to “restore respect for people of faith.”

When several young protesters disrupted his remarks, Mr. Trump watched as they were marched out by security guards, his old refrain of “get them out!” replaced with a lament about the rudeness of such interruptions and an assertion that the demonstrators were “professional agitators” sent by Democrats.

But he also used the opportunity to make his case against Mrs. Clinton, attacking her economic plans and willingness to admit Syrian refugees into the country and questioning her judgment when she was secretary of state. Sticking mostly to policy, he only briefly referred to her as “crooked.”

“She’ll appoint radical judges who will legislate from the bench, overriding Congress, and I’ll tell you, the will of the people will mean nothing — nothing,” he said. “She will undermine the wages of working people with uncontrolled immigration, creating poverty and income insecurity.”

At one point, Mr. Trump tried to turn the tables on Mrs. Clinton, who regularly argues that he lacks the temperament to be president. In a line that seemed to fall flat, he said that she was “unfit” to lead because of her refusal to employ the phrase “radical Islam” when talking about terrorism.

Referring to Mrs. Clinton’s call for President Obama to honor his pledge to take in more than 10,000 Syrian refugees, Mr. Trump challenged her to instead “replace her support for increased refugee admissions” with “a new jobs program for our inner cities.”

“We have to temporarily stop this whole thing with what’s going on with refugees where we don’t know where they come from, but we have to take a rest,” Mr. Trump said, avoiding any discussion of his provocative plan to ban foreign Muslims from entering the country. “We have to take a timeout. We have to use the money to take care of our poorest Americans and work with them so they can come out of this horrible situation that they’re in.”

The Faith and Freedom conference offered an important proving ground for Mr. Trump. Evangelicals are a vital part of the Republican coalition; they voted overwhelmingly Republican in 2012, with 79 percent supporting Mitt Romney, according to Pew Research.

But Mr. Trump, a thrice-married Manhattan businessman, does not hew to traditional conservative orthodoxy, and in years past he might have agreed with some of what Mrs. Clinton had to say on Friday about expanding access to prenatal care and safe abortions.

During the campaign this year, Mr. Trump, who previously supported abortion rights, said that Planned Parenthood had done “some very good work” for millions of women and, in response to North Carolina’s contentious new law, that transgender people should not face bathroom restrictions.

Still, he won the early endorsement of Jerry Falwell Jr., president of the conservative Liberty University in Lynchburg, Va., at which Mr. Trump spoke, and successfully wooed evangelical voters, in January.

With polls showing Mr. Trump facing a daunting disadvantage against Mrs. Clinton with women and Hispanic voters, he will need robust evangelical turnout in November to close the gap. Despite some Republicans expressing a sense of buyer’s remorse about Mr. Trump, conservative Christians seem to be sticking with him.

Hogan Gidley, who was an aide to former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas, said that while evangelicals “would love to have a true evangelical in the White House,” they understood that Republicans required a broader coalition to win a general election.

“Republicans cannot win without getting evangelicals, and they can’t win only getting evangelicals,” Mr. Gidley said. “They have to expand the voter universe and, so far, Trump has done an amazing job with that.”


