


Faced with broadcasting an all-singing, all-dancing, happy-faced celebration of art and commerce less than 24 hours after the deadliest mass shooting in American history, CBS did about what you’d expect. The Tony Awards broadcast on Sunday night began with the host, James Corden, standing on the bare stage of the Beacon Theater, his back to the house, delivering a short and careful tribute to the victims of the massacre at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla.

“Theater is a place where every race, creed, sexuality and gender is equal, is embraced, and is loved,” he said. “Hate will never win.”

There was no mention of terrorism or the Islamic State. But the appeal for tolerance and the salute to the inclusiveness of the theater community fit seamlessly into a broadcast that promoted the diversity of the Tony field in the wake of #OscarsSoWhite. (Though when the camera ventured into the orchestra seats of the Beacon, the hashtag could have been #AudienceSoWhite.)

Then Mr. Corden, the American Theater Wing, the Broadway League and the presenters, nominees and winners got down to the business of selling Broadway, in a polished, middle-of-the-road telecast that didn’t embarrass but never caught fire. It started to drag long before “Hamilton” won the last of its 11 awards, for best musical, at 11:13. (The nominees for best revival of a musical have never been read so quickly.)

Further mention of Orlando was relatively scant, with a notable exception. In his acceptance speech for best score for “Hamilton,” Lin-Manuel Miranda provided the broadcast’s emotional high point, reading a sonnet that cited “senseless acts of tragedy” and included the repeated “and love is love, is love, is love, is love” that brought down the house.

Later, accepting the award for best musical, the producer Jeffrey Seller didn’t mention the shooting, but his closing line, “Look around, how lucky we are to be alive right now,” carried a different resonance than it would have on another day.

Otherwise, people mostly stuck to scripts and prepared speeches (and videotapes, as in a recorded tribute to “Hamilton” by President Obama and the first lady, Michelle Obama). Jessica Lange and Frank Langella also broke the trend, referring to the “sad day” in their acceptance speeches, and a reference was written into Barbra Streisand’s introduction for best musical.

The presence of Ms. Lange, Mr. Langella and Ms. Streisand, along with those of Jane Houdyshell and Reed Birney of “The Humans” — who both spoke movingly of what it meant to win a Tony after a long career onstage — gave a strong flavor of nostalgia and veteran professionalism to a show that was supposed to be dominated by the youthful cast and hip-hop rhythms of “Hamilton.”

The relentless march of “Hamilton” was the news, but Mr. Miranda’s megahit was overshadowed by performances from other shows. The musical medleys weren’t very interesting to look at, but there was some impressive belting and crooning and scatting from Cynthia Erivo and Heather Headley (“The Color Purple”), Carmen Cusack (“Bright Star”) and Audra McDonald, Brian Stokes Mitchell and the cast of “Shuffle Along.”

Mr. Corden is not someone you go to for gravitas, and his delivery of the opening statement was a bit tremulous. But once he was on script, he was an excellent host, demonstrating the ingratiating personality and unassuming technique that have served him well on stage (“One Man, Two Guvnors,” for which he won a Tony in 2012) and television (his current gig as host of CBS’s “The Late Late Show”).

The broadcast’s big opening, starting with Mr. Corden on stage with “Hamilton” cast members, segueing into some mild jokes about Donald J. Trump and the Tonys’ irrelevance and then morphing again into a medley celebrating non-nominated long-running shows, was boring and too long. But Mr. Corden saved it with a few moments of writhing parody of Mama Rose and some elegant hoofing to “We’re in the Money.” (Direct political commentary was buried near the end of the broadcast, in an on-the-nose gag about a Trump musical called “Book of Moron.”)

Later he presided over amusing business like the silent 15-second appearance of the awards’ accountants. (Less amusing: a long cross-promotional segment of his car pool karaoke sketch from “The Late Late Show.”) He also led the camera through the lobby, bumping into several late arrivers, and out to a sidewalk platform, where commercial breaks were introduced by nominees performing snatches of classic Broadway tunes. This looked like a disastrous idea when Mr. Miranda, the writers of “Bright Star” and Andrew Lloyd Webber (on tambourine) butchered “Tomorrow,” but it rallied to become one of the broadcast’s more endearing features.


