


The wrecking ball is finally coming for ABC No Rio, an old brick tenement on the Lower East Side that has been slowly crumbling since a group of artists and activists started a cultural center there in 1980. Plans for the last art shows are underway, and a move out is expected to be completed by the end of June. Demolition could come before the fall.

The center was founded after members of group called Collaborative Projects broke into an empty city-owned storefront on Delancey Street in late 1979 and installed the so-called Real Estate Show, which took an acerbic view of that industry. Those artists eventually accepted the city’s offer to move to an empty storefront on Rivington Street, which they named for the remnants of lettering on a nearby sign that had once read “Abogado y Notario Publico.” In the 36 years since, the center has withstood speculation, rising rents, a protracted eviction battle with the Giuliani administration and more, becoming a defiant symbol of an ungentrified New York.

No Rio plans to replace its fragile four-story home with an environmentally friendly new structure where artists will continue to present the same type of boundary-pushing material that has become the center’s hallmark. Installations and performances there have tended to reflect a rebellious aesthetic rooted in the grittier and more dangerous Lower East Side of the ’80s and ’90s, before the neighborhood became palatable to developers and deep-pocketed renters.

Over the years the center has sought to fuse art and politics, welcoming those who do not feel comfortable in the mainstream of either world and attracting a loyal, almost tribal, following.

“It includes punks who embrace the do-it-yourself ethos, express positive outrage and reject corporate commercialism,” the center’s board members and volunteers wrote several years ago of their constituency. “It includes nomads, squatters, fringe dwellers, and those among society’s disenfranchised who find at ABC No Rio a place to be heard and valued.”

Although the razing and rebuilding have been planned for years, delayed by red tape and rising costs, the decision to act now came after developers recently paid $30 million for a former matzo factory next to No Rio that they plan to replace with million-dollar condos. Given No Rio’s age and condition, the structure seemed unlikely to survive the demolition next door.

So, No Rio’s member collectives have begun preparations to “go into exile,” as some have put it, until their new building is completed.

A few weeks ago the group’s zine library, one of the more prominent such collections in the country, moved to Clemente Soto Vélez, a community center on Suffolk Street, where No Rio’s director, Steven Englander, will also have an office. Volunteers have been packing up inside the third-floor darkroom. And organizers of the center’s weekly Saturday afternoon punk shows said they would shift performances to other places, including Silent Barn in Bushwick, Brooklyn, starting in July.

When artists arrived at the Rivington Street building 36 years ago, there were still tenants on the upper floors, said Becky Howland, one of the founders. The artists repaired gaping holes in the storefront ceiling and augmented an unreliable boiler with a wood-burning stove made of oil drums.

The lack of commercial interest in the neighborhood, the abandonment of properties there and the low rent charged by the city gave No Rio the chance to find its footing in an area that was then ignored or avoided by most people, she said, adding that the founders never imagined that their venture would last decades.

“No Rio will live longer than any of us,” Ms. Howland said. “It can give artists hope because it is a toehold amidst the glass towers and Disneyland of Manhattan.”

Led by the artists Jack Waters and Peter Cramer, from the mid-1980s until the mid-1990s, the center became known for poetry, film, queer-identity art and experimental performances by people like Kembra Pfahler. Punk and antifolk shows included Michelle Shocked and Beck. The political art shows continued too, with one criticizing South African apartheid and another opposing United States actions in Central America and featuring work by Claes Oldenburg and David Wojnarowicz.

By 1994 the upstairs tenants had left, and the city had stopped accepting No Rio’s rent checks, saying it would transfer the building to a developer. No Rio volunteers moved into the empty apartments, forming connections with squatting and anarchist movements centered in the East Village. After three years of noisy protests, the city relented, announcing that No Rio could have the building if people stopped living there and it raised $100,000 for repairs.

It soon became evident that mere repairs would not suffice, but by sticking to the agreement, No Rio earned good will. And as the center has endured, many officials have come to believe that it should be preserved. In 2006 the city sold the building to No Rio for a dollar. Since then, the center, which has raised $1.6 million in private donations, has also received $6.45 million in grants through City Council members, the former Manhattan Borough president Scott M. Stringer and the city’s Department of Cultural Affairs.

Tom Finkelpearl, the cultural affairs commissioner, called the center “a free-flowing collective in touch with the spirit of the Lower East Side,” adding that the green design of the replacement building makes it a good candidate for assistance.

The architect for the new center, Paul Castrucci, said it would be “one of the most energy-efficient buildings in the city.” Plans call for roof gardens that will insulate the structure and reduce rain runoff into the city’s sewer system and natural ventilation and lighting that reduce cooling and lighting loads.

In addition to supervising a gradual move, Mr. Englander is preparing for the building’s final art shows, scheduled to open on June 10. One will exhibit work documenting the building. The other, called “InFinite Futures,” will present artists’ visions of what the No Rio site could look like in five, 50 and 500 years.

On a recent evening Mr. Englander reflected on No Rio’s future, including the question of how to maintain its oppositional ethos in an ever-gentrifying environment.

That animating spirit, Mr. Englander said, comes from the people inside the building rather than its surroundings. If anything, he suggested, the changes in the neighborhood may make No Rio’s willingness to explore the margins more vital.

“Nobody knows what New York City will be like when this hypergentrification catches its breath,” he said, adding: “I’m pretty confident that people in line with the mission and purpose here will always be around.”


