


On our podcast, Inside the New York Times Book Review, we asked you to send us voice memos telling us about your favorite summer reading. If you’re not a listener to the podcast yet, we invite you to check it out: you can subscribe on iTunes and Stitcher.

In any case, we want to hear from you. Please send us a voice memo telling us about a book you read one summer that has stayed with you. How old were you when you read it? Where were you? How did the book affect you? Keep your story to 30 seconds or less, and make sure to tell us your full name, where you live, and the title and author of the book.

We may use your voice memo in a future episode of the podcast.

How to do it:

If you’re using an iPhone, these directions are for the native Voice Memos app. Android users, try Smart Voice Recorder. For Windows phones, try Croebe Voice Memos. All are free.

1. Find a relatively quiet place to do this, and open your app. Voice Memos is sometimes grouped with Utilities.

2. When you open it, you’ll see the record field. Hold the phone a few inches from your face with the speaker end tilted slightly toward your lips.

A few tips:

Your name and where you live is a good beginning.

These are short, so it’s helpful to figure out what you want to say ahead of time. But please don’t read from a script, even if you jot some thoughts down. We want to hear your story as you’d tell it to a good friend.

Hit the red button to start recording.

3. Wait a few seconds before you start speaking. When you’re done telling your story, wait for a few more seconds of silence and hit the red button again to stop.

4. Give it a title, and save.

5. The voice memo will appear in a queue. Click on it to get share options.

6. Click the share icon, that box with the arrow on the left:

7. Select email, and send your voice memo to us at podcasts@nytimes.com. Also—if you’ve gotten this far and are having trouble doing this, or just can’t imagine doing this, don’t despair. You can also email us your story. Just remember: pithy is golden. We look forward to hearing from you.


