


The Boston Celtics’ franchise record for regular-season victories does not belong to a team featuring Bill Russell, or one led by Larry Bird or by Kevin Garnett. And perhaps most relevant, especially in light of the 73-victory Golden State Warriors’ now having played two playoff games without their injured star, Stephen Curry, it did not come with a championship.

It was the 1972-73 team, which John Havlicek and Dave Cowens led to 68 wins — tied for the second-most regular-season wins at that point, and still the fifth-most ever — before Boston locked horns with the Knicks in the Eastern Conference finals. The teams split the first two games, and in the third, a Celtics loss, Havlicek scored 29 points but injured his shoulder. He missed the next game, and the diminution of his performance the rest of the way contributed greatly to the Celtics’ eventual elimination in seven games.

Curry, who has battled ankle problems throughout his career, injured his right ankle in Game 1 against the Houston Rockets. He insists he will be ready to play in Game 4 on Sunday, with his team leading the series by two games to one. But the experiences of that Celtics team suggest that Golden State may still have something to worry about even when Curry returns.

Curry has shown a tenacious streak, insisting that he was simply bowing to his coach’s desire to make sure he is 100 percent before risking him in a series in which the Warriors, even after a Game 3 loss, should be able to win without him.

“If I was a betting man, I’d be broke betting on me playing in Game 2 and Game 3,” Curry told ESPN’s Marc Spears. “So we will see what happens.”

Havlicek made a similar statement to reporters after missing Game 4 with a torn right trapezius muscle sustained in a collision with the Knicks’ Dave DeBusschere.

“I had my shoulder X-rayed, and there are no breaks, just torn muscles,” Havlicek said. “I have to be optimistic.”

Havlicek’s prediction that he would return proved accurate, and the initial returns were promising. He came off the bench in Game 5 and scored 18 points as the Celtics rallied to pull to within 3-2.

Boston won Game 6 with little help from Havlicek, who was still severely limited in movement in his right arm. He finished with 9 points, 2 assists and 2 rebounds in 27 minutes.

It was during that game that the Knicks figured out how to exploit the diminished version of Havlicek. In Game 7, he scored just 4 points as the Celtics lost, 94-78.

Havlicek told reporters after the game that his shoulder had felt better than at any time since the injury, pointing out that he had attempted one layup with his right hand, but that he simply had lost too much strength in the arm to play up to his usual standards, with the injury even affecting his ability to pass the ball.

“I couldn’t get any force on the ball,” Havlicek told reporters. “I saw guys open.”

Perhaps the best description of the series, and one that could haunt the Warriors if Curry comes back and appears limited, came from Don Nelson, the Hall of Fame coach of the Warriors, who was Havlicek’s backup on the Celtics.

“I think, all along, we were playing with the thought that ‘John is going to be John if we can just keep it going,’ ” Nelson said after the Game 7 loss. “Well, John wasn’t John.”

Curry, the dominant offensive force in the N.B.A., relies on quickness and agility nearly as much as he does his marksmanship, so any reduction in mobility could be crippling to his style of play. His history of ankle trouble also informs the team’s cautious approach.

Luckily for the Warriors, they still have the edge over Houston in their first-round matchup. But their future would be far less assured if Curry were sidelined again, or even limited, in later rounds against stacked teams like the Los Angeles Clippers, the Oklahoma City Thunder and the San Antonio Spurs.

After Curry led Golden State to its 73rd win of the season, breaking the record of Michael Jordan’s 1995-96 Chicago Bulls team, Jordan congratulated the Warriors but also issued a veiled challenge, saying he was looking forward to seeing how they did in the playoffs. To unseat Jordan’s Bulls as the presumed greatest team ever, the Warriors would have to end their season with their second consecutive N.B.A. title.

The Celtics found out in 1973 that they could not win it all when “John wasn’t John.” The Warriors, and everyone else, will find out soon enough if Curry can be Curry.


