


A GEORGIAN ESTATE ON THE COAST OF WALES

$2.56 MILLION (1.75 MILLION POUNDS)

Perched on a rocky outcropping overlooking the Dovey Estuary, this 3.54-acre estate includes a four-bedroom five-bath house, a restored cottage and a small private island. The property is on the west coast of Wales, near the village of Aberdovey (Aberdyfi in Welsh) at the southern end of Snowdonia National Park. The Cambrian Coast Railway Line cuts through one side of the property, connecting the local towns to Pwllheli, a resort town in northern Wales.

Known as Trefri Hall, the 5,088-square-foot main house was built in the 19th century; the cottage dates to the 17th century. The property is designated a Grade II listed site, which means no major changes can be made without the approval of the local conservancy.

The historic listing is “definitely seen as a benefit,” said Belinda Hutchinson-Smith of Strutt & Parker, the listing agent for the property. “It ensures the character of the property.”

The entrance of the main house leads to a reception hall, with broad views of Cardigan Bay. The house features deep sash windows, 14-foot ceilings, period molding and an oak staircase. There is a marble fireplace in the sitting room, which has a wide bay window overlooking the estuary, which attracts a variety of migratory birds. In 2003, the current owners added a glass conservatory with views of the estuary, the river and the surrounding hills. There is another marble fireplace in the dining room, which is attached to the conservatory. The kitchen features an AGA range and a small breakfast area.

The four bedrooms are upstairs; each has its own en-suite bathroom. (The fifth bathroom is on the ground floor.) All the bathrooms have been refurbished over the last six years with underfloor heating, new showers and porcelain tiles, the owner said. One upstairs bathroom has a free-standing bath tub next to a window with views of the estuary.

The two-story cottage was refurbished over the last four years. Originally a long farmhouse with living quarters on the top floor and stables below, it now has two large bedrooms and one bathroom, a living room with a balcony, and two wood-burning stoves. Around the cottage, there are old stables and barns, now used for storing garden equipment.

The grounds have several cultivated garden areas surrounded by stone walls, featuring azaleas, hybrid rhododendrons, fruit trees and Japanese maple trees. There are two greenhouses and separate workshops. A boat house has been converted into an office, with a wood-burning stove and French doors leading to a deck and a dock. A castellated bridge leads to the island, which is deserted except for a contemporary decorative turret.

The furniture and art on the property are not part of the asking price, but select pieces are available for sale, including furniture dating to the 17th century, the owner said. Nineteen acres of pasture adjacent to the property are also available for sale, although the land is currently rented to a sheep farmer, according to the owner.

The nearest village, Aberdovey, is about a mile and a half away and has a post office, grocery stores, pubs and restaurants. Buses passing the house provide connections to Aberdovey and to local towns. The nearest international airports are Manchester and Birmingham, which are both about two and a half hours away by car or train. The train trip to London is about four and a half hours.

MARKET OVERVIEW

Wales is a much different market from the rest of Britain, according to agents. Sales activity and pricing tend to be steadier than in the roller-coaster markets of London and other areas.

“We haven’t had the highs, so we probably won’t see the lows,” said Anthony Clay, a partner with Knight Frank, the real estate company.

Housing prices in Wales were down 0.3 percent in 2015, according to data from the Office for National Statistics. A sluggish British economy and uncertainty about the future have dampened sales activity, agents said. But the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors expects prices to rise 6 percent and sales by 3 percent this year, primarily because of short supply.

Over all, prices for large country homes in rural Wales are often a fraction of the price of properties closer to London. But they are also hard to find. “There isn’t a massive turnover,” Ms. Hutchinson-Smith said. Many of the bigger estates in rural Wales are passed from generation to generation and rarely come on the market, she said.

“For something exceptional, the market is still very good,” she said. “The really special ones don’t tend to be sold very often.”

In recent months, the higher-priced homes have been selling more than the lower range of the market, according to Julie Elliott, an associate in the Swansea office of Fine & Country, the real estate company. “A lot of buyers are second-home buyers,” she said.

Many were buying before a new Stamp Duty increase on second homes went into effect in April, she says. “Now it will probably slow down slightly,” Ms. Elliott said.

WHO BUYS IN WALES

Wales doesn’t attract the wealthy foreign buyers found in many areas of Britain, agents said. It’s too remote for many international buyers, who “like to be in range of Heathrow,” the London airport, Mr. Clay said.

Around the cities, investors are active buying homes to lease. But they are less interested in the rural and coastal areas. Anything beyond Cardiff in southern Wales and Bristol in southwest England is “just harder work” to sell, Mr. Clay said.

A majority of the buyers in the coastal and rural areas are looking for a second home or a place to retire, agents say. Wales’s beautiful scenery and wildlife also attract hikers, bird watchers, hunters, fishing enthusiasts and sailors.

“A lot of buyers are coming home to Wales,” Ms. Elliott said. They left and now they are returning to either buy a second home or relocate to Wales, she said. “People are buying second homes who probably will end up living in them.”

BUYING BASICS

Wales follows the same basic buying procedures as the rest of Britain, agents said. There are no restrictions on foreign purchases. Mortgages are generally available. Typically buyers search for property without an agent and then hire a lawyer to complete the transaction, agents said.

WEBSITES

Official Welsh tourism site: visitwales.com

Welsh government site: wales.gov.uk

Stamp Duty information: gov.uk/stamp-duty-land-tax/residential-property-rates

LANGUAGES AND CURRENCY

English, Welsh; British pound (1 pound = $1.46)

TAXES AND FEES

Britain charges a Stamp Duty ranging from 2 percent to 12 percent on properties of more than 125,000 pounds, or around $182,500, depending on the purchase price. In April, a new law went into effect charging an extra 3 percent for a home that is not a primary residence. Agent commissions are typically 1.5 percent of the purchase price, paid by the seller. Annual property taxes on this estate are about $8,000, according to the owner.

CONTACT

Belinda Hutchinson-Smith, Strutt & Parker, (011-44) 1743 284200; struttandparker.com


