


The Museum of World War II outside Boston has paid $50,000 for Anne Frank’s inscribed copy of Grimm’s fairy tales, in what the museum is calling the first major offering of material connected directly with Frank in nearly 20 years.

The book, auctioned by Swann Auction Galleries in New York, is inscribed with the names of Anne and her sister, Margot, on the title page, in Anne’s handwriting, and was accompanied by a 1977 letter by their father, Otto Frank, explaining that the book had been left behind in the family’s apartment in Amsterdam, before they went into hiding in the secret annex.

Kenneth W. Rendell, the museum’s founder and executive director, said in an interview that the book would be a centerpiece of the museum’s Holocaust collection, which includes material relating to other members of the Frank family, as well as what he called “very human pieces” from others who had been in concentration camps.

“I had everyone surrounding her on display, but nothing that had come from her own hand,” he said, adding that he been the underbidder when an Anne Frank autograph sold at Christie’s in 1989.

“This was a very exciting opportunity,” he said. “I wasn’t going to miss it.”

The book, he said, will go on display soon at the museum, which is in Natick, Mass., and has more than 7,000 items on display and nearly 500,000 in its research collection, according to Mr. Rendell. It was founded in 1999 as a home for Mr. Rendell’s vast personal collection and became a public nonprofit three years ago, he said.

Frank’s own diary is permanently on display at the Anne Frank House in Amsterdam.

Auctions of material relating to Anne Frank, who died at 15 in 1945 in Bergen-Belsen, and other victims and survivors of the Holocaust have sometimes been controversial. In 2014, the Manhattan auction house Doyle canceled the sale of material relating to the Holocaust diarist Mary Berg after her family raised objections. (It was later acquired by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington.)

Mr. Rendell, himself a dealer in manuscripts and autographs, said that auctions were a legitimate means for getting such artifacts into publicly accessible collections.

“If these things don’t get into museums, they exist in a vacuum,” he said. He added: “When you see someone’s handwriting, it’s personal. It makes someone real.”


