


The Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh has a wish list of pieces that it has always wanted for the collection. Warhol’s rare paint-by-number series from 1962 is one of them.

“That was in my top three list, along with a 40 by 40 ‘Marilyn’ and an early comic book painting,” Eric Shiner, the museum’s director, said, adding that these are the works “we’ve been after for a very long time.”

The series consists of just five works on canvas, including the “Do It Yourself (Sailboats)” painting, which has been acquired by the museum, with the help of the dealer Larry Gagosian. The museum traded deaccessioned works from its collection for the painting.

“Gagosian contacted me and said he was now the owner of this painting,” Mr. Shiner said. “He wanted to come to us first, knowing it was one of the key series we were after.”

With the painting, which elevates pop culture kitsch to high art, “Warhol is literally poking fun at the very concept of Abstract Expressionism, which is about free will,” Mr. Shiner said. “He is giving the artist rules that you have to paint in a certain place with a certain color. It is rigid, defined and instructive.”

Another paint-by-numbers Warhol work, “Do It Yourself (Violin),” is on view at the Met Breuer.

The art collector James R. Hedges IV has a clear memory of when his father decided to start carving wood again.

“He went out to Southern Appalachia and started meeting other people who were self-taught wood carvers,” Mr. Hedges said. “His life opened up. He fell in love with folk artists — outsider artists — and started collecting their work.”

For the next 30 years, James R. Hedges III, known as Jimmy, who was born into a prominent Chattanooga family and died in 2014, traveled the American South — bringing home art; befriending artists like Joe Light and Mose Tolliver; and building a gallery on his farm in Lookout Mountain, Ga.

Now his treasure trove of more than 2,400 pieces is going to the Smithsonian’s Archives of American Art, along with the records from Mr. Hedges’s gallery, which document more than 400 outsider artists.

“This just felt like a gold mine to us,” said Kate Haw, the archives’ director.

When Annette Leddy, the archives’ New York collector, went to the Hedgeses’ storage facility, she said “it was literally packed.” Outsider art has become more important and “integrated with contemporary art,” she said.

Driving his truck through back roads, Jimmy Hedges would hand-deliver pieces to collectors’ homes, stopping along the way to visit with artists and buy more work. He was an active presence at the Outsider Art Fair, folk art exhibitions and prison auctions, seeking to improve the economic condition of fellow artists and raise their profiles.

“He would drive Purvis Young to a craft fair in Birmingham or to see the High Museum in Atlanta and introduce him to curators and artists,” the younger Mr. Hedges said of his father’s relationship with the Miami outsider artist. “I found scores of letters — ‘Dear Jimmy, Thank you for giving me $50; Dear Jimmy, Thank you for buying out all the work in the studio so that I could pay for my dialysis.’

“Art is an expression that every human has — whether mentally ill, indigent, imprisoned, hobbyist or folklorist,” he added. “This creative spirit is core human stuff. My dad documented this universe.”

Robert Morris was a “gaping hole in the collection,” of the Dia Art Foundation, Jessica Morgan, its director, said. The same had been true of Carl Andre and Joan Jonas, whose work Dia recently added.

Now the foundation is acquiring eight works by Mr. Morris, the 85-year-old sculptor and conceptual artist, including an installation of the minimalist ensemble he created for the Green Gallery in New York in 1964 and an untitled earthwork. A Morris exhibition at Dia: Beacon will begin on Oct. 8.

The 1964 piece — comprising six painted plywood works, along with a seventh object intended for the original exhibition — will be fabricated for Dia under Mr. Morris’s supervision. “One of the elements can be sat on; others involve you edging around them,” Ms. Morgan said. “So there’s a very direct relationship with the human body.”

Seven years ago, the Japanese artist Mariko Mori dreamed about people seated at the foot of a waterfall. “They were praying in anticipation of something,” she said in a statement. “Then, suddenly, a golden ring appeared over the waterfall. People cried out at it, like the Mayans who witnessed an eclipse of the sun.”

Now, Ms. Mori is realizing this vision as part of the Celebra (Celebrate) Cultural Program of the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.

The permanent installation, “Ring: One with Nature” — to have its premiere Aug. 2, before the opening ceremony — is part of an effort by the artist’s nonprofit Faou Foundation to place site-specific works on six continents. (Her 2011 installation “Sun Pillar” is on Miyako Island in Japan.)

The sculpture — which will change color as the sun hits it and is meant to represent a sixth Olympic ring — is to be situated atop the Véu da Noiva waterfall. “I wanted to create a symbol of oneness,” Ms. Mori said, “and completeness and eternity.”


