


INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 6 about the first Italian translation of the Babylonian Talmud referred imprecisely to its number of pages. While it is 5,422 pages long if both sides of a page are counted, it contains only 2,711 individual pages, not 5,422. The imprecise reference was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.

•

An article on April 2 about the filing of a criminal complaint of culpable homicide by the police in Kolkata, India, against IVRCL, the company building an elevated highway that collapsed, killing at least 23, misspelled, at one point and in some editions, the surname of the chairman of a rail company who called IVRCL a “major defaulter.” As the article correctly noted elsewhere, he is Satish Agnihotri, not Aghnihotri.

•

A listing on March 6 of well-known alumni of Britain’s elite schools with an article about efforts by some of those schools to diversify their student bodies misidentified the alma mater of the celebrity chef Nigella Lawson. She went to Godolphin & Latymer School, not Westminster School. Although the error was corrected online shortly after publication, editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

NEW YORK

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Monday about a fire that ravaged the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Java in Manhattan just hours after parishioners had attended Easter services referred incorrectly to the Julian calendar, which Christian Orthodox churches sometimes follow. It is one of the reasons — not the only one — why Orthodox churches often celebrate Easter later than Western churches.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Monday about the annual shareholder meeting of Berkshire Hathaway in Omaha misidentified the baseball event held there annually. It is the College World Series, not the Little League World Series.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a lawsuit against the owner of Quaker Oats after testing found traces of the pesticide glyphosate in some oatmeal omitted the given name of the lead plaintiffs’ lawyer. He is Kim Richman of the Richman Law Group.

SPORTS

A picture caption on Thursday with an article about the way the coach’s challenge replay system was used in the first round of the N.H.L. playoffs misstated, in some copies, the given name of the Florida Panthers’ coach. As the article correctly noted, he is Gerard Gallant, not Gerald.

WEEKEND

Because of an editing error, a classical music entry in the Listings pages on Friday about the Metropolitan Opera referred incorrectly to the screening of “Elektra” in theaters scheduled for Wednesday evening. It will be a recording of this past Saturday’s performance, not a live broadcast.

•

A movie entry in the Listings pages on Friday about a series of Jean-Luc Godard films starring Anna Karina that will be shown at various sites in New York City referred incorrectly to an event with Ms. Karina scheduled for this coming Friday night at Film Forum in Manhattan. She will take part in a Q. and A. after the film “Band of Outsiders,” not introduce it.

OBITUARIES

Because of an editing error, an obituary on Saturday about the weight lifter Tommy Kono misstated the year he won his second Olympic gold medal, in Melbourne, Australia. It was 1956, not 1960. (As the obituary noted elsewhere, the 1960 Olympics, at which he won a silver medal, were held in Rome.) Also because of an editing error, the obituary misidentified the affiliation of Artie Drechsler, who commented on the number of medals Kono won. He is with USA Weightlifting, not USA Wrestling.

OPINION

A letter on Saturday from a Hillary Clinton supporter at Harvard misspelled the surname of the protagonist of “West Wing,” whose ideology the letter writer cited. He is Jed Bartlet, not Bartlett.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


