


Seen head-on, behind the scaffolding, Performance Space 122 looks about the same as it has for years: that red-brick facade overlooking First Avenue, those hulking metal gates guarding the door.

But stroll a few yards up the sidewalk, peek around the edge of the building, and the scruffiness gives way to a gleaming new exterior. Its sleekness betrays no hint of the gentrifying neighborhood’s tatty, crime-ridden past or the creative experiments that have gone on there since 1980, when PS122 opened at the corner of East Ninth Street.

What began as a squat in an old public school building would become a stage for people like Spalding Gray and Meredith Monk, for Eric Bogosian and the preglobal Blue Man Group.

“We had sort of a charmed life growing up there,” said Mark Russell, the organization’s artistic director from 1985 to 2005.

That past, and the larger history of performance in the East Village, will be available, beginning on Saturday and continuing for the rest of the month, through a free self-guided, smartphone-enabled mobile tour that starts at PS122 and heads east to Tompkins Square Park before wending down Avenue A to the Pyramid Club, then over to Howl! Happening: An Arturo Vega Project, on East First Street. A kickoff event on Saturday at 2 p.m. will include a semi-guided tour, with a few iPads available for those without smartphones.

A short video is paired with each location on the walk. At Howl!, it’s a homage to the performance artist Tom Murrin and his full-moon shows. At PS122, it’s about the time in November 1988 that the artist David Leslie, dressed à la Julie Andrews as Maria von Trapp, scaled the building for a piece called “Stunt” and plummeted five stories — which was part of the plan. In a clip of the performance, the crowd below reacts in horror. But Mr. Leslie survived; in the video, he’s the one telling much of the tale.

The tour, presented in conjunction with Lower East Side History Month, is a bit of a public-relations exercise for PS122, whose building has been closed for renovations since 2013. It has continued to present programming elsewhere in the meantime, but its staff members have been working out of Greenpoint, Brooklyn, since late 2011.

Vallejo Gantner, PS122’s artistic director, worries that young artists don’t know that the organization is part of the East Village, and neither will some of its neighbors when it reopens, which it expects to do next year. He doesn’t want it to seem, he said, as if “we parachuted in.”

The challenge is to talk about the artistic exploration that has happened there, but “in a way that is not just about nostalgia.” He would like to see PS122 remain the “hub of an innovative, generative culture,” even if East Village rents mean fewer of its artists live around the corner.

“That ethos doesn’t have to die just because the neighborhood’s changed,” he said. “Because that’s the thing that made it interesting, and will make it interesting in the future.”

Interesting, of course, is not always fun. Mr. Russell, now director of the Under the Radar Festival, remembers some of the downsides of making art in a neighborhood he said was “a pioneer area.”

“It was pretty beat, pretty dangerous,” he said. “We would get robbed, usually just after our benefits. That was really sad.”

For security, if not fire safety, he installed a roll-down, corrugated steel gate in the middle of a hallway.

But PS122 flourished amid the boom of the 1980s and soon developed an international reputation. It became a magnet for experimental artists including Richard Maxwell, Young Jean Lee and Karen Finley. Participants in a four-day benefit before the center closed for renovations included Philip Glass, Elevator Repair Service, the Wooster Group and some neighbors from the building, Mabou Mines.

Mr. Gantner said that he intended this month’s mobile tour to be the first part of a video project that would grow over time, celebrating the presence of boundary-pushing art in a neighborhood that, he said, does not need “another hidden cocktail bar.”

“If we wanted to live in a rich kind of financial hub, we could live in Frankfurt,” Mr. Gantner, who is Australian, said. “We could live in Singapore and be bored out of our skulls. We live in New York because it’s an exciting, dynamic, creative scene where we’re surrounded by interesting people.”

That’s been true of the East Village, Mr. Russell said, for longer than many might think. W. H. Auden lived on St. Marks Place, some of the Beat-era writers and painters migrated from the West Village, and Ellen Stewart started La MaMa in a basement on East Ninth Street, a half-block from where PS122 is now.

It’s good to know that, Mr. Russell said, when you walk down the street.


