


An emergency advisory committee to the World Health Organization called the spread of yellow fever in Africa a serious concern on Thursday and advocated drastically expanding vaccinations to combat it.

But the agency stopped short of declaring a global health emergency, because a fast-moving outbreak that began in Angola in December appears to be coming under control.

“The committee was of the opinion that we have a serious issue on our hands,” said Dr. Oyewale Tomori, a Nigerian yellow fever expert who heads the advisory panel, “but it does not constitute a public health emergency of international concern.”

The Angolan outbreak spread to three other countries, including China, and has claimed about 300 lives. In April, the W.H.O. warned that its emergency stock of yellow fever vaccine was close to exhaustion. Dr. Margaret Chan, the director general of the W.H.O., flew to Angola that month to draw attention to the crisis.

But increased manufacturing capacity by the four companies making the vaccine and diversion of doses away from routine vaccination to Africa has brought the stockpile back to its normal level of six million doses, which could triple within a few months, said Dr. Bruce Aylward, the agency’s executive director for outbreaks and health emergencies.

The vaccine costs the W.H.O. about $1 a dose, and one shot usually gives lifetime protection, Dr. Tomori said.

The outbreak began in Luanda, Angola’s capital, rose to over 2,400 suspect cases and then spread to the Democratic Republic of Congo and Kenya, and to China, where there were 11 cases among expatriate workers.

Urban outbreaks are considered the most dangerous, and a second one had appeared to be erupting in Kinshasa, Congo’s capital. But that country has a history of yellow fever vaccination and the spread was relatively slow, Dr. Aylward said. In China, there have been no more cases in a month and all workers traveling to or from Africa are now vaccinated, he said. Many Chinese workers are in Africa building roads and bridges, and employed in oil fields and other industries.

There is no treatment for yellow fever, which is related to dengue, Zika and West Nile viruses, and it is spread by the same Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.

Unlike the Zika virus, it is not known to cause microcephaly in babies, but it is often lethal in itself, killing through high fevers, liver damage and organ failure.

In April, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said it could not give Africa as much help as it normally would have because most of its mosquito-disease experts were fighting the Zika virus in Brazil, Puerto Rico and elsewhere.

In March, the disease-alert service ProMED — which warned almost a year ago that Zika might spread in Latin America — issued an unusually strong alert. John P. Woodall, a founder of the service, calculated how much yellow fever vaccine the world could make in a year, and said that if the disease spread to parts of Asia with the right climate and mosquitoes, “hundreds of thousands could die before Y.F. vaccine stocks could be boosted and delivered.”

The four manufacturers can make up to 80 million doses a year at full capacity, Dr. Aylward said. The emergency committee was convened partly to consider whether, if the threat of a global epidemic loomed, it would make medical sense to dilute doses to stretch supplies.

That idea was rejected because the outbreak appears to be coming under control. Dr. Tomori said the next step would be to build up enough capacity to routinely vaccinate children in the tropics everywhere there is risk.

Yellow fever normally circulates in monkeys, and human outbreaks are usually limited to jungle villages, logging camps and mining areas. But Luanda has more than six million people.

After more than five million Angolans were vaccinated, cases in Luanda dropped. New clusters appeared in several of the country’s provinces and spread to other countries and China, but vaccination now appears to be containing them.

Dilution would be considered again only “if we get any other outbreaks that turn explosive,” Dr. Aylward said.


