


Salt & Char After about 10 years in Hong Kong, the acclaimed former Lespinasse chef Gray Kunz is back in New York. That is, upstate New York. He has joined the Adelphi Hospitality Group, which owns the newly renovated Adelphi Hotel in Saratoga Springs and his new steakhouse next door. “I always wanted to do a steakhouse,” he said. “This is in an area where there are farms and local markets filled with meat and produce.” He knows the territory well, having had a home in the Hudson Valley for decades. He expects to serve what he calls “forgotten cuts,” the lesser-known steaks that are attracting attention in New York. His executive chef is Braden Reardon, who was at the NYY Steakhouse in Manhattan. Christophe Chatron-Michaud, who may be familiar to many New York restaurantgoers, is returning from Asia to be the general manager. Mr. Kunz will not sever his ties with Café Gray Deluxe, his restaurant in the Upper House, a boutique hotel in Hong Kong. As for a New York City encore, “there are plans to come back to Manhattan,” he said. “But not right now.” (Opens Friday): 353 Broadway, Saratoga Springs, N.Y., 518-450-7500, saltandchar.com.

Café Medi The dramatic new skylit hotel restaurant, done in bright splashes of blue, evokes the Mediterranean. The chef, Vincent Chirico, who owns Vai on the Upper West Side, offers cucumber tartare, fluke ceviche, octopus and grilled fish, with fruit- and herb-based cocktails by Allen Katz. (Wednesday): Hotel on Rivington, 107 Rivington Street (Ludlow Street), 212-796-8040, cafemedinyc.com.

Carla Hall’s Southern Kitchen A very on-again off-again soft opening, including friends and family nights, has been in progress. But now, Carla Hall’s taste of Nashville, notably the hot chicken at various notches up the Scoville scale depending on the chile treatment, is about to be fully up and running. The restaurant is a first for Ms. Hall, the chef and host of “The Chew.” With well-burnished chicken there are many sides, including potato salad, collards, coleslaw, biscuits, cornbread, a kale salad and pickles. Lemonade, iced tea, beer, wine and cocktails are on tap. The space is compact, with a diner look at the front counter where orders are placed, and communal tables beyond, with an open kitchen pass. Countrified touches include a white hutch filled with goods for sale. Ms. Hall’s business partner, Evan Darnell, said he was surprised at the demand for takeout, which is more than half the orders. (Friday): 115 Columbia Street (Kane Street), Columbia Street Waterfront District, Brooklyn, 718-855-4668, carlahallsouthernkitchen.com.

Chuck & Blade, Buns Bar As its name suggests, this steakhouse highlights some less common cuts. And a sandwich shop sibling around the corner specializes in unusual sliders like shrimp tempura. Both are the work of Sam Weinstein, a son of the Ark Restaurant founder and principal Michael Weinstein, and several partners: 184 Eighth Avenue (19th Street), 646-370-3494, chuckandbladenyc.com; 263 West 19th Street, 646-370-4321.

Market Ipanema This compact Brazilian cafe is an outpost of a pair of spots in Rio de Janeiro, all owned by Beatriz Lobato Grabowsky. Salads, bowls, tartines and tapioca crepes are the specialties: 66 Kenmare Street (Mott Street), 646-329-6144, marketipanema.com.

1633 A playful take on Greek food, this restaurant, from James Paloumbis and the chef Dionisis Liakopoulos, also conveys an air of mystery. The windows are blacked out and you enter through the kitchen, which is actually a traditional Greek way of doing things, and you might even be treated to a taste of the food. Look for dishes with names like mousse-AKA, and wildly eclectic décor. (Thursday): 1633 Second Avenue (85th Street), 212-837-8285, 1633nyc.com.

Vin Sur Vingt A group of Gallic wine bars with casual sandwiches, salads and the like has opened its fourth location: 66 West 84th Street, 646-895-9944, vsvwinebars.com.

Jackson Hole After 42 years as an Upper West Side fixture, this outpost of the burger chain has shuttered.

Chuko Ramen In late July, Jamison Blankenship is moving this restaurant across the street to the space occupied by Bar Chuko, which he will close. The new Chuko Ramen will open in August: 565 Vanderbilt Avenue (Dean Street), Prospect Heights, Brooklyn.

Fish Cheeks High-end Thai seafood by the owners of the Obao restaurants will move into the former Le Philosophe space in a few months: 55 Bond Street (Bowery).

White Gold A butcher shop and restaurant by April Bloomfield and Ken Friedman is coming to the Upper West Side in the space that was Risotteria. Details are scant: In an email, Mr. Friedman wrote, “We aren’t ready to say anything till we are much closer to opening”: 375 Amsterdam Avenue (78th Street).


