


Once upon a time, when a city transit project had dragged on across four decades and people were starting to notice that it wasn’t actually there, the mayor and the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority demanded an investigation into what the heck was taking so long.

That meant some of the very people who had been working on it for all those years, and whose efforts had been frustrated by forces they had no control over, now had to rehash the whole wretchedly dull history of something that didn’t get done.

This assignment did not make anyone involved happy, as Robert Olmsted, the director of planning for the authority, recalled in a chronicle of the events.

“In the words of one of the participants, ‘The time for action has passed. Let’s have another study!’” Mr. Olmsted wrote.

At least 45 years ago, officials began making plans to add new tunnels to the two that carry trains across the Hudson River. The existing ones were built more than a century ago.

On Tuesday, the first public hearing was held on the environmental impacts of replacing them, or not. If the time for action has passed, no one can seriously be calling for another study. The decay of those two tunnels has brought the region to the lip of a volcano.

All Amtrak trains going up the Northeast must cross the Hudson through them. New Jersey Transit carries its customers to Pennsylvania Station through them. Trouble has been metastasizing for years.

One workweek last summer, on four days out of five, the tunnels had to be virtually shut down because of one problem or another.

Hammered by time, the tunnels have long needed to be overhauled — cables, signals, track bed, the structure, the works. And that was before Hurricane Sandy came along in October 2012 and soaked everything in briny water at ruinous length.

At issue now is not building replacements, but how fast it can be done. The customary pace of public works projects puts the entire region in peril.

If just one of the two tunnels has to be shut down, which could happen at any time, it means train traffic will have to be reduced not by half, but by 75 percent, from 24 trains per hour to six. That’s because the sole remaining tunnel will have to be used for two-way traffic, and time will be lost in reversing signals, according to “Billions for Red Tape: Focusing on the Approval Process for the Gateway Tunnel Project,” a report from the Common Good, a group that advocates the reform of government processes.

The group is calling for President Obama to issue an executive order that would turn over authority for environmental review on the project to the chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, and for other permitting issues to the federal Office of Management and Budget.

The point is to limit years of meetings with 20 agencies sitting around and planning yet more meetings, said Philip K. Howard, the president of Common Good.

“Inaction is the worst result of all,” Mr. Howard said.

The very words “environmental review” cloak a process in virtue and goodness, but if prolonging it means that the region loses one of those rail tunnels, it would be more destructive than many environmental calamities. The loss of even one tunnel would force more people into cars and lead to hundreds of thousands of tons of emissions.

An earlier plan for new rail tunnels underwent about six years of environmental review. The tunnels were canceled by Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey in 2010, who said the costs had swollen. (Mr. Christie, a Republican, redirected funds to keep gas taxes low and to prop up the state budget.) Some of the earlier studies can be used to advance the current project, officials say.

Federal officials have now promised to finish their review in two years. Mr. Howard’s report estimates that permits will take an additional year after that. If those three years could be cut in half, he said, the project would save $3 billion. Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, estimates that every month of delay adds $80 million in costs. For that reason, he said, it is important that officials at the Port Authority — and other agencies — not become prisoners of process.

Environmental review is an essential, if wonky, maze that cannot compete with the smoking-gun clarity, and villainy, of the “Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee” note that announced the scheme to tie up traffic at the George Washington Bridge. But it will be far more destructive if it means we have one fewer tunnel — or two — under the Hudson.


