


Max Jury hadn’t planned it this way. The 24-year-old singer-songwriter and Iowa native figured he’d attend the prestigious Berklee College of Music, cobble together enough songs for an album and be on his way to music stardom. “I was a bit naïve,” admits Jury, whose self-titled debut album is out June 3. He did attend Berklee, but after feeling stifled by the clinical nature of his classes, dropped out after just a year, returning instead to his hometown, Des Moines, and taking a job as a maintenance worker for the local parks department — an experience that left him dispirited. “Me and manual labor don’t really mix,” Jury says, adding that his co-workers — mostly truck drivers picking up work in their off-season — “didn’t treat me very nice.” This newfound sense of dislocation, coupled with his then-girlfriend’s moving to New York, inspired Jury to write the album track “Numb,” a video for which premieres here. “I was just kind of directionless and thinking, ‘Well, shoot, what am I doing?’”

Jury eventually emerged from his funk through songwriting, though his initial attempts at recording an album almost ended in catastrophe. Setting up at Jimi Hendrix’s legendary Electric Lady Studios in New York City’s Greenwich Village, Jury placed candles around the studio “to summon the spirits” and lend some ambience to the session. But when the vibrations from a particularly loud playback knocked one of the candles over, spilling its wax across the mixing board, the singer panicked. “I started to pack my bags and told my producer, ‘It’s all over, man. We’re done.’” After a few hours of confusion, however, the equipment was restored, and disaster averted. Despite rumors that he was kicked out of the studio, Jury cites a much more practical reason for finishing the album elsewhere: He was running out of money. “It’s kind of an expensive place,” he says.

Taking up an offer from a friend he made at Berklee, Jury relocated to a cabinlike studio in the woods just outside Chapel Hill, N.C. There, he discovered the director of music at a local church on YouTube and invited him to play on the rest of the album. That musician, Jackson Russell, brought along his cousins, who in turn brought an extra layer of gospel to Jury’s sparse, Laurel Canyon-influenced tunes. (Their influence can be heard in the opening strains of “Numb,” on which background singers elevate the once-acoustic song to new heights.) For Jury, the resulting sound — a mix of 1960s soul with the piano-led storytelling of Tom Waits and Rufus Wainwright — was as unexpected as the process itself. “I’ve spent the past two years getting to do what I’ve always wanted to do, so in a sense I feel I’m a different place from when I wrote these songs,” says Jury, who until recently was splitting time between Des Moines and London. “But I hope people can listen to them and be comforted that someone else is going through similar things.”


