


This article was updated on May 23, 2016, to reflect developments in the Kesha and Dr. Luke dispute.

For more than 18 months, a contract disagreement between the pop singer Kesha and her longtime producer Dr. Luke has been churning through courts in three states, raising complex questions for the music industry about gender, the control of an artist’s career, and the power of social media.

Since 2014, Kesha has been fighting to be released from her contracts with the megaproducer (known for his work with Katy Perry, Kelly Clarkson and many more) and his label’s parent company, Sony Music Entertainment, asserting that Dr. Luke had subjected her to years of abuse, including rape, and unfair business arrangements. He has denied all the accusations.

While the various legal turns have prompted major pop artists, including Taylor Swift and Adele, to voice support for the #FreeKesha campaign on Twitter and Instagram, each shift in the narrative — including Kesha’s off-and-on-again performance at the Billboard Music Awards and the recent release of her first song since 2013 — adds another layer to the complicated, continuing civil case. (No criminal charges have been filed.)

Below is a close look at the dueling lawsuits and additional documents filed by both sides thus far, as well as a preview of what is still to come.

In 2005, Kesha, whose full name is Kesha Rose Sebert, was a teenager and high school student living in Nashville, when Lukasz Sebastian Gottwald, better known as Dr. Luke, reached out after listening to her demo recordings. In September of that year, shortly after she turned 18, Kesha entered into a recording agreement with Dr. Luke’s production company, Kasz Money Inc. (KMI), according to court documents.

Under the terms of that deal, Kesha’s contract could be extended by KMI through her sixth album, with at least six songs on each album required to be produced by Dr. Luke. (The contract was amended in 2008 and 2009, when KMI negotiated a deal for Kesha with RCA Records, a division of Sony; Dr. Luke’s label, Kemosabe, formed in 2011, is also housed under Sony.)

According to her lawsuit, Kesha’s recording career stalled as the producer focused on “more high profile and lucrative” artists until 2008, when she contributed uncredited vocals to the rapper Flo Rida’s song “Right Round,” which became a No. 1 hit. Dr. Luke went on produce and write songs for Kesha’s 2010 debut album, “Animal,” as well as an EP from the same year, “Cannibal,” and her 2012 follow-up album, “Warrior.” Kesha, 29, also appeared on the Pitbull single “Timber” in 2013, which was produced in part by Dr. Luke.

Kesha’s career has been relatively quiet since — Dr. Luke cited creative differences between the two in a 2013 profile in The New Yorker — as she remains under contract with the producer’s companies. (She has recently performed live with a Nashville band called Yeast Infection, in addition to high-profile appearances at Coachella in April and at the Billboard Awards on Sunday, where she performed a cover of Bob Dylan’s “It Ain’t Me, Babe.”)

Dr. Luke continues to produce and co-write songs for Flo Rida, R. Kelly, Becky G and other artists.

According to a civil suit filed in Los Angeles in October 2014, Kesha says that her entire experience working with Dr. Luke was fraught with instances of sexual, physical, verbal and emotional abuse. The suit asserts that the abuse, which included constant insults about her appearance and weight, continued to the point that Kesha “nearly lost her life.” (After developing bulimia, she entered rehab in January 2014 and stayed for two months.)

Although Dr. Luke has never faced a criminal complaint from Kesha, much of the interest surrounding her case focuses on her allegations of sexual assault. She has cited Dr. Luke’s years of intimidation and his control over her career as the reasons she “never dared talk about, let alone report, what Dr. Luke had done to her.”

In one instance, Kesha says Dr. Luke forced her to drink with him, and then gave her “sober pills” to recover. (No exact dates are included with respect to the assault claims.) “Ms. Sebert took the pills and woke up the following afternoon, naked in Dr. Luke’s bed, sore and sick, with no memory of how she got there,” the filing reads, after which she “immediately called her mother” and said Dr. Luke had raped her. The suit says that Kesha later learned the “sober pills” were gamma-hydroxybutyrate, or GHB, a so-called date rape drug.

On another occasion cited in the lawsuit, Kesha says she was forced to snort an illicit drug before a flight with Dr. Luke, who then made sexual advances while she was intoxicated.

Kesha also accused Dr. Luke of professional misconduct and intimidation, and said he prevented her from having any real control over her music, while threatening her career and her family if she spoke out against him. And she accused Dr. Luke of refusing to negotiate fair terms for the contract for her second album after her first album became a platinum hit, trapping her in “long-term contracts which were one-sided, extortive, and devastating to her health, sanity and career.”

In a sworn affidavit from August 2015, Kesha recalled one instance in the studio when Dr. Luke demanded she record lyrics written by Will.i.am. of the Black Eyed Peas. “He told me to sing a verse where I was calling another girl a ‘heffer’ knowing how much pain that had caused me from his insults about my body,” she wrote. According to the statement, Kesha refused, sending Dr. Luke “into a rage,” during which he told the singer “that he could manipulate my voice to say whatever he wanted in his computer.”

“I cannot say words I don’t mean,” Kesha concluded. “I cannot work with this monster.”

Unable to point to another case where physical abuse resulted in the termination of a record contract, Mark Geragos, Kesha’s lawyer at the start of the case, told Billboard at the outset that Kesha’s lawsuit may be a “first-of-its-kind case.”

The same day Kesha filed her initial suit in Los Angeles, Dr. Luke filed a lawsuit in New York that accused Kesha and her mother, Pebe Sebert, of defamation and breach of contract, claiming they were using “false and shocking accusations” in an attempt to get the singer out of her contract. He also accused Kesha, her mother and her new management company of trying to interfere with fulfilling her contractual obligations. (In addition, Dr. Luke filed a suit against Kesha’s mother in Nashville alleging defamation and tortious interference; in April, Ms. Sebert dropped her counterclaims in that case. A lawyer for Kesha’s mother said, “She has decided to move on and find peace and forgiveness in her heart rather than dwelling in the cancerous past of an ongoing lawsuit with no end in sight.”)

In his New York suit, Dr. Luke said that the accusations of physical and mental abuse were untrue and defamatory, and that, professionally, he had upheld his end of the relationship by turning Kesha into a platinum-selling star. Her first single, “Tik Tok,” hit No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, and has sold some 15 million downloads worldwide.

According to the suit, “Kesha’s repudiation of this contractual relationship, and her and her mother’s ongoing campaign to extort a release by tarnishing Gottwald’s reputation, has caused damage” to his career.

(In June, Judge Barbara M. Scheper of Los Angeles Superior Court ruled to set aside Kesha’s lawsuit there for now, citing the singer’s deals with KMI and RCA, which stipulated that contract disputes would be handled in New York. Lawyers for Kesha said in May that they would attempt to revive the singer’s suit there.)

In addition to her suit in Los Angeles, Kesha filed counterclaims to Dr. Luke’s lawsuit in New York. In April, the singer was dealt a major legal setback when her claims of infliction of emotional distress, gender-based hate crimes and employment discrimination were dismissed, with a judge citing a lack of evidence and jurisdiction. The statute of limitations had also passed on some of Kesha’s accusations, the judge said.

Throughout the case, Dr. Luke and his lawyers have also pointed to a 2011 deposition from a separate lawsuit brought by Kesha’s former management company, arguing that sworn answers from Kesha and her mother show their subsequent allegations against Dr. Luke to be false.

In that 2011 deposition, which has been only partly unsealed, Kesha denied having an intimate relationship with Dr. Luke and said he had never given her a “roofie.” Kesha was then asked, “Did you ever tell your mother that you woke up in a hotel room in Gottwald’s bed and you don’t recall what happened that night?” She replied that she did not remember.

Kesha also said, “Dr. Luke never made sexual advances at me,” although she did not deny that the pair were seen “making out” on a plane. (Lawyers for Kesha have pointed to “post-traumatic stress disorder and rape trauma syndrome” to explain her reticence to report the abuse.)

In a separate deposition from the same case, Ms. Sebert denied that she had been made aware years earlier of any sexual relationship between Dr. Luke and Kesha, and said that she had not been made aware that the producer had given her daughter a date-rape drug.

Additional filings in the case include enthusiastic correspondence between Kesha, her mother and Dr. Luke in the form of emails and a birthday card addressed “to the foxxy-est producer ever!”

On Feb. 22, Dr. Luke wrote on Twitter about the case, once again denying all of the accusations. “Lives can get ruined when there’s a rush to judgment before all the facts come out,” he wrote. “Look what happened at UVA, Duke etc.”

In an amended filing last year, Kesha’s suit asserted that Sony “knew, or using reasonable diligence would have discovered, Dr. Luke’s prior conduct” toward not just Kesha, but additional female artists, referred to in court papers as Jane Does, “whose careers he controlled.”

According to the suit, Sony “provided Dr. Luke with unfettered and unsupervised access to vulnerable female artists beginning their careers, and who would be totally dependent upon Dr. Luke for success.”

In October 2015, a year after filing her initial lawsuit, Kesha proposed through her lawyers that she would be willing to record an album for RCA under Sony during the pending litigation “without any involvement or interference from Dr. Luke or his related entities.”

When that request was denied by lawyers for Sony, Dr. Luke and Kemosabe, Kesha filed a motion arguing that if her music career was delayed any further, she would suffer irreparable harm to her commercial potential. Without the court’s emergency help, “there will soon be no career left to pursue,” the motion said.

“Kesha Rose Sebert wants nothing more than to be able to record an album,” read the filing, which tried to block Sony and Dr. Luke from pursuing damages if Kesha recorded outside of her contract. “Her only condition is that she be allowed to record with a record label that is not affiliated with someone who has emotionally and sexually abused her.”

Justice Shirley W. Kornreich denied the motion, calling Kesha’s contract “heavily negotiated and typical for the industry,” while citing a lack of evidence for the abuse allegations. (Kesha’s legal team said in its filing that “the truth or falsity of the allegations of abuse are not at issue in this Motion.”) The judge also declined to rule for now on a motion by Dr. Luke to dismiss the case outright.

However, in contrast to the attempted negotiations in October, lawyers for Sony did indicate at the hearing that the company would be open to a recording arrangement for Kesha that did not include Dr. Luke.

Mr. Geragos called that an “illusory promise,” arguing that Sony would be inclined not to promote Kesha’s music properly because of its relationship with Dr. Luke. But after the hearing, Mr. Geragos told The New York Times that the offer was “a positive first step to get her back in the studio.”

In late April, with the approval of Dr. Luke and Kemosabe Records, Kesha released “True Colors,” a collaboration with the electronic producer Zedd.

Barring a settlement, it may be a long legal road for Kesha. In the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, where Kesha filed her initial lawsuit, a status hearing is scheduled for July 15 as Dr. Luke’s lawsuit continues in New York. A trial date is unlikely before 2017.

Outside of the courtroom, the two sides remain locked in a struggle for control over public perception in the case. Ahead of the Billboard Awards, Kesha said she had been barred from performing by Dr. Luke and Kemosabe, a decision that was quickly reversed after the label “obtained assurances” that Kesha would not use the appearance as a platform to address the litigation.

Following a performance that made no mention of Dr. Luke, Kesha wrote online that singing is her “therapy.”


