


As part of a legal settlement, the state has agreed to correct widespread faults in its foster care system, promising to improve health care for children, set workload limits for overtaxed foster care workers and ensure more timely investigations of alleged abuse and neglect. Gov. Nikki R. Haley, a Republican, and Susan Alford, the acting director of the State Department of Social Services, are named in the federal lawsuit, which was filed Jan. 15 by child-welfare advocates, including Children’s Rights, a New York-based nonprofit. Listed as plaintiffs were 11 children in the foster care system, which has been criticized for many years as dangerously troubled, with overwhelming worker caseloads, lapses in oversight and a number of child deaths. The settlement was filed Friday in United States District Court in Charleston and requires a judge’s approval to be finalized. RICHARD FAUSSET

A Norfolk City Council member is calling for a federal investigation and Norfolk’s police chief is defending his officers after this year’s fifth fatal shooting by the police in this city of about a quarter-million people. Two officers responding to a disturbance at a home opened fire when Willie D. James, 43, lunged at them with a knife on Thursday, Police Chief Michael Goldsmith said on Friday at a news conference. The Police Department is conducting an internal investigation, but Chief Goldsmith said, “I’m going to stand behind my officers on this.” Councilman Paul Riddick said that police shootings “have reached an epidemic proportion” in Norfolk, and he will ask the F.B.I. to investigate. Mr. Riddick said that among the issues he wants federal authorities to examine are the level of experience within the Police Department and whether any of its officers resigned from other law enforcement jobs after being involved in shootings. Chief Goldsmith said his department is among the best in Virginia at “crisis intervention” and that all of his officers involved in fatal shootings were in peril when they fired. (AP)


