


Tapestry After the Indian chef Suvir Saran left the elegant Union Square restaurant Devi in 2012, he moved to San Francisco to open American Masala, inspired by the cross-cultural recipes in his book of the same name. But the sprawling 400-seat restaurant never opened. “It was a lucky thing,” Mr. Saran said. “It was difficult to fill all those seats. San Francisco is dead after 9 p.m.” So he is back in New York, in partnership with Roni Mazumdar, an entrepreneur in art and entertainment who owns MasalaWala restaurants with his father. Joel Corona, a former private chef in California, and Aarti Mehta are chefs de cuisine. The white brick restaurant, with a swath of white quartz bar and polished woodwork, is hung with pieces by Indian artists. Mr. Saran’s food is a mix of Mexican, North African, French and Italian, all liberally exploiting the Indian spice cabinet. “When you think about it, Mexico and India both have a lot of cumin in common,” Mr. Saran said. Some ingredients, including pork and eggs, come from his upstate farm. (Opens Friday): 60 Greenwich Avenue (Perry Street), 212-373-8900, tapestryrestaurant.com.

Cherry Point Julian Calcott, formerly the executive sous-chef at the Spotted Pig, and his partners have chosen the name that Greenpoint once had, thanks to the profusion of cherry trees that grew in the area. Dishes like steak tartare, koji-rubbed steak au poivre and melted leeks are served in a vintage dining room, formerly a Polish butcher shop. (Wednesday): 664 Manhattan Avenue (Norman Avenue), Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 718-389-3828, cherrypointnyc.com.

Passage Irish Bar and Kitchen Elevated Irish pub fare, with 27 beers and 74 whiskeys, sets this tavern apart. There are apple and black pudding fritters, Jameson spring rolls, Irish breakfast flatbread, curried shepherd’s pie and several burgers, including one made with black pudding: 40-11 30th Avenue (Steinway Street), Astoria, Queens, 917-832-6680, passageastoria.com.

PN Wood Fired Pizza It’s a different kind of choice: The toppings are all set combinations, but you can specify the flour you want in the dough, including einkorn (heritage spelt), organic whole wheat and a multigrain blend that includes rye and barley. Giacomo Baldi, the managing partner, is also the head of Molino Grassi USA, which specializes in organic and unusual flours. The flours are also sold in a small retail area near the entrance. The dough is matured for at least 96 hours to develop flavor. The restaurant also serves an Italian menu of crostini, gnocchi, salads and lamb chops: 2 West 28th Street, 646-964-4834, pnpizzanyc.com.

2nd City The chef Jordan Andino’s heritage is Filipino, and he has interpreted his grandmother’s recipes for the eat-in or takeout menu of what he calls Filipino taqueria fare. Options include butter-poached barracuda tacos, soy-braised chicken burritos with kimchi fried rice, and pork belly bao buns. (Wednesday): 525 Hudson Street (Charles Street), 917-639-3262, 2ndcityusa.com.

Springbone Many trendy buttons — broth, paleo and fast-casual — have been pushed at this new Greenwich Village spot. Jordan Feldman, a founder, discovered that bone-rich broths alleviated his sports injuries, so he opened the restaurant. There are 10 broths that go into various bowls with meat and vegetable add-ins. Sandwiches are also served. (Wednesday): 90 West Third Street (Sullivan Street), 646-368-9192, springbone.com.

Union Fare A spacious food hall and restaurant complex is opening in stages in the building that housed the original Barnes & Noble, from the days when there was only one. A cafe that serves coffee on tap and pastries made in-house, and that morphs into a wine bar in the evening, will open Friday. Next week, a full-service bakery will be added. By June 1, the 185-seat Union Fare restaurant will open, serving contemporary American fare, with a raw bar and a charcuterie bar. It is run by the chef Yvan Lemoine, who was at Dream Hotels, with the pastry chef Thiago Silva from Catch. Later in June, a market will follow, with an array of prepared foods, including some international street fare, to eat in or take out. William Kim, the developer and owner, has hired an experienced team to run the project: 7 East 17th Street and 6 East 18th Street, 212-633-6003, unionfare.com.

Isa Taavo Somer’s quirky “cabin in the woods” in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where Ignacio Mattos was once the chef, has closed after five years.

Avra Estiatorio The Greek seafood specialist, established for many years on East 48th Street, will open a spacious branch this summer, designed by the Rockwell Group in the former home of Rouge Tomate: 10 East 60th Street.

Chimichurri Grill The Argentine steakhouse on Ninth Avenue will open a larger branch this summer in what was the David Burke Townhouse: 133 East 61st Street.

City Vineyard Early this summer, City Winery in SoHo plans to open this restaurant, with a glass-enclosed dining room, another 3,200 square feet of outdoor seating and a 4,400-square-foot rooftop terrace: Pier 26 (North Moore Street), Hudson River Park.

Le Dock Jean-Georges Vongerichten will take over the kitchen in this venerable restaurant in the Fire Island community where his partner, Phil Suarez, has a house. Mr. Suarez owns the restaurant: Fair Harbor, Fire Island, N.Y.

Harvey At this restaurant, to open this summer in the Williamsburg Hotel, the chef Adam Leonti will specialize in vegetables and in the grain dishes he has been developing at Brooklyn Bread Lab in Bushwick: 96 Wythe Avenue (North 10th Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, thewilliamsburghotel.com.

Shuna Lydon, who was the pastry chef at Calliope and Peels in Manhattan, has become the first chef in residence for the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation in Captiva, Fla. Through the end of the year, she will cook for the artists in residence at the foundation and work to develop a greener kitchen.

Marco Moreira and Jo-Ann Makovitzky will no longer be involved with the Fourth restaurant and Singl bar in the Hyatt Union Square as of June 1. New operators will take over these places. The couple has closed the Botequim Brazilian restaurant on the lower level, which was awarded two stars by The New York Times, and they plan to relocate it.

Juliette Pope, the beverage director at Gramercy Tavern, is leaving in late June. She said she had no plans but realized that she needed a break. She started as a cook at Union Square Cafe in 1996, then moved on to Gramercy Tavern, where Paul Grieco lured her into wine service.

Christian Ramos, a Per Se alumnus who has been the chef at Virginia’s in the East Village, has left that post.

Sandro Romano, who worked in high-end restaurants like Union Square Cafe and the Modern, has become the culinary director of the Union Market chain in Brooklyn and Manhattan.


