


Eva Helene d'Ambrosio, a daughter of Carol Bott d’Ambrosio and Dr. Leo T. d’Ambrosio of Indianapolis, was married at her parents’ house May 21 to Matthew Alexander Herman, the son of Kimberly D. Herman and Steven R. Herman of Rockville Centre, N.Y. Lawrence C. Mandel, a minister affiliated with American Marriage Ministries, officiated.

Ms. d’Ambrosio, who is 28, is keeping her name. She is a foreign service officer working in Washington as a trade negotiator in the Office of South and Central Asian Affairs at the United States Trade Representative’s office. In August, she is to be posted in Abu Dhabi as an economic officer. She graduated with distinction from Indiana University.

Mr. Herman, 31, is a founder and the chief technology officer working remotely from Washington for Trace VFX, a visual effects company with offices in New York and Mumbai, India.

Both were living in Mumbai in 2013 when Ms. d’Ambrosio and Mr. Herman were introduced through OkCupid. She was then an economic reporting officer at the United States Consulate, and he was setting up a new office for his company.

Ms. d’Ambrosio said she went on a couple of dates with local men, and the first guy turned out to be “around 16,” and the next one told her matter-of-factly that he had a wife.

She decided to search more familiar turf, limiting herself to Americans living in Mumbai. She came across Mr. Herman’s profile, whose funny photos, including one of him with a giant wooden bear in Maine, inspired her to send him a message.

After chatting online for a couple of days, they met at Sancho’s, a Mexican restaurant in Mumbai, where Mr. Herman riddled her with questions about a Mumbai politician, the late Bal Thackeray, all the while continually taking calls and text messages from contractors setting up his new office.

“It was a bad first date,” said Ms. d’Ambrosio, who at first suspected he was secretly a journalist trying to get a juicy quotation out of a United States government official. She began giving him bland responses, talking in diplospeak and giving him one-word answers.

“I thought that was it,” he said, recalling that she seemed cagey. “But two weeks later, she did text me and asked if I wanted to go to an art fair in Belapur.”

At the fair, neither had much in the way of expectations, and as a result, they were a lot more relaxed.

“The second date was awesome,” she said. “We took a rickshaw and got totally lost in a random part of India. We were laughing and joking. Technically, everything went wrong, but we still had fun.”

When he told her he had a motorcycle, she knew he was the right person to help her start up a beat-up light-blue Vespa with a sidecar that she had recently bought through an Indian equivalent of Craigslist.

He stopped by to help her the next day.

“He looked the part of a tech start-up employee, so I was surprised when he was handy and mechanical,” she said. Of the Vespa, she said, “It was completely falling apart and had the engine of a lawn mower belching black smoke.”

He kissed her that evening on her rooftop, and after finally repairing the Vespa, Mr. Herman began driving (with Ms. d’Ambrosia in the sidecar) all around Mumbai on weekends. As unmistakable foreigners, they became quite the sight, daring to ride such a sorry-looking vehicle in the constant sea of Indian traffic.

“All the Mumbaikars were laughing, honking and waving when they would see us go by,” she said.


