


Detailed accusations of state-sponsored doping among Russian athletes have spurred serious debate about whether the country should be allowed to compete in the coming Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.

“We have never claimed that we do not have doping problems,” the Russian Ministry of Sport said last week after the former director of the country’s antidoping laboratory described widespread use of performance-enhancing drugs by Russia’s Olympians.

But what, exactly, are those doping problems? And how will they affect Russia’s eligibility for the Rio Games?

Do Russian athletes dope more than other athletes?

That’s impossible to know. But we do know that they get caught more. Russian athletes had more positive doping tests than athletes from any other country in 2014, the most recent year for which data is available from the World Anti-Doping Agency.

Why is there suddenly so much scrutiny on Russia?

In December 2014, the German public broadcaster ARD released a documentary that drew on accounts from Russian athletes, coaches and antidoping officials who said the Russian government had helped procure drugs for athletes and cover up positive test results.

The ARD documentary prompted the World Anti-Doping Agency to form an independent commission to investigate. That group ultimately released two reports that described systematic, state-sponsored doping in Russia. The findings were largely focused on track and field athletes.

The group also proposed that Russia be suspended from competition by track and field’s governing body and barred from track and field events at this year’s Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. The track and field federation, known as the IAAF, barred Russia from international competition until it proves that it has fixed its doping problems.

What happened last week?

Grigory Rodchenkov, a former director of Russia’s antidoping laboratory, detailed in interviews with The New York Times how a doping program that involved dozens of athletes unfolded at the Sochi Games in 2014. Dr. Rodchenkov said state antidoping experts and members of the intelligence service covertly replaced tainted urine samples with clean ones collected from the athletes months earlier.

He said doping among Russian athletes went far beyond what WADA had found.

What sports are involved?

Although the track and field team is the only one currently under sanctions, the various reports have connected athletes in many sports to doping. Dr. Rodchenkov said biathletes, bobsledders, the entire women’s hockey team and more than a dozen cross-country skiers were part of Russia’s state-run doping program at the Sochi Games. WADA’s independent commission also found suggestive evidence across sports.

The track and field federation, however, is the only governing body that has responded with sanctions. Federations for some other sports have said they are looking into the matter.

How have Russian officials responded?

Alternately with defiance and contrition. While often emphatically dismissing all allegations as a Western conspiracy intended to smear Russia, officials have sometimes struck a more conciliatory tone, hoping to win the favor of track and field officials who might control their ability to compete in the Rio Games.

The Russian Sports Ministry acknowledged doping problems in a statement last week after Dr. Rodchenkov’s claims were published in The Times. But it did not say specifically what those problems were. Then, writing in The Sunday Times, a British newspaper, the Russian sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, said Russian officials, coaches and athletes made “serious mistakes,” but he stopped short of specifying them or admitting to any state role.

What’s next?

The IAAF is expected to rule on the status of Russia’s track and field program at its next meeting, June 17, in Vienna, Austria, after a task force charged with monitoring Russia’s progress on antidoping reforms presents its findings.

Other sports federations might also conduct investigations, but it seems unlikely that any of them will move swiftly enough to affect the Rio Games, which begin Aug. 5.

What is the International Olympic Committee’s response?

Olympic officials have publicly said little about holding Russia accountable, deferring to WADA and the individual sport federations to address any problems.


