


LONDON — With half the games already played at this long and at times ugly European Championships, one man has stood out like no other.

Spain has given joy to a dried-up event, just as it has in other tournaments over the past decade. And the man at the heart of it all is Andrés Iniesta, known back home as Saint Andrés.

Shortly after halftime on Friday, Iniesta orchestrated a wave of beauty that washed over Turkey in Spain’s 3-0 victory in Nice, France. Iniesta was the conductor of a collective display that involved 21 passes, with six going through him. The Turks could not track Iniesta’s movement, let alone intercept him.

Iniesta’s coup de grâce was to thread the ball between the remnants of Turkey’s back line. His teammate with F.C. Barcelona, Jordi Alba, anticipated the pass and set up Álvaro Morata to strike the third goal and finish off Turkey.

Turkey’s manager, Fatih Terim, raged about his players’ “throwing in the towel.” Turks in the crowd jeered their own players, but those fans at least had enough energy to join in a rippling wave that was started by Spanish fans in another part of the stadium.

The Spanish fans applauded their counterparts for having the sportsmanship to share in the fun while their team was outclassed on the field. Given all that has soured this tournament, it was as refreshing as water on a parched tongue.

Spain’s overall superiority was teamwork of the highest order, and it was Iniesta who inspired it. The Turks could kick him when they could catch him, but they couldn’t deter him on Friday night.

In a championship where the big names — Cristiano Ronaldo, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Eden Hazard — have not been able to find their rhythm so far, Iniesta, 32, is back to being his greedy best.

Greed? Oh yes. This is a player who, in his 12 years as a pro, has won eight La Liga titles, four Champions League crowns, two Euros and a World Cup.

He wants more. And after its total flop at the 2014 World Cup, Spain did something that few other nations do today. It persuaded the coach, Vicente del Bosque to remain and to rebuild.

“From 2008 to now, we have lost some of the most important players in the history of Spanish football,” del Bosque said Friday. “We are on the right path, but we haven’t won anything yet.”

Those important players include Iker Casillas, who has been replaced in goal by David de Gea. They include the he-man central defender Carles Puyol, the midfield duo of Xabi Alonso and Xavi Hernández and the strike force David Villa and Fernando Torres.

Replacing that core might finish most other countries. More than any other player, Xavi was the key for Spain, the passing master in midfield who was a metronome of passing consistency for a decade.

Iniesta was at his side, but Iniesta, all 5-foot-7 of him, was free to bewitch opponents with his footwork, quickness, subtlety and freedom to play a more advanced role than Xavi.

With Xavi gone and playing at a lower level in Qatar, Iniesta now is the orchestrator for Spain. But Iniesta is Iniesta; he can’t entirely erase from his personality the impulse to go off on spectacular dribbles, or to split a defense with precision.

Del Bosque says his team has won nothing yet. Indeed, if winning is all that counts, Italy is the equal of Spain at this Euros. Italy also has two wins after two games, showing an ability to absorb everything an opponent can throw at it and then strike when the other team is weary.

It is legitimate tournament play by Italy. Its stalemate-busting goals in its two games so far — by Emanuele Giaccherini against Belgium and Éder against Sweden — were movements of beauty for a team that pragmatically knows how to win and how to pace itself in a major tournament.

Spain gives so much more, though, because beauty is intrinsic to its play.

Del Bosque, 65, was talked into giving it one last shot with Spain to restore what was broken in 2014, and the team is making strides in changing its play, which Germany, the world champion, has not been able to do so far.

Both national teams play, or have played, the “False No.9” tactic of having no real center forward, choosing instead to hit opponents via stealth from its midfield runners.

Germany and Spain both brought more orthodox strikers to the Euros. Germany has largely kept big Mario Gómez seated on the bench while persisting in playing with the smaller, and thus far not very successful, Mario Götze.

Spain, by contrast, has put two new attackers into its lineup. Nolito plays on the left, a bustling, relentless forager as David Villa once was.

Álvaro Morata, just over 6-foot-2, is more of a throwback to the old-fashioned target-man striker. Both scored against Turkey, after which Nolito told reporters, “Thirty years from now, I’ll be able to say I played with Iniesta, the best player in his position in the world.”

Spain has moved on without sacrificing its mesmerizing strength, possession. It is stoked by the excellence of Iniesta, who succeeded in finding his target with 85 of the 93 passes he attempted against Turkey.

Analysts at the stadium gave Iniesta a 9 out of 10 for performance. Why? What must a man do in a team game to score the perfect 10?

Villa who is finishing out his career with New York City F.C., had his say on Twitter. “Spain has a lot of football and a lot of goals. They also have the best player in Euro2016 by a long way Andres Iniesta.”


