


SPRECKELS, Calif. — Bernie Sanders signaled Wednesday that he would continue his presidential campaign beyond the California primary next week, saying he had the money to keep running until the Democratic National Convention next month.

During a news conference while campaigning in California, the Vermont senator said he already had plans to host events in Washington next week and to lobby superdelegates to withdraw their support from Hillary Clinton and back him instead. He added that he felt confident he can win California’s primary on Tuesday and that Mrs. Clinton was campaigning in the state because of polls showing the two locked in a tight race there. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist poll released on Wednesday shows the race in a statistical tie.

“We have absolutely the financial resources that we need to run a very, very strong campaign here in California and in the other states and in D.C. and Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands and throughout the rest of the campaign,” Mr. Sanders said.

He chided Mrs. Clinton for deciding to campaign in California, where she is counting on minority voters to propel her to victory.

“I wonder why Secretary Clinton and her husband, Bill, are back in California?” Mr. Sanders said, with a touch of sarcasm. “I thought we had lost and it was all over. But I guess Secretary Clinton is maybe looking at some polling that would suggest otherwise.”

While Mrs. Clinton is just 71 delegates shy of the 2,383 needed to clinch the nomination, Mr. Sanders said he was “feeling pretty good” about his campaign and hoped superdelegates would realize that he was the best candidate to beat Donald J. Trump in the general election. He also said he hoped the next week would bring victories that could help him make his case at the party’s convention in Philadelphia.

“If we win California, and if we win South Dakota, and North Dakota and Montana and New Mexico and New Jersey, and the following week do well in Washington, D.C.,” he said, “I think we will be marching into the Democratic convention with an enormous amount of momentum.”

Mr. Sanders also said he hoped that a round of coming victories would help him and his allies encourage the party to include a nationwide ban on fracking in the Democratic platform.

“I would hope that the Democratic Party makes it clear that it has the guts to stand up to the fossil fuel industry,” he said.


