


Kara Lacey, 33, does it after a long day of work, sometimes accompanied by a glass of wine. “It’s super-relaxing, fun and nostalgic,” said Ms. Lacey, a publicist who lives in Hoboken, N.J.

Alex Bender, 29, a real estate executive in SoHo, did it during a recent jaunt to Montauk, N.Y. “It’s nice to concentrate on something that’s lighthearted, fun and simple, which I don’t often get to do,” he said.

Nikki Marsh, 35, a stay-at-home mother in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., does it with fellow moms when they need to relax. “It’s a special time when we’re not allowed to talk about school or kids,” Ms. Marsh said.

The newest device to promote mindfulness and inspire 20- and 30-somethings to put down their phones for hours? It isn’t a new swipe-left app and doesn’t involve overpriced stretchy pants.

It’s coloring books for adults, which have been gaining traction, booksellers say. Enthusiasts claim that coloring is therapeutic, fosters creativity and reaps benefits associated with meditation.

“As adults, we need a chance to escape from our everyday life and do something that’s totally meditative,” said Kelsey Montague, an artist in Denver who recently released an adult coloring book titled, “What Lifts You?” “Once you start coloring, all you have to worry about is staying in the lines and which color to use. It’s an amazing escape.”

Celebrities have also gotten into the craze. Victoria Beckham recently posted a photograph of herself on Instagram with a copy of the “Vogue Colouring Book” peeking out of her handbag.

The book, released in November, features designs inspired by the fashion pages of the British edition of the magazine during the 1950s, including ready-to-wear by Christian Dior, Givenchy and Chanel.

Kate Hudson posted a Snapchat video of her coloring aboard a plane en route to a “Kung Fu Panda 3” premiere.

The trend is having an impact in stores as much as on social media. At Words, a popular bookstore in Maplewood, N.J., coloring took off after a group of monks visited the town last summer and taught residents how to create Mandala drawings with rice.

“After the monks left, people came in looking for books on coloring,” said Lisa Matalon, a saleswoman at the store. “I guess it all stems from the same process of mindfulness and relaxation.”

Words is now stocked with an array of adult coloring books and accouterments like colored pencils and markers. The most popular books, Ms. Matalon said, are “Enchanted Forest” and “Secret Garden,” both by Johanna Basford, who is considered the godmother of the movement with her best-selling coloring books.

Customers are also requesting coloring books based on popular books like the “Harry Potter” series and “Game of Thrones.”

Ms. Lacey said she discovered adult coloring last October when one of her clients, the Australian apparel label Cotton On, hosted a party for its new lifestyle brand, Typo, and featured a crafts table with coloring books.

The books came in handy for Ms. Lacey, who underwent foot surgery in January and had to stay off her feet for two weeks. “I was told that I shouldn’t be doing normal activities like going out or working out, so to counteract the Netflix hole I was falling into, I took some coloring books home,” she said. “I was able to put the phone aside for a few hours and really unwind.”

Now back on her feet, Ms. Lacey continues to color at home after work.

Melissa Rappaport, the founder of the public relations firm RappAround in Los Angeles, received a coloring book in December as a gift from an employee. Over the holidays, she and her husband drank wine and sat around coloring.

While Ms. Rappaport found the activity soothing, it didn’t quite replace her unlimited data usage. “I’d love to say it made me put down my phone,” she said. “But I had to Snapchat my progress so my followers could see the whole thing happen.”


