


President Obama will speak on Friday at the site where the United States first used an atomic bomb at the end of World War II. What should he say?

In announcing Mr. Obama’s visit to Hiroshima, Japan, the White House said he would not revisit President Harry S. Truman’s decision to drop the bomb or apologize for the attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. But some New York Times readers who answered our request for suggestions for the president’s speech said he should do just that.

Maki Wakiyama from Urawa, Japan, said Mr. Obama should apologize because the “bombs killed indiscriminatingly.” David Rothauser, of Brookline, Mass., said an apology by the president “would set a tone of reconciliation that all nations can respond to.”

“Prime Minister Abe can take Obama’s cue and give heartfelt apologies for Japan’s WWII atrocities against her Asian neighbors thereby engendering lasting respect from former enemies,” Mr. Rothauser added, referring to Shinzo Abe of Japan.

But a reader from New York City, Joseph Swartz, said the president could lament the damage caused by the atomic bombs without apologizing for their use.

“He can say it was unfortunate that the U.S. made a strategic choice to use nuclear weapons to end the war with Japan,” Mr. Swartz wrote, adding that the decision had ultimately saved lives by avoiding a military invasion of Japan. “The president must not apologize for that event,” he said.

Another reader, Michael Ennis, of Dallas, suggested that Mr. Obama use his speech to urge Mr. Abe to confront his country’s past.

“Obama should at least confront Abe’s attempt to whitewash Japan’s WWII war crimes as aggressively as he confronted Viet Nam’s leaders over their human rights abuses,” Mr. Ennis wrote, adding: “Abe’s unapologetic stance is merely exacerbating the pain and mistrust that Japan’s ultra-nationalist aggression has sown throughout Asia for the last 85 years.”

Michael Sternfeld of Gaithersburg, Md., said that Mr. Obama should remind the Japanese leadership that what happened in Hiroshima was “the result of Japan being ruled by autocratic militarists who valued conquest and glory over their own citizens.”

Many other readers who sent their suggestions said that Mr. Obama, who has made curbing nuclear weapons a signature issue of his presidency, should make good on that promise.

“President Obama should tell the world that he has not forgotten the promise he made in his Prague speech to work for global nuclear disarmament,” the Rev. Holly Beaumont from Santa Fe, N.M., wrote.

Ms. Beaumont said the president should “veto the $1 trillion he previously approved to modernize the U.S. nuclear weapons programs.”

“He should tell the world,” she added, “that his visit to Hiroshima confirms his belief that nuclear weapons are a threat to humanity, and the U.S., the only nation to use nukes against another nation, must provide the leadership to achieve nuclear disarmament.”

Alexander Martin, of Nashville, Tenn., said he wanted to hear Mr. Obama make a pledge to “my fellow humans and the future inhabitants of our planet, that the United States shall today unconditionally and permanently renounce its prerogative to use, deploy, maintain, manufacture, and develop nuclear weapons, and shall decommission and destroy its existing nuclear weapons with all due haste.”

What do you think the president should say in his speech? Share your suggestions and check back during the week, when we will publish selected readers’ submissions.

Last August, on the 70th anniversary of the attacks that killed about 200,000 people and ushered in the atomic age, we asked readers: Did the United States have to drop the bomb? We received thousands of responses, including justifications, condemnations, indictments and explanations.

Even with decades of perspective and more historical knowledge about what was happening at that time in the war, the debate over the use of atomic weapons has yielded little consensus.


