


A federal judge has delayed until Aug. 22 an order requiring Justice Department lawyers to take ethics classes and to give him the names of young immigrants participating in a deportation protection program created by President Obama. At a hearing on Tuesday in Brownsville in the case by 26 states against the president’s executive actions on immigration, Judge Andrew S. Hanen suspended his May 19 order. The administration will not have to provide this week the names of about 50,000 immigrants who received extended deportation deferrals, which Judge Hanen halted last year. The judge postponed his order until after the Supreme Court rules on the states’ challenge, a decision expected in late June. JULIA PRESTON

James Halsell Jr., who commanded or piloted five space shuttle missions, was charged with murder after a car wreck on Monday killed two young sisters on a remote stretch of highway in Tuscaloosa County. The state police said alcohol and speed may have been factors. Troopers said a car driven by Mr. Halsell, 59, collided around 2:50 a.m. with a car in which Niomi Deona James, 11, and Jayla Latrick Parler, 13, were riding. The girls were thrown from the car and died. Neither was wearing a seatbelt. Mr. Halsell, who lives in Huntsville, was released from jail after posting $150,000 bail. The girls’ father, Pernell James, 37, was treated at a hospital. (AP)

Gov. Sam Brownback said Tuesday that he would call the Legislature into special session to tackle education funding and respond to a state Supreme Court order declaring that public schools might not be able to open after June. Mr. Brownback, a Republican, did not set a date for the Republican-dominated Legislature to reconvene to beat a June 30 deadline set by the court for lawmakers to fix school finances. The court last month rejected some changes in school finance laws that lawmakers had made to comply with an earlier order from the justices to improve funding for poor schools. Public schools are out for the summer, but they provide services year-round to special education students and serve meals to poor children. (AP)


