


Jaspal Ricky Singh and Channi Parihar met as undergraduates at George Washington University in Washington, D.C.

Ms. Parihar moved to New York, working as a special education teacher, and lived with her sister in a one-bedroom condominium, converted to a two-bedroom, in a postwar high-rise in Murray Hill, on the East Side.

Dr. Singh moved among several cities for his medical training. He and Ms. Parihar married four years ago, and they lived with her sister as he started work at Weill Cornell Medicine on the Upper East Side, where he is a physician specializing in spine medicine.

After a cramped month, Dr. and Mrs. Singh moved nearby to a renovated one-bedroom at View 34, formerly the Rivergate, the huge 1985 rental building near the East River.

Within weeks, Hurricane Sandy struck. Their lobby was flooded. For most of the ensuing three weeks, they again stayed with Mrs. Singh’s sister.

Over time, their rent climbed to $3,400 a month from around $2,900. With plans to have a baby, the Singhs, who are now in their 30s, decided to buy a larger place. So they contacted Bobby Rehani, a salesman at City Connections Realty, whom they knew through friends.

They wanted to remain in Murray Hill, near family and friends. They had plenty of amenity-filled condominium towers to choose among, many dating from the 1980s.

With a top price of around $1.2 million, the Singhs aimed for two bedrooms and two bathrooms. They thought about finding a place with enough space to create a third bedroom for their many guests.

They would have been happy with one-and-a-half-bathrooms, but those proved rare. “The price would jump up a lot when it was two full baths,” Mrs. Singh said.

They saw several units that they crossed off their list because they seemed outdated.

At the Horizon on East 37th Street, opened in 1989, a 1,100-square-foot two-bedroom, listed at $1.15 million with monthly charges of around $2,000, had a triangular living room. The shape didn’t work for their plan to create a guest bedroom.

And the building was adjacent to a development site, near the former Con Ed pier, so they could face years of construction, Mr. Rehani said. The place sold for $1.11 million.

At that point, a year and a half ago, Mr. Rehani told the Singhs about the Corinthian Collection, in the Corinthian, opened in 1989 on East 38th Street. Within the 817-unit building, the sponsor had retained 144 units that were to be renovated but were not yet on the market.

Mr. Rehani mentioned the building’s golf simulator.

Dr. Singh lit up. He missed being able to use his golf clubs, and rarely made it to one of Manhattan’s few driving ranges.

No model apartment was ready, but “they had three pictures,” Dr. Singh said. “They looked great.”

The Singhs liked a two-bedroom with two bathrooms, covering nearly 1,200 square feet. Renovated — as in the three pictures — it would be more than $1.5 million, Mr. Rehani said.

“I wish he hadn’t shown us the drawings, because it was out of our price range,” Mrs. Singh said.

It looked as if they would be able to split the living room into two rooms. The Singhs offered $1.558 million for a renovated unit by email, almost on a whim. “And then we forgot about it,” Dr. Singh said.

At the Charleston on East 34th Street, built about 2007, Dr. Singh liked the symmetrical layout of a two-bedroom. But the price was $1.85 million, with monthly charges of $2,260, so the couple kept looking. “That was more about showing them what’s available at different price points,” Mr. Rehani said.

Soon, Mr. Rehani contacted the Singhs to say the Corinthian Collection was officially open for sales. The sponsor agreed to accept the couple’s email offer of $1.558 million; monthly charges would be slightly more than $2,000.

After doing the math and talking with friends and family, the Singhs decided to go ahead. “The fact that they honored that simple email is amazing,” Dr. Singh said.

Two-bedrooms at the Corinthian Collection are now listed for approximately $1.6 million to $2.3 million.

The occupancy date was repeatedly pushed back. At first, the delay was welcome. The couple had a few months remaining on their lease. But when the new place still wasn’t ready, they ended up renting by the month, for which the rent rose to $4,500.

They arrived in the winter, deciding to keep the living room intact and instead add a trundle bed to the second bedroom, which they will use as a nursery. The bathroom space is everything they wanted, particularly the master bathroom, which has a double vanity with two sinks.

They have found home ownership frustrating at times. Last month, Mrs. Singh, now pregnant with a daughter due in August, arose in the night and found water gushing from beneath the kitchen sink. The couple called 911 and ran downstairs.

The flood, as it turned out, was coming from the floor above. Apparently a water filtration system beneath a sink had broken.

The cleanup required fans and dehumidifiers. Some outlets were temporarily knocked out of commission.

Such water issues are “nothing unusual and just the typical day-to-day maintenance of a larger building,” said Cari Nogas, a spokeswoman for the building.

Dr. Singh uses the golf simulator as often as possible. Recently, descending in the elevator with his golf clubs, he was informed by neighbors that it was raining outside. “I said, ‘I am going to the golf simulator in our building,’ ” Dr. Singh said. “They said, ‘We have a golf simulator?’ They didn’t even know.”


