


ARLINGTON, Tex. — When the Yankees, fragile after Alex Rodriguez’s injury scare and with a lineup that can’t dent a sheet of tinfoil, arrived for a three-game series with the Texas Rangers, the climate was noticeably different from their last visit.

And only some of that has to do with the weather.

There may be a hint of that sweet, warm stickiness in the air that comes when spring begins to cede to summer here, and perhaps a dash of rain during the Yankees’ current visit. But that will be nothing like late July last season, when walking outside felt like entering a blast furnace. Manager Joe Girardi canceled batting practice twice, and the players stayed sequestered indoors until the evening games began.

“It was 110 degrees,” said catcher Brian McCann, whose exaggeration was only slight.

The first-pitch temperatures for those four games were 97, 98, 99 and 101 in the finale, after which that night’s starting pitcher, C. C. Sabathia, spent the night in the hospital being treated for dehydration despite having thrown just 80 pitches.

If that series remains seared into the minds of the Yankees for its mind-melting heat, it was also four days filled with quirks and drama — and, in retrospect, a pivot point for their season, which headed in a downward direction they have yet to reverse.

After winning the first two games of last year’s series, including a bizarro 21-5 victory in the second game in which the Rangers took a 5-0 lead and then were no-hit over the final eight and one-third innings by relievers Diego Moreno and Adam Warren, the Yankees looked like World Series material.

They were 57-42 at the end of that night, July 28, with the second-best record in baseball. They owned a season-high seven-game lead in the American League East.

But the Yankees went 30-33 the rest of the season, worse than all but three teams in the American League. And their start to this season has been no better.

“If you’d like to characterize that as why we didn’t play well the rest of the season, I think that’s far too much of an oversimplification,” reliever Andrew Miller said when asked about 2015, and how quickly it went the wrong way after the 21-5 blowout.

When the Yankees arrived last July, they were buoyant. Rodriguez, with his two daughters present, celebrated his 40th birthday by hitting his 24th home run of the season. Later that night, Rodriguez was joined by his teammates, his family and his friends to celebrate his birthday.

And after the first game here, a 6-2 victory, Didi Gregorius had something to celebrate, too, his first career home run off a left-handed pitcher, more affirmation that he had begun to find his feet as Derek Jeter’s replacement.

Still, not all was well that night, despite the win. First baseman Mark Teixeira was irate when the third-base coach Joe Espada told him, “Easy, easy” as he rounded third on a single by Chase Headley, only to get thrown out at the plate. Teixeira yelled at Espada, emptied a trash can in the dugout and sharply criticized Espada to the news media afterward.

The next night, Chris Capuano, getting what would be his last shot to stick in the rotation, walked five Rangers in the first inning before getting pulled. Moreno, who had been recalled from the minors that day, entered and threw five and one-third hitless innings, followed by Warren, who allowed no hits over the final three. Meanwhile, the Yankees scored 21 consecutive runs.

The laugher meant that the Yankees could tease Chris Young, who homered and drove in five runs but also struck out looking against infielder Adam Rosales, who pitched the final inning for Texas. Young was reminded that he had also struck out against a pitching machine during a preseason scrimmage.

The Yankees were feeling so assured that when Toronto swung a blockbuster deal that day, trading Jose Reyes for Troy Tulowitzki, they shrugged. The Blue Jays were eight games back, after all.

With the trade deadline approaching, General Manager Brian Cashman kicked the tires on a few deals, but he held firm in refusing to deal any of his top prospects. In the end, his only move was at the margin of the roster, acquiring Dustin Ackley and releasing Garrett Jones.

But reinforcements seemed unnecessary. With outfielders Carlos Beltran and Jacoby Ellsbury returning from stints on the disabled list, and the starting rotation intact, the Yankees were as healthy as they would be all season.

And then they weren’t. Moreno, after his inspiring performance, developed elbow inflammation and did not pitch again in 2015. By the time the Yankees left Texas, pitcher Michael Pineda was headed to the disabled list. Before the season was over, Sabathia, Nathan Eovaldi, Teixeira and Stephen Drew were disabled by injuries.

Consider this, too: After the 21-5 victory, Gardner hit .196 until the end of the season; Rodriguez, .202; McCann, .204; Ellsbury, .227; and Headley, .239.

Meanwhile, one day after that offensive onslaught, the Yankees were beaten, 5-2, by an old nemesis, Colby Lewis.

On the final night of the series, the Yankees’ most infallible players — Dellin Betances and Miller — could not prevent a 7-6 defeat. Betances blew a save and Miller took the loss, the only time that happened in the same game all season. And before they took the field that night, the Yankees had learned that the Blue Jays had acquired David Price.

Fast forward to this Monday. When the Yankees arrived here, they learned that another top left-hander, the Rangers’ Cole Hamels, would miss his scheduled turn Monday night. Instead, the Yankees faced the journeyman Cesar Ramos.

The Yankees regained their footing — in their return to the place where they lost it a year ago — as Nathan Eovaldi pitched no-hit ball for six innings, leading the Yankees over the Rangers, 3-1.


