


RE: RHODES

David Samuels profiled Ben Rhodes, an aspiring novelist turned national-security communications adviser, who rewrote the rules of diplomacy for the digital age.

David Samuels’s profile of Ben Rhodes asserts that the Obama administration orchestrated Ploughshares Fund’s support of the Iran nuclear agreement.

Preventing an Iranian nuclear bomb has been a core goal of our organization for decades. To say that we or other security experts were “freshly minted” or “cheerleading” is absurd. Our expertise in this field is nationally recognized. We were promoting negotiations long before this administration took office.

Our support was based on policy, not politics. We back the administration when they’re right, and we oppose them when they’re wrong. We supported the administration’s New Start treaty with Russia and the historic Iran agreement because they make America safer. We oppose the administration’s $1 trillion plan to build new nuclear weapons because it makes the world more dangerous.

We always act independently based on our own mission to reduce nuclear threats. We will continue to do so — no matter who is in the Oval Office. Joe Cirincione, president, Ploughshares Fund, Washington

Abandoning longtime allies while embracing states that have long been enemies is a strategic shift more momentous than what can ordinarily be explained as “foreign policy”; in a free society, it requires the assent of the American people. Like its manipulation of the Constitution’s treaty process, this White House subverted that assent to convince Americans that they live in a different, less dangerous world.

It’s a fair bet that most Americans didn’t sign onto a duplicitous “larger restructuring of the American narrative” by junior fiction writers when they sent Obama to the White House in 2008. But it’s what the country got and, thanks to Ben Rhodes’s work creating his “force multipliers” of freshly minted star journalists and partisan experts, will continue to get. David Reaboi, The Federalist

A president and his minions who boastfully prevaricate and treat those of us in the public and the media as dupes, or an opposing-party candidate who, while espousing some objectionable views in an even more objectionable manner, nevertheless does so openly and truthfully?

Tough choice, but Rhodes might have succeeded in demonstrating the value of offensive integrity over genteel deceit. Steven S. Orlow, Flushing, N.Y.

Much rightly has been made of the arrogance and foolishness of the presidential speechwriter Ben Rhodes’s boast of pulling a woolly Iran nuclear deal over the eyes of naïve young journalists. But for me, the more vital issue is the hollowing out of America’s corps of correspondents.

The fact that ever-fewer news organizations can afford to field reporters at home and abroad is a terrible blow to the crucial role of the press in informing and interpreting for our already abysmally ignorant citizenry. The notion of reporters’ relying on government officials for unverified information is sickening. I came of age as a journalist in an era when reporters treated officials with skepticism. Like politicians, they have questionable products to sell. They and their claims must be thoroughly examined. A weakened press means a weakened populace and a weakened democracy. Americans should worry deeply about this. I do. Lewis M. Simons, Washington

The magazine’s profile of Ben Rhodes makes unfounded assertions about me, and since the article was published, the editor of the magazine has acknowledged that they erred in failing to give me the chance to offer my blanket objections before publication.

David Samuels states that my Twitter feed was a source of information for the White House staff member Tanya Somanader: “Laura Rozen was my RSS feed,” Somanader told him. “She just found everything and retweeted it.” Samuels misinterpreted that to support an argument that I, along with The Atlantic’s Jeffrey Goldberg, were retailing the administration’s narrative. This is untrue.

I have covered the Iran nuclear talks intensively for years, and my Twitter feed is widely followed by people around the world interested in this issue.

My reporting stands on its own. It was certainly not done as a favor to any administration. The magazine’s failure to make good-faith efforts to let me respond is baffling and negligent. Laura Rozen, Washington


