


It hardly seemed like a place where a four-alarm fire would snarl a vital railroad and delay tens of thousands of commuters in the country’s biggest city.

In East Harlem, the Urban Garden Center, located under the Metro-North tracks at 116th Street and Park Avenue, was known as a place to pick up a cup of soil for bromeliads or get a weekly community-supported agriculture delivery, where children from the city could get their fingers and shoes dirty building terrariums or visit the clucking chickens. But that changed suddenly on May 17, when workers reportedly poured gasoline into a hot generator in a storage lot filled with bags of fertilizer and wood pallets, among other things, which ignited like a giant pile of kindling.

In the wake of the fire, Thomas F. Prendergast, the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, demanded an investigation. “Should we have material like that stored under such a vital, critical piece of infrastructure?” he said. “That’s a question that needs to be asked and answered.”

New York and the transit authority said they would each be scouring the city for other places where hazardous materials might be stored near train tracks or viaducts. The Fire Department, which is conducting an investigation of the cause of the blaze, issued four summonses to the garden center over the storage of gas and propane.

Dimitri Gatanas, who runs the center with his family, said that for the six years they had been operating on 116th Street — under a lease with the city’s Economic Development Corporation — he had often found it hard to get the attention of government officials.

Now, “everybody is looking for a scapegoat here, and they’ve got me at the cross hairs,” Mr. Gatanas said, speaking on behalf of the family for the first time since the fire.

“The Urban Garden Center didn’t just crawl under the tracks here and weasel their way into a space that wasn’t theirs,” he said. “This was a vetted arrangement here. It wasn’t like we just pulled up, unloaded our truck and started a business.”

Around 2009, the Economic Development Corporation was seeking tenants and proposals to revitalize La Marqueta, a struggling enclosed marketplace that once housed 500 stalls, mostly owned by local Puerto Rican businesspeople. Hot Bread Kitchen, a nonprofit group that helps poor people, immigrants and minorities build culinary careers, signed on as an anchor tenant and planned to install a large professional kitchen as part of its incubator program.

The Gatanas family has operated plant businesses around the city since the 1950s, when Mr. Gatanas’s grandfather, Dimitri Gravanis, an immigrant from Greece, opened a shop at 89th Street and Madison Avenue. When the development corporation put out its request for proposals, Mr. Gatanas was running a struggling garden center in the Bronx. When he heard that a space in Manhattan might be available, he “saw a glimmer of light.”

Mr. Gatanas submitted a proposal for the two lots adjacent to the market, which he said had been orphaned for decades, except, perhaps, for the film crews that shot “Carlito’s Way” there. The area lacked light, running water and electricity. One of the lots was on a hill. And it was exposed to the continual 110-decibel rumble of speeding trains.

“I saw asphalt, stanchions, and I thought, ‘What a great place for a garden center,’” Mr. Gatanas said.

The Gatanas family signed a five-year lease with the city for the two plots in 2010, with a five-year extension.

Mr. Gatanas said it took about a year to get a mailing address, which was critical not only for setting up simple things like an Amazon account, but also for banking transactions. His packages are still misdirected sometimes, he said.

The hulking metal viaduct casts a long shadow above Park Avenue and the neighborhood.

When a piece of stone fell while workers drilled on the tracks above, without scaffolding, Mr. Gatanas said, it took him two hours to figure out whom to contact to stop the job. Only two years ago, the garden center’s main lot and greenhouse were buried in bricks and the front door of the building across the street after a gas explosion killed eight people.

Matthew Washington, the deputy Manhattan borough president, was the chairman of Community Board 11 when the Urban Garden Center opened.

Some residents may have wished that the storage lot “was a bit more organized,” he said, but “there was a hope and desire from the community that it would be a more active space.”

And the Urban Garden Center accomplished that, he said, by hiring local workers and involving the community in chicken-naming contests and school tours.

As the center expanded, the storage lot across the street filled with mulch and multiple varieties of soil. People donated tools and machinery in various states of working order. There were old vehicles and two trailers, one of which was used as an office, and another filled with, among other things, Mr. Gatanas’s collection of gardening books.

Mr. Gatanas said the space had become unwieldy because of “poor planning.” But many of the items were part of his unofficial recycling program, including piles of broken pallets that were remade into window boxes.

And the garden center is hardly alone in using the space under the tracks as storage. A few blocks south at 111th and Park Avenue, unmarked shipping containers and wooden pallets sit behind a barbed-wire fence covered in black netting.

On Monday night, Mr. Gatanas was using the Italian restaurant across the street as a temporary office. A stack of bills and letters, some with blackened edges, sat on the table. His mother and father, Nicholas, 77, and Aspasia, 63, who also work for the business, eventually filled the seats. Mrs. Gatanas has been fielding dozens of calls from concerned customers, and residents who know her face or see the logo on her apron have hugged her on the street.

“As a family, we’re embarrassed and disappointed about what’s happened here,” Mr. Gatanas said. “We feel bad about the businesses that closed that evening because of our mistake. And that a family had to be evacuated from the fourth-floor building nearby.”

Mr. Gatanas said they had, at times, fallen behind on the rent, which he said was about $4,500 a month. The city has initiated eviction proceedings before, but each time, the family and the development corporation have worked out a payment arrangement.

On Wednesday, the family found out they would be allowed to stay. More than a dozen officials from the Fire Department and the transportation authority spent three hours inspecting the garden center and issued several new warnings, Mr. Gatanas said. The development corporation presented the family with a new lease that raised the rent to $5,100 and also placed additional restrictions and conditions on how the lots could be used.


