


Ballet conductors and concert conductors tend to be separate species. Ballet music requires a maestro (or, occasionally, a maestra) to set tempos to make the choreography effective, accompany individual dancers with sensitivity and elicit good orchestral playing. New York’s current exemplar of this genre is David LaMarche, of American Ballet Theater, notably in scores by Delibes.

Occasionally a guest conductor — I’ve heard Adrian Boult, Colin Davis, Bernard Haitink, Antonio Pappano and Gennady Rozhdestvensky conduct the Royal Ballet at Covent Garden — shows further dimensions in ballet music. Valery Gergiev’s work with the Mariinsky Ballet, on the other hand, has shown the problems that can arise: Though he is a great conductor, his harsh, heavy emphasis is often hostile to the buoyancy needed for ballet.

Andrew Litton became music director of New York City Ballet in late 2015. Because he combines this job with performances elsewhere, his appearances still sometimes seem like those of a guest. But he conducted the entire closing week of the company’s spring season at the David H. Koch Theater — the traditional block of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” performances — and showed all the virtues of his appointment. This was an unusually powerful and eloquent rendition of the music, which is a singular collage of items by Felix Mendelssohn, culled from multiple scores by George Balanchine for his two-act drama.

The sections from Mendelssohn’s “First Walpurgisnacht” music, near the end of Act I, acquired a special force. It has always seemed perfect that the huntress Hippolyta executes fouetté turns — “fouetté” means “whipped,” and the step sums up the hunt’s drive and thrill — but the power of Mr. Litton’s conducting made the fouettés seem more musically judicious than ever. Many remarked on the exceptional emphasis that Mr. Litton brought in the overture to the “heehaw” music illustrating Bottom as ass. (Balanchine’s stage action at this moment shows us Bottom, but before his transformation: one of several musical imperfections in this marvelous ballet. When the motif is echoed in the Scherzo, Bottom is not onstage.)

Mr. Litton has yet to master all the skills of the ideal ballet conductor. Though he leads impressively, his tempo for the opening movement of the Symphony No. 9 for strings — which here begins the Act II wedding divertissement — was somewhat too slow for the steps. In later performances, the wind and (especially) brass sections let him down with some particularly poor playing and wrong notes.

Nonetheless, the dancers glowed all week, rising with spontaneity and color to Mendelssohn’s call. The role of Titania beautifully showcases dissimilar dancers: young Miriam Miller, with face and limbs registering wonderfully throughout the theater, is all springtime bloom; Teresa Reichlen, marvelously incisive and exact, is warmly imperious; Sara Mearns, at her freshest and grandest, makes the dance joyously voluptuous. Ms. Miller, so exquisite in her expansive use of her upper body, needs to acquire more lower-body strength if she’s to become the ballerina of central Balanchine roles, for which she seems otherwise ideal. She has moments when her thigh action suggests a powerful impetus reminiscent of Suzanne Farrell; sometimes she holds a shape with thrilling firmness. These highlights, however, aren’t yet part of anything consistent.

Lauren Lovette, making her debut in the Act II divertissement pas de deux at Sunday’s closing performance, is another upper-body beauty. On this occasion, handsomely partnered by Chase Finlay, she cast a spell with a singing thread of technical tenacity. Will she become a Balanchine ballerina? As a rule, she’s surest in roles by other choreographers; Balanchine’s classicism makes her look sentimental, as if she’s telling us how much she loves this choreography rather than showing us why it’s lovely. Can she demonstrate authority? Tiler Peck and Sterling Hyltin (earlier in the week) currently exemplify the heights this pas de deux can reach.

A run of “Midsummer” performances is an endearing way to get to know City Ballet’s dancers better. Savannah Lowery is at her finest as Hippolyta; and Georgina Pazcoguin — bidding a temporary farewell to City Ballet before moving to Broadway for the new production of “Cats” — swept through the same role with a searing enthusiasm that, like her terrific Dewdrop in “George Balanchine’s ‘The Nutcracker’” during Christmas week, showed how the company had made too little use of her gifts in Balanchine.

Harrison Ball, in his debut as Puck, finds his best Balanchine role to date. Anthony Huxley, even though he has not mastered every aspect of the Scherzo, is a bright, scintillating Oberon; watching this artist grow has become one of the biggest delights this company offers. Cameron Dieck and Peter Walker made vivid debuts as Lysander and Demetrius; for Mr. Dieck, this crowned a season in which he constantly made newly strong impressions. (His series of jumps on the spot in “Concerto DSCH” became one of the season’s talking points.)

The five pre-“Midsummer” weeks of the season contained much fine dancing, too. Sara Adams, Emilie Gerrity, Emily Kikta, Meagan Mann, Unity Phelan (especially) and Indiana Woodward were among the most repeatedly eye-catching younger women; Taylor Stanley richly deserved his promotion to principal; and Joseph Gordon, Russell Janzen and Andrew Scordato all made important advances.

Still, the season showed several lapses. It’s easy to see that Robert Fairchild, back after a year on Broadway in “An American in Paris,” has lost much of his former dance finesse. Since it took him seasons to acquire, that’s disconcerting, as is the new slickness of his manner in several roles. Ms. Peck, almost always impressive, has several roles in which she’s not really believable, while Ms. Mearns invariably holds the attention, she, too, danced one “Serenade” with a glazed diva quality that felt phony. Some choreography — the first two movements of “Western Symphony,” above all — needs restudying. In the elegy of “Serenade,” the heroic, turning jumps into the man’s arms — whether delivered by Ms. Peck or Erica Pereira — have none of the oomph that Balanchine required here.

The season followed immediately in the steps of Miami City Ballet’s exceptional week at the Koch. Let no New Yorkers think their home companies exemplify the most musical dancing today; the Miamians set the high-water mark for the year so far. It’s exciting to have Mr. Litton reshaping City Ballet’s music with such authority, but the marriage between music and dance is a more elusive alchemy.


