


PARIS — From the very beginning, it was clear that Northern Ireland was going to have to revel in the small stuff.

After all, a ball punted forward is not normally a cause for celebration, a goal kick not usually a reason for merriment. But then again, playing against Germany in the teams’ final group stage game of the European Championships — with goal difference most likely serving as the tiebreaker in determining spots in the knockout round — is not exactly a normal situation, either. On this night, the scale, at least from Northern Ireland’s perspective, was understandably recalibrated.

So throughout their team’s game at the Parc des Princes, the Irish fans, who rarely need an incentive to jump and dance and sing anyway, roared for throw-ins that went in their favor. Fouls on Germany were greeted with braying and bravura. Corner kicks? There were only three, but each felt euphoric.

The greatest ovations, though, were reserved for Northern Ireland’s goalkeeper, Michael McGovern, whose saves — of all manner and might — turned a game that could have ended 10-0 into what the history books will record as a narrow 1-0 loss to Germany, the reigning world champion. Northern Ireland, competing in its first Euros, finished the group stage with 3 points and a goal differential of zero, a combination that — after some later results fell favorably — was enough to push it through to the round of 16.

After a season of saving his Scottish club team, Hamilton Academical, from relegation, McGovern also largely saved his national team’s tournament. When he entered the locker room after the game, his teammates stood and gave him a round of applause.

“When you get that, you don’t need the manager to say much,” Northern Ireland Coach Michael O’Neill said. “If we were going to lose the game, that was the best defeat we could have had.”

For Germany, the match was less rewarding. From a results standpoint, the victory did the job — Germany won Group C — but there will be some frustration about the inability to turn the game into the blowout that seemed to be its destiny. Coming after Germany’s drab 0-0 draw with Poland, which finished second in the group, the one-goal win will probably feel even less auspicious for the Germans.

Yet a good part of that is attributable to Northern Ireland. After a rousing rendition of “God Save the Queen,” the players pushed — just a little bit — early in the match, rushing forward in the opening minutes and even opening up a bit in an effort to trouble Germany goalkeeper Manuel Neuer.

Northern Ireland quickly tucked back, however, once it became clear there was little chance of breaking the German defense. With Albania already sitting on 3 points (but with a minus-two goal difference) and several groups still yet to play, Northern Ireland’s players knew this match was about risk management as much as anything.

This could not be like Germany’s 7-1 victory over Brazil in the semifinals of the 2014 World Cup. That kind of result would be a goal-difference disaster.

The risks were considerable, too: When the Germans are thrumming, there is no more entertaining team to watch and no more lethal side in front of the goal. But the Irish were determined. Gareth McAuley and Craig Cathcart, the central defenders, dug in; Jonny Evans, who played on the outside, seemed to never stop running as he closed down Germany’s players all match; and Steven Davis, the captain, clogged the midfield.

Behind them all was McGovern, there to save everyone when all of it broke down.

This was not quite Tim Howard single-handedly keeping the United States in its game against Belgium in Brazil two years ago, but it was close. In the space of about three minutes, McGovern smothered a one-on-one chance for Thomas Müller, punched away a free kick and then denied a close-range shot from Mesut Ozil. Seconds later, he made a save with his feet on a shot from Mario Götze.

There was some good fortune for Northern Ireland as well: Müller hit the post with a header and the crossbar with a side-footed shot from about 12 yards. But if not for McGovern, who finished with eight saves, the Germans could have been three or four goals in front by halftime.

Instead, there was only a single goal — by Mario Gómez, who took a lovely pass from Müller and drove the ball into the net from close range in the 30th minute — juxtaposed against an abundance of McGovern highlights.

“It’s important when we went 1-0 down not to concede anymore,” McGovern said, adding that “given the opposition, it was the most enjoyable and best game I’ve had.”

Germany Coach Joachim Löw said he knew coming into the game that Northern Ireland would “defend intensively” and declared himself “satisfied” with what his players showed, especially after McGovern played perhaps the game of his life. Löw noted that Müller, who has not scored in eight career games in the Euros, was “unlucky,” but otherwise he seemed unconcerned about his team’s lack of finishing.

“We have shown our quality today,” Ozil said. “The only thing missing was to take these chances.”

Up till the end, it seemed that they might. Late in the game, Sami Khedira had a simmering blast from outside the penalty area palmed away by McGovern, and Gómez had a header from a few yards out blocked by the goalkeeper. With each save, the Irish fans grew louder and louder. Long after the final whistle, they remained in their seats to sing.

“We’re not going home,” they crooned. “We’re not going home.”

Whether they meant for the night or the tournament was unclear, but this much was sure: Never before had a 1-0 defeat felt more like a victory.


