


The artist Daniel Arsham is one half of a design team called Snarkitecture, so it should come as no surprise that his work — which includes sculpture, movies, set design and collaboration on music videos — has a puckish sense of play. Walls seem to be melting, ceiling forms appear to be dripping down, stairways go nowhere. In a collaboration with the musician and producer Pharrell Williams, Mr. Arsham, 35, remade Mr. Williams’s first Casio MT-500 keyboard in volcanic ash, shattered glass, crystal and steel. On a recent morning, he was just back from a trip to Japan, where he had worked on a film about kendo (Japanese fencing) and mounted a gallery exhibition of his work. “I’m pretty good with jet lag,” he said, preparing for a busy day in New York, where he lives in Battery Park City with his wife, Stephanie, 38, and their son, Casper, 3. “I just ignore it. With the amount of travel I do, if I get into that feeling of ‘Oh, I’m tired all the time,’ I’ll just be that.” The Arshams are expecting their second child in July.

SLAP HAPPY Typically my son will wake me up somewhere around 6:30. He comes into our bed and slaps me in the face. He wants his breakfast. He eats yogurt and bread with jam. He loves madeleines. My wife is French and Japanese, so he’s addicted to certain things from both of those places.

TEA BUT NO SYMPATHY I make coffee. I have an espresso machine at home. That’s one of the things I miss when I’m away. Surprisingly, there’s no good coffee in Japan. It’s weird. You can find amazing tea everywhere, but I was there for two weeks with no coffee.

WORK IT OUT I usually go to the gym in the morning. There’s a gym in the building. It’s just general staying in shape. Especially after travel, it helps get back into this time zone. I’ll stay for an hour. I just do some weights and running, usually.

MUNCHING BEFORE BRUNCHING Before we go to brunch, sometimes we’ll go to Brookfield Place, which is a giant mall, and they have a bakery there that makes the madeleines that Casper likes.

OCULUS DRIFT Usually we’ll walk through the tunnel to the World Trade Center, the Calatrava tunnel, and then go to Soho House or the Standard — usually somewhere where we can walk afterwards, either to galleries or a museum. Soho House has a brunch that starts at 11, so if we get there at 10:30 or so, it’s totally empty, and we can just get a table wherever we want. It’s good with my son; he can have space. I might have an omelet and a bagel, coffee.

ARTWARD, HO Usually we’ll stay until 1 or 1:30. Then we usually go to a museum or an exhibition. My son knows, if you ask him what we say about art, he says “touche pas,” which means “don’t touch” in French. There’s art all over our house, so he knows it’s something we look at, but no touching. I think he likes it. I have a couple really nice KAWS. I have a Sorayama sculpture. I worked for many years with the choreographer Merce Cunningham, and toward the end of his life he introduced me to Robert Rauschenberg, so I have a really nice Rauschenberg print.

GROWN-UP TIME Sometimes in the afternoon we’ll have a babysitter come over, so Steph and I can hang out. Our building is right on the water, so if it’s nice, sometimes we’ll just go outside and read.

POWER DOWN In the evening my son usually goes to bed quite early, so we’ll be watching whatever program I missed when I was away. This weekend it’s probably going to be a “House of Cards” marathon.

INTERNATIONAL CHOW My wife cooks a lot, so she’ll make something at home. Depends on the mood. She cooks more in the French tradition than Japanese, although sometimes the fish she’ll make has a Japanese preparation. Or she’ll make miso soup. Dinner is around 7:30. That’s when he goes to bed.

CRASH I’ll try to get to bed quite early, like 10:30. I just finished reading “Ready Player One,” about virtual reality. If it’s really good, sometimes it keeps me up.


