


We are just one-third of the way through 2016, and we have already been so overwhelmed by the loss of musical heroes that it feels impossible to make room for more grief. But Les Waas, who died on April 19 at age 94, deserves a page in our Book of Lamentations. You may not have heard of Waas, but you’ve heard his music. He was the Philadelphia adman and prolific composer of jingles who in 1960 came up with the theme song for Mister Softee — that deceptively gentle singsong melody, rendered in tinkling music-box bells, that has blasted from the roof-mounted P.A. systems of Mister Softee ice cream trucks for decades. The song was originally a jingle, music and words, written for radio and television spots, with a lyric celebrating the deliciousness of Mister Softee’s desserts and the convenience of a mobile ice cream parlor:

As poetry, it ain’t much. The chiming tune, though, is irrefutable. A chorus, a bridge, another chorus, and a brief coda — Waas’s jingle hews to the form of a pop song, which, of course, it is. The music is indelibly associated with New York City, where Mister Softee runs its largest fleet. But the company’s trucks have spread the song far and wide, to 15 other states and to China, where Mister Softee began operating in 2007. It’s a global hit.

It’s an unusual kind of hit too. It’s a creation of the crassest commercial intent, an advertisement. But the melody, which steps through a string of sprightly notes as if guided by some faultless celestial logic, gives the song the feel of a folk artifact, a thing that’s as old as the hills. Consider the soundtrack of Mister Softee’s ice cream truck competitors, a repertoire of nursery-rhyme ditties, public-domain classics, 19th- and early-20th century standards: “Pop Goes the Weasel,” “Do Your Ears Hang Low?” “Home on the Range,” “Turkey in the Straw,” “Camptown Races,” “The Entertainer.” When Waas sat down to write a jingle more than half a century ago, did he know that he was going toe to toe with Stephen Foster and Scott Joplin and some of the most beloved tunes in the Anglo-American songbook, and that he would beat them all?

For centuries, city life has been defined by hubbub — town criers and curbside hawkers and mischief-making callithumpian marching bands. These days, though, much of that noise has been hushed up, legislated and gentrified away. Technology has made music more ubiquitous than ever, but our listening has been privatized; boomboxes have given way to pocket-size devices, whose playlists we absorb through noise-canceling headphones. Ice cream trucks are vestiges of the lost, louder city, a throwback to New York’s early days, when a town run on boisterous commerce was just revving up. You can hear an echo of Mister Softee’s ancestors by paging through “Cries of New York” (1808), an anthology of the shouted sales pitches of street vendors: fruit peddlers, knife grinders, chimney sweeps, sand merchants. (“Here’s white sand/Choice sand/Here’ your lily white s-a-n-d/Here’s your Rock-a-way Beach s-a-n-d.”)

Today the loudest sound we hear in New York is traffic, a permanent background roar, punctuated by the screams of police, fire and ambulance sirens. The Mister Softee jingle is different kind of siren, a siren call — a beckoning faraway tune, getting closer by the second, telling us that a white boat on wheels will soon hove into view, bringing refreshing delights supreme. In 2004, Mayor Michael Bloomberg tried to ban the Mister Softee song, part of his effort to turn the city into a more tranquil yuppie idyll. But the effort was shouted down: New Yorkers didn’t want to let go of this reminder of an older, wilder, more raffish town.

Or maybe that’s sentimental nonsense; maybe people just really like soft ice cream. In any case: R.I.P., Les Waas. (Pour one out, and make it a vanilla malted milkshake.) Remember Waas this summer when his famous song ding-a-lings down the street, and when you hear the beat we add to his melody — the patter of feet falling on pavement, running toward the music.


