


BEIRUT, Lebanon — Insurgent shelling hit a maternity hospital in the government-held section of the Syrian city of Aleppo on Tuesday, according to state media and footage from the scene, underscoring what rights groups are calling a growing disregard for the rules of war.

It was the sixth assault on a medical facility in the divided city in less than a week and the first to have caused casualties on the government-controlled side. At least three women were reported killed and 17 people wounded, including children.

On Wednesday, warplanes destroyed a pediatric hospital and a clinic on the rebel-held side of the city, leaving dozens of people dead, including medical workers, women and children.

That attack, believed to have been carried out by the Syrian government despite its denials, came as intensifying airstrikes and rebel shelling shattered what remained of a fragile truce that had prevailed for a few months. The violence of the past week has plunged Aleppo back into all-out war, killing scores of people, mainly civilians.

The strikes on hospitals and clinics have incited a new wave of outrage from international humanitarian organizations, which called for an end to the attacks and emphasized that, if deliberate, they constitute war crimes. The United Nations Security Council condemned the attacks in a resolution on Tuesday that passed unanimously.

“This breaks all the rules of humanity,” Pawel Krzysiek, the spokesman for the International Committee for the Red Cross in Damascus. “These indiscriminate attacks must stop.”

Secretary of State John Kerry said later Tuesday that the hospital appeared to have been struck by a missile fired from rebel-held territory, and that the United States condemns such attacks “no matter who commits them.”

Several rebel groups denied having shelled the Dabbit maternity hospital, but numerous other insurgents operate in the city of Aleppo, including some fighters of the Nusra Front, which is linked to Al Qaeda.

A commander of an American-backed rebel group said his men were not involved, and contended that other groups that had carried out attacks in the past were being brought under control. But that did not explain the civilians killed in dozens of shelling attacks on government-held neighborhoods in the past week, which suggest that American-backed groups are carrying them out, or that they are unable to stop other groups from doing so.

Some anti-government activists — and even the rebel commander, who goes by the name Abu Qutaiba — suggested that the shelling of the maternity hospital had been carried out by the government to tarnish the insurgents.

But other anti-government activists said they assumed the attack had been carried out by insurgents, even as they debated whether it had been a missile or rocket strike, as state media has said, or a car bomb. Some condemned the assault, like Razan Ghazawi, who wrote on Twitter that attacking medical workers was a tactic of President Bashar al-Assad and “committing those crimes only makes us a criminal like him.”

Others sought to justify it.

“We will target their areas more,” Khaled Eido, an activist and former fighter, said by text message, calling the attack retaliation for “the massacres the regime committed in the past and on Obama’s silence.”

Abu Qutaiba, the rebel commander, said his group, called Go Straight as You Were Commanded, receives aid through a covert program run by the C.I.A. and allied intelligence agencies, including what he called “precise weapons,” and “would never randomly shell regime-held areas.” But a number of rebel groups use missiles improvised from gas canisters, which are both powerful and imprecise.

Even with the escalation of violence, the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, expressed hopes that a truce could be restored in Aleppo within hours. Russia is the most powerful backer of the Syrian government.

He spoke in Moscow after meeting with Staffan di Mistura, the United Nations special envoy for the Syria conflict, who is trying to revive peace talks.

Footage from the government-held side of Aleppo showed the maternity hospital’s facade partly sheared off, along with the blackened wreckage of a car, and patients, including several children, being rushed to other hospitals.

State news media said that the death toll could rise and that in all, 14 people had died Tuesday in insurgent attacks. “Today, Aleppo is a place of slaughter,” said the Rev. Ibrahim Nsier, a Protestant clergyman. He listed places struck Tuesday morning, including near his apartment, where he said a shell killed a 5-year-old schoolboy.

“We gathered his flesh from everywhere,” he said.

On the rebel-held side, a suspected government airstrike destroyed a warehouse holding medical supplies, Mr. Krzysiek said. And rescue workers said at least six people died in other government attacks.


