


The final 10 places in the Eurovision contest were decided Thursday night in the event’s second semifinal, including songs from Australia and Ukraine that have stirred controversy over questions of political and commercial content.

The other countries advancing to Saturday’s final in Stockholm were Belgium, Bulgaria, Georgia, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Serbia.

Australia, which received dispensation to participate in the competition in 2015 and again this year, is widely considered one of the front-runners, for Dami Im’s “Sound of Silence.”

Some had called for the song’s disqualification over the lyric “trying to feel your love through face time,” which they said was a reference to Apple’s FaceTime technology and violated the contest’s ban on promotional lyrics. Eurovision ruled that the song did not refer to the company’s product and thus could compete.

Ukraine’s entry, “1944,” performed by Jamala, seems to make reference to the Soviet Union’s aggressive policies toward the Tatars in Crimea during World War II. Critics in Russia have said that it infringes on the contest’s ban on political songs. But the song has remained in the competition in part because its lyrics make no explicit reference to the events they seem to allude to.

Thursday night’s winners will join the representatives from Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Malta, the Netherlands and Russia, who won the first semifinal on Tuesday. The entrants from Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Spain automatically qualified for the final because their countries contribute the most money to the competition. Sweden qualified because it won last year.

Sergey Lazarev of Russia, Ira Losco of Malta and Amir of France are among the other front-runners this year.

This week, it was announced that Justin Timberlake would perform at the final, which is set for 9 p.m. Central European Time. It will be broadcast and live-streamed in the United States on the Logo network.


