


I was never among the who’s-who in Durban, the beautiful city on the Indian Ocean coast of South Africa, where I live. But a few years ago, after some success as a writer, I became a person to invite. I loved it, make no mistake: the parties with the intellectual set, the politicians and anti-apartheid heroes, the serious journalists and entertainers. It seemed I had arrived.

But having arrived with little grasp of the rules, I blundered a bit. Durban has a contradictory quality about it that makes you feel as if you’ve just walked into someone’s extramarital affair. The social scene is dominated by people, like me, of Indian heritage, the descendants of sugar-cane cutters indentured to South Africa in the 1800s. (The Indian diaspora of Durban is the largest in the world.) Now the tacit rule here, if you’re an Indian who happens to fall in with the shiny crowd of country-clubbers and private-school soccer mums, is to deny who you really are. Buying clothes at flea markets is best done in secret, darling, lest you face immediate sanctions. I hadn’t quite perfected the fine art of hiding my cheap shoes.

Even so, there was one party I looked forward to immensely, because I so admired the honored guest. The thought of spending an evening in her company, as well as with the high achievers of Indian descent, was enough to make me go out and buy a new dress. I cringed, though, when I pondered the buffet. I spent most of my partygoing ravenously hungry, because those tiny trending packages of carbohydrate-free one-bites never quite managed to satisfy. Large white plates with minuscule towers of grilled organic vegetables drizzled with macerated herbs were works of art, but I bemoaned my lingering hunger.

It turned out to be an evening of tottering around eating fashionable nibbles, while holding forth on serious subjects. The conversation was great. But, oh, I suffered. At some point in the evening, I had enough and loudly confessed to a group of academics and socialites what I was craving: bunny chow.

Durban’s claim to fame is hot curry, a spicier, punchier version of the North Indian original. But its true incarnation is called bunny chow. The name is strange; it doesn’t contain any rabbit but rather a quarter loaf of unsliced white bread, hollowed out and filled to bursting with steaming curried beans or spicy mutton. This substantial meal dates to the times of the Indian sugar-cane cutters. The legend goes that because they lacked decent meal breaks, a cook started putting their daily curry into the bread, to be eaten fast and hot.

There is no better taste than soft and yeasty white bread soaked through with thick curried gravy. And it is best eaten with your fingers. Most bunny-chow joints don’t even supply you with cutlery. They simply point you in the general direction of a water tap.

Is this a gorgeous dish? Most definitely. Is this fashionable fare? Most definitely not. Just mentioning it at my high-class party turned pouts into sneering guffaws. The upturned noses suggested that I had lost my place on the invitation lists for a long time to come.

These elite partygoers said bunny chows were crass, not to mention terribly unhealthful because of all that bread. One guest began to expound on how South African Indians need to remove themselves from the cane-field mentality. I had heard this before. Culinary tastes now said so much about you: how fashionable you were, how far you had evolved from your beginnings.

That’s when I began to feel that being invited to join the intelligentsia and literati of Durban was a curse rather than a boon. Why would I seek the favor of people who thumb their noses at their very lineage? I imagined them hiding away old photographs of grannies in unironed saris or grandfathers in muddy fields, when they visited one another for cocktails.

It was easy for me to walk away that night and head to one of the oldest bunny-chow places in town, a dive of a hotel, where it is said that in apartheid times, nonwhites received their bunnies wrapped in newspaper at the back door. And there, surrounded by loud music and singing and raucous people, I was truly happy.

While washing all that gravy off my fingers, out of the corner of my eye, I saw a gentleman fingers-deep into his crass bunny chow, expensive tweed sleeves rolled up high. He didn’t see me at first, but I remembered him from the party, joining in all the criticism about the meal he was now eating. Oh, the look on his face was priceless. Now my belly was full.


