


Andreas Athanasiou and Henrik Zetterberg scored, Petr Mrazek made 16 saves, and the Detroit Red Wings beat the Tampa Bay Lightning, 2-0, in Detroit on Sunday night.

Detroit cut its deficit to 2-1 in the teams’ first-round playoff series. Game 4 is scheduled for Tuesday night in Detroit. Game 5 will be at Tampa Bay.

Gloves were dropped, fists flew, and there were piles of players on the ice when the game ended.

Ben Bishop made 28 saves for the Lightning, whose top line of Tyler Johnson, Nikita Kucherov and Alex Killorn was shut down after the three players had combined for 6 points in the first two games of the series.

Kucherov had scored first in each of the first two games, while Killorn and Johnson had scored the tiebreaking goals in the third periods.

Detroit’s rookie coach, Jeff Blashill, benched goaltender Jimmy Howard on Sunday and put Mrazek in net. The move seemed to work, as the Red Wings’ swarming defense and backchecking forwards limited Tampa Bay’s shots on net.

At the other end, the Red Wings kept Bishop much busier.

Athanasiou, a rookie, scored his first career playoff goal midway through the second period on a one-timer from the left circle that fluttered past Bishop’s stick on the short side.

Zetterberg, in his 13th postseason, crashed the net late in the second period and was credited with a goal that appeared to go off his left skate. The goal stood after a video review and a challenge from Lightning Coach Jon Cooper.

Blashill made another decision that paid off by putting Brendan Smith, who had been a healthy scratch since March 26, in the lineup instead of Kyle Quincey. Smith used his right shoulder to put Cedric Paquette on his back early in the game. Smith, an agitating player, also drew another penalty late in the game.

Tampa Bay went on the power play for the first time late in the second period and got another opportunity to have an extra skater early in the third, but the Lightning failed to take advantage.

Detroit’s Pavel Datsyuk, who said he planned to retire from the N.H.L. after the playoffs, was called for tripping with 5 minutes 40 seconds left. His teammates prevented Tampa Bay from making the most of the opportunity.

The Lightning pulled Bishop to add an extra skater with 2:28 left, but had to put him back in 11 seconds later because Braydon Coburn was called for interference for hitting Smith.

Mrazek did not have to make many saves, but he made enough to shut out the high-scoring Lightning. He had two shutouts against them last year, pushing their first-round series to a Game 7 before the Red Wings were eliminated with a 2-0 loss.

BLUES 3, BLACKHAWKS 2 Jaden Schwartz scored late in the third period with Patrick Kane in the penalty box for high-sticking, and St. Louis won at Chicago to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round playoff series.

Patrik Berglund also scored in the third as St. Louis rallied for the win after a difficult 3-2 loss in Game 2, which included two coach’s challenges that were decided against the Blues. Brian Elliott made 44 saves on Sunday, keeping St. Louis alive during a strong second period by Chicago.

Kane, the N.H.L.’s leading scorer this season and a favorite for the league’s most valuable player, drew a four-minute penalty for a high stick on defenseman Alex Pietrangelo, and St. Louis made the most of the chance to go in front.

Vladimir Tarasenko passed down low to David Backes, who sent it right to Schwartz in the slot. Schwartz beat Corey Crawford low on the glove side for his third career playoff goal and a 3-2 lead with 6:38 left.

Crawford finished with 33 saves. The Blackhawks pulled him for an extra attacker with 1:10 remaining, but Elliott and the Blues held on. Game 4 is scheduled for Tuesday night in Chicago.

Brent Seabrook and Artem Anisimov scored for the Blackhawks, who dropped to 28-7 in home playoff games since the 2013 postseason. It was their first home playoff game since they hoisted the Stanley Cup at United Center last June.


