


SEATTLE — The first time the United States men’s national soccer team played in the Copa América was in 1993 in Ecuador. In its second game of that tournament, the hosts soundly defeated a United States team that was still largely composed of former college players.

Nearly a quarter century later, with the United States playing host to the tournament for the first time and featuring a team laden with experienced professionals, the Americans reversed the outcome and beat Ecuador, 2-1, in a contentious quarterfinal that reflected how far the United States has progressed in soccer over the past two decades.

On a night when both teams were shown red cards, and Ecuador Coach Gustavo Quinteros was ejected in the final minutes, it was the American players who celebrated by jumping into one another’s arms and dancing in the center circle, having secured a vital win on a grand stage.

The victory propelled the United States into the semifinal stage of the Copa América for the first time since 1995, in Uruguay, and it will play the winner of Saturday’s quarterfinal between Argentina and Venezuela.

This was arguably the biggest result for the United States on home soil since it defeated Colombia in the 1994 World Cup. The Copa América is an irregularly contested championship of South American teams, older than the World Cup and the European Championships, and features some of the world’s most formidable national teams.

To celebrate its 100th anniversary, the Copa came to the United States, and the home team’s coach, Jurgen Klinsmann, said before it began that the goal was to reach the semifinal stage.

Clint Dempsey, who plays locally for the Seattle Sounders, helped make that possible when he scored in the 22nd minute to give the Americans the lead, heading home his 52nd goal for the national team, five shy of Landon Donovan’s record.

Gyasi Zardes scored in the 65th minute, poking home a ball played across the goal mouth by Dempsey while both teams were playing with only 10 men each. Ecuador finally scored in the 74th minute, setting the stage for a nerve-racking finish.

The first goal was executed with clinical precision, and it seemed that the Americans might take an easy path to victory. With the United States forcing the action on a swift counterattack, the ball was fed back to Jermaine Jones outside the 18-yard area to the left of Ecuador’s goal, and he lifted a perfectly placed ball back into the box. Dempsey split two defenders and redirected the ball into the back corner of the goal.

“This performance tonight from him was unbelievable, obviously, in front of his home crowd,” Klinsmann said. “He is special and he deserves every compliment.”

The announced attendance was 47,322, almost all of whom appeared to be supporting the home team.

Later, the teams were reduced to 10 men each after a brief skirmish resulted in two red cards. Antonio Valencia, who plays for Manchester United, tripped Alejandro Bedoya after the whistle, igniting a minor fracas involving a number of players.

During the pushing and shoving, the referee, Wilmar Roldán of Colombia, appeared to have judged that American defender Jones had slapped Ecuador midfielder Michael Arroyo in the face.

Roldán showed Jones a red card and then presented a second yellow card to Valencia, who had also been carded in the first half. Because of the accumulation of cards, Jones, Bedoya and Bobby Wood will not be able to play in the semifinal.

“It was an absolute joke,” Klinsmann said of the ruling against Jones. “I was right there, and the fourth referee made that decision, not the referee. The referee didn’t see it. He followed the advice of the fourth official out there. It’s a disgrace, a decision like that.”

With more room to operate, the game opened up, at first for the Americans and then for Ecuador.

In the 65th minute, the Americans pushed the ball into the Ecuadorean area, with Zardes heading back down to the right of goalie Alexander Domínguez. Dempsey fought to retain possession and then sent a low shot under the left hand of Domínguez. The ball might have crossed the line for a second Dempsey goal, but Zardes was taking no chances and slotted it home.

“It’s the striker’s mentality,” Zardes said with a smile.

But in the 74th minute, Ecuador struck back with a goal off a unique set piece. The ball was placed just outside the box to the left of American goalie Brad Guzan, and it seemed that he and the rest of the United States defenders seemed to be expecting an elevated cross in front of the goal.

But instead, Walter Ayoví passed it along the ground back through the penalty area, where Arroyo drove a low shot with his right instep into the goal to Guzan’s right. Then things began to get very hectic as Enner Valencia missed a chance to equalize on a header that barely missed the goal.

“In the first half, the U.S. dominated,” the Ecuador assistant coach Luis Suárez said. “In the second half, it was all Ecuador.”

That might have been a slight exaggeration, but Ecuador was pushing the action and Klinsmann began waving his arms to pump up his players and the crowd, and then got into a shouting match with some of the Ecuadorean players along the touchline.

Things became even more chaotic in the 90th minute when the Ecuador bench became enraged at a foul call and a bottle was thrown onto the field. Quinteros, who was yelling and waving his arms frantically while running along the sideline, paid the price and was sent to the tunnel, the final indignity on a wild night.

The United States, which had played the patsy 23 years ago in Ecuador, was left on the field to celebrate and share the moment with its fans, some of whom may be too young to remember the last time their country reached this stage at the Copa América.

“This was a huge step forward tonight,” Klinsmann said.

The next step is a semifinal of a major tournament in Houston on Tuesday.


