


He cuts a striking figure in a Johnny Cash-like ensemble of black boots, black jeans, black shirt and black overcoat, but Ravi DeRossi remains enough of an unknown that customers pay no attention to him as he gives a tour of his various bars in the East Village.

There are a lot of bars, by the way. Over the course of a decade or so, Mr. DeRossi, 42, has quietly, quirkily built up an empire of 15 drinking establishments and restaurants in downtown Manhattan, mostly, as well as in Brooklyn. You could say he’s a stealth prince of the East Village, and the corner of Avenue A and East Sixth Street is his Versailles.

Roughly a decade ago, Mr. DeRossi was one of the first people “to recognize that there was a new model of bars in New York,” said David Wondrich, the author of the cocktail bible “Imbibe!”

After other entrepreneurs paved the way with spots like Milk & Honey and Employees Only, Mr. DeRossi teamed up in 2007 with a young cocktail fanatic named David Kaplan. Their Death & Company was the third bar that Mr. DeRossi built, but it was the first of his places that truly captured the spirit of the moment. Since then, Mr. DeRossi’s portfolio has expanded and his mission has changed, but his particular wedge of the East Village remains a magnet for young drinkers with disposable incomes.

Mr. DeRossi’s spots tend to have explicit alcohol-specific themes (rum, tequila, bitters) and an ambience that mirrors them. “He’s creating these worlds — he plays to these fantasies that we have,” said Leslie Pariseau, one of the authors of a new cocktail book called “Spritz.” “‘What is rum? What do we think about when we think about rum?’ If you’re looking to lose yourself in some themed world, this is a great way to do it. It’s Epcot Center but in New York.”

Lately, though, Mr. DeRossi has shifted his attention to food. On a recent Friday, he got dinner at Avant Garden, the vegan restaurant he runs a few steps away from his apartment on Seventh Street. He intends, over time, to convert all his places to vegan menus. He sampled a rice pudding and made a quizzical face.

Mr. DeRossi has a sharp eye for detail, and he does not hesitate to speak up when he notices anything awry. “He doesn’t censor himself very much,” said Daniel Kessler, a member of the band Interpol and an investor in several of Mr. DeRossi’s enterprises, including Mayahuel and Bergen Hill, which is relocating this month from Brooklyn to the East Village. “He’s going to be very direct when something’s not working. I think you have to be that way when you’re managing that many spots.”

At Mother of Pearl, a tiki hangout Mr. DeRossi owns on Avenue A, he strolled into the kitchen and began chatting with the cooks. “How’s Omar’s hand?” he asked. “Is he better? Is he going to work tomorrow? This is the second time he’s cut his finger off.”

He bit into a steamed bun with tofu, a snack that is vegan, like the entire menu at Mother of Pearl. He was not wowed. “Vegan food always needs more salt,” he said. “It needs more stuff inside. The bun overpowers the flavor.”

Like Ray Liotta’s character in “Goodfellas” navigating hidden passageways, Mr. DeRossi then slid through a swinging door into Amor y Amargo, his bar where all the libations are based on bitters. He walked up some back stairs into Cienfuegos, where the specialty is rum punch. He ambled a few yards down Sixth Street to check in on Death & Company.

As much as he seems to embody the leadership principle of management by wandering around, he brushes off any suggestion that his booming network of properties hints at the mind of an astute capitalist.

He attributes his success to dumb luck and random impulses. Although he has occasionally brought in outside investors, he tends to prefer an independent model that allows him to invest his own profits in new projects.

Unmarried and fond of casting himself as a man who values his solitude, Mr. DeRossi may act as if his accidental success makes him the opposite of Danny Meyer, but lately his ambition has been showing.

By the end of the year, he plans to have three or four new spots in Manhattan. He’s talking about opening a branch of Death & Company in Denver, and he is closing in on property in Los Angeles.

As empire builders go, though, he does very little to promote himself.

“I’ve never been on Twitter, I’ve never been on Instagram,” he said. “My company is really bad at the social media thing. We’ve got to figure that out.” Mr. Wondrich said people are “used to the Donald Trump empire builder, and he’s the antithesis.”

But it’s more than his lack of self-promotion. His personal background doesn’t necessarily hint at an aptitude for success in business. “I’ve been dumb most of my life,” Mr. DeRossi said. “I’m not going to lie.”

His Italian-sounding surname is a pseudonym; he adopted it in his 20s when he was trying to land work as an actor and didn’t want Hollywood to typecast him in convenience-store roles. (His real surname is Lalchandani. The son of immigrants from India, he grew up in Boulder, Colo.) He achieved some success as an abstract painter in his early 20s, but he’s the first to admit that he squandered a good portion of his post-collegiate years in a drunken fog.

He bounced around New Orleans, Paris and the Greek islands, and for a while in the early 2000s, he ran a deli with his mother in Boulder. His primary focus involved an unwise combination of alcohol and riding around on a Harley-Davidson that he called Jessie.

“I was blackout drunk every night,” he said. “I would drink a bottle of Jack Daniel’s every single night. I was so stupid drunk, I would stop at a red light and fall over. It was a rough time in my life.”

That dark phase hit a nadir in November 2001, when he was arrested in Santa Fe, N.M. He later pleaded no contest and was found guilty of driving under the influence.

When his family sold the deli and he found himself with a windfall, Mr. DeRossi moved to the East Village with a vague urge to get back into painting. Instead, he found himself studying the foot traffic on Seventh Street from his window above a funeral home.

He noticed that people liked bars. He liked bars, too. He decided to spend $40,000 to open one of his own, the Bourgeois Pig, because that seemed a smart way to cut out the middleman.

“I just liked to drink,” he said. “I was a big drinker. I wanted to have an income and not have to worry about selling my artwork.”

He felt at home in the bar. “I would have so much fun,” he said. “I would get wasted and wait on tables. I kind of got addicted to it. I worked 700 nights in a row.”

He has cut back on the drinking. And he has experienced something of an epiphany regarding health, environmental impact and the treatment of animals.

He has become a vegan, and after a moment of sadness and insight following the death of his cat at Christmas, he has decided that he wants the menus at all of his bars and restaurants to evolve gradually toward a vegan focus.

It’s risky, but that doesn’t seem to bother him. “Life’s a risk,” he said. “The restaurant business is like the dumbest risk in the world.” He said that food sales at Mother of Pearl had doubled since it went vegan in February.

He’s not yet sure how the vegan transformation is going to play out at his other places. Bergen Hill, for example, was originally conceived as a seafood place. “It would have to become a completely different concept with a different name,” Mr. Kessler said.

Mr. DeRossi can only insist that he’s going to continue paying close attention to the details. “Remember the rice pudding we had at Avant Garden?” he said in a phone call a few days after giving a tour of the East Village. “Gone. I can’t eat that rice pudding ever again.”


