


Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor, will discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange. The Democratic primary season has led to some grumbling from supporters of Bernie Sanders that the primary system is rigged. This week, we start on that subject, and look ahead to the California contest on June 7.

Toni Bernie Sanders has benefited from the caucus system; it’s a major reason he has been competitive. If Hillary Clinton had dominated caucuses instead of primaries, I suspect that he would have complained that caucuses were flawed — that they were less democratic than primaries and less accessible to the working class.

And if Sanders had dominated with Democrats and lost among independents, instead of the other way around, I suspect we wouldn’t be hearing calls from him to open more primaries to independents.

That’s just standard politics — any other candidate would have behaved the same way. And Sanders is far less of a finger-in-the-wind politician than many. But it goes against this general idea that his side is trying to convey: that he’s pure, that he’s above politics.

Nate I think there’s some truth to that. Along those same lines, I remember back in 2008 that Barack Obama’s support in red states was supposed to be a sign of his strength. Now Sanders supporters dismiss Clinton’s wins in red states as if they’re somehow illegitimate.

Toni There’s a graphic being shared on social media that shows how Clinton would have outgained Sanders under any system. If it had been winner-take-all for every state, the Clinton advantage would have been well over 1,000 delegates. Under the G.O.P. system, the Clinton advantage also would have been immense. Was there a pledged-delegate system anybody could have devised to allow him to win? Give super-duper credit for caucuses?

Nate I don’t think there’s any way you could construct a delegate system where Bernie Sanders would win the nomination. He lost by far too much.

Toni Minnesota recently decided on a primary over a caucus for future elections. Do you think that, as the years go by, we’ll see more primaries instead of caucuses?

Nate It’s possible. Caucuses do pose a bit of a danger to the legitimacy of the nomination process. Just about everyone agrees that actual primary elections are more democratic. At some point, a candidate is going to win a majority of pledged delegates by the margin of a huge edge in caucuses. It’ll be a big problem.

Toni Can you give an example of how reliant Sanders was on caucuses?

Nate Here’s one way to look at it: Sanders is down in the popular vote by a 14-point margin, but only down by about eight points in pledged delegates. That gap is entirely because of the caucus states: They award as many delegates as the primaries, but with only a fraction of the vote. Sanders still would have won many of these caucus states if they were primaries, but not by anywhere near the same margin.

Toni There is a perception among a lot of his followers that the election system is rigged. What about some of the examples they cite, like the Brooklyn voter purge in the New York primary?

Nate Well, I think the first thing that’s important to acknowledge is that the American election system is a disaster. It’s administered at the local level, by thousands of jurisdictions across the country. It’s often grossly underfunded. Voter registration systems are truly a mess. Put it all together, and we have a very ineffective voting system that always produces a steady stream of errors.

That said, these errors are not really signs that our elections are rigged.

With Brooklyn, the Board of Elections purged more than 100,000 voters just ahead of the election. This shouldn’t happen: Purges should happen well ahead of an election.

But did it affect the race? Not really. The people who get “purged” from voter rolls are “inactive” voters — people who haven’t voted in two straight elections and didn’t return postcards seeking to verify their address. These are generally people who moved, or have died.

I just received my first postcard from the state of Washington last week. I assume I’ll be moved to “inactive” status, since I was lazy and didn’t respond, and then I’ll eventually be removed.

So realistically, most of the people who were purged were not going to vote. They probably don’t live in Brooklyn anymore.

And the people who were purged in Brooklyn were probably likelier to be supporters of Clinton than Sanders. Brooklyn voted for Clinton by 20 points. Most inactive voters are older (after all, a 20-year-old hasn’t had the opportunity to skip two consecutive federal elections).

And, in the end, Clinton won New York by around 300,000 votes — far more than the total number of purged registrants in Brooklyn, let alone the fraction who might have voted.

Toni Another complaint was voter suppression in Arizona.

Nate Arizona really was a mess. But it looks like bad planning.

Arizona, like a lot of Western states, is transitioning to conducting most of its elections by mail. Washington, Oregon and Colorado have fully made this transition. Arizona and California are in sort of the next tier, where big majorities of voters are on permanent absentee rolls.

In the 2014 Democratic primary, more than 80 percent voted early. As in-person voting has dropped, Arizona has scaled back the number of Election Day polling places. This created a big problem in 2016: It turned out that a lot more people showed up to vote on Election Day. The lines were huge. Now, did this inconvenience a lot of voters? Yes. Was it bad election administration? Yes. Did people leave the lines? Certainly. Did it change the result? No.

The turnout was healthy — after all, most people vote absentee, and more people voted than in 2008. Clinton won by a big margin. It’s not plausible to suggest that Sanders lost anywhere near that kind of support thanks to long lines. The math just doesn’t work, given how high the turnout was and Sanders’s small four-point edge among Election Day voters.

Toni One electoral oddity our readers may not know about involves California. A lot of would-be Sanders supporters mistakenly registered with the American Independent Party. They were misled by the word “independent” in the party’s name. It turns out it’s a party whose “platform opposes abortion rights and same-sex marriage, and calls for building a fence along the entire United States border.”

Nate I don’t think many Sanders voters are hurt by the American Independent Party. Less than 3 percent of registered voters in California are members of the A.I.P., and around half are probably Republican-leaning independents, not Democratic-leaners. Of course, it’s not as if Sanders would win all of these voters. And the turnout among non-Democratic voters is always lower as well. I think it’s hard to argue this hurts him by even one percentage point.

Toni Clinton has been ahead in the polls in California. But will we get another Field poll before the election? Can you give a brief explanation of why the Field poll is so highly regarded?

Nate I don’t know whether we’ll get another Field poll, but I hope we do. It’s just one of the best polls out there: It has a long track record; it’s conducted off the state’s voter registration file (which is important generally but even more for a semi-closed primary); it’s a big sample; it’s calling enough cellphones. It checks all of the boxes.

Toni Amy Walter of the Cook Political Report wrote: “This year, the electorate will be divided along race, education/class and gender like never before. I’m preparing myself for a campaign that is going to be nasty and ugly and will leave the country more polarized than it is today. There’s nothing to be happy about there.” This truly is going to be an election of demographic division, isn’t it?

Nate If Clinton wins this election, I’m not sure whether it will involve a much greater racial divide than in 2012. But it probably will be more divided by education, at least among whites, and gender.

Toni Bill Kristol mysteriously said there would definitely be a third-party run by an “impressive” Republican. It would probably have to be someone with the name recognition of Mitt Romney to make a splash. If Romney truly believes Trump must be stopped, he might be one of the few people in the country who could do something about it. But if he ran, he probably would be foreclosing any chance of becoming president in the future. And he would be called a traitor to his party. Is talk of a G.O.P. stop-Trump movement just false hope? It’s getting very late, with some state deadlines having passed.

Nate I don’t think it’s too late, depending on the goal.

Toni For example, winning a state like Utah, and running strongly in some other states. The only realistic goal would be to stop Trump.

Nate If the goal is simply to prevent a Trump presidency, it’s definitely not too late.

[Update: Bloomberg is reporting that the mysterious candidate is David French, a National Review staff writer and Iraq war veteran.]

In recent weeks, Nate and Toni discussed Bernie Sanders’s better polling numbers against Donald Trump (and reasons to be skeptical of them), Elizabeth Warren’s prospects to be vice president and Mr. Trump’s strengths and weaknesses in various battleground states.


