


Iran’s foreign minister on Wednesday disputed suggestions that Iran now wanted access to the American financial system as part of the nuclear accord, which has not yet yielded the economic infusion that Iranians foresaw after the deal took effect in January.

But the foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, also said American officials must be “much more proactive” in assuring other countries that they could do business in Iran without risking penalties from the United States.

“We never asked to have access to your financial system,” Mr. Zarif said. “What we asked was to implement the nuclear deal, which requires the United States to allow European financial institutions to have peace of mind for dealing with Iran.”

Mr. Zarif spoke in an interview with members of The New York Times editorial board, one day after he met with Secretary of State John Kerry at the United Nations to discuss the financial complications that have now become an issue in ensuring that the nuclear accord’s intentions are fulfilled.

The agreement, reached by Iran and six world powers including the United States, eased or ended many sanctions imposed on Iran in exchange for reductions in Iranian nuclear work and verifiable guarantees that Iran’s nuclear program remains peaceful.

Despite the optimism generated by the accord, a variety of United States sanctions on Iran remain in force over other issues in the countries’ prolonged estrangement. Those sanctions include prohibitions on relationships between Iranian and American banks and severe limits on Iran’s use of the dollar.

Because many international financial transactions are conducted in dollars or converted to dollars, foreign companies interested in doing business with Iran remain wary of inadvertently violating the American rules. This reluctance has frustrated Iran and led to accusations by Iranian officials that the United States has subverted the nuclear agreement.

At the same time, critics of Iran in the United States say Iran’s accusations are an excuse for seeking additional concessions — most notably access to the American financial system that would enable Iranians to conduct transactions in dollars. Some critics contend that under such an outcome, the United States would lose all economic leverage with Iran.

While officials in the State Department and Treasury have repeatedly said that Iran will not get access to the American financial system, they have implicitly acknowledged that a problem exists.

After the meeting with Mr. Zarif on Tuesday, Mr. Kerry told reporters at the United Nations that both sides were working to ensure that “the nuclear agreement is implemented in exactly the way that it was meant to be and that all the parties to that agreement get the benefits that they are supposed to get out of the agreement.”

Mr. Kerry said the two sides intended to meet again Friday.

Mr. Zarif acknowledged that the Treasury, which oversees the complex rules of American financial sanctions, had taken steps to carry out the nuclear agreement, “but I don’t think it’s enough.”

“They need a much more proactive approach to just letting people know that they won’t be punished for dealing with Iran,” Mr. Zarif said.

During the interview, held at the residence of the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Zarif also touched on other issues, including the tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia.

President Obama raised some of those same issues on Wednesday when he met with King Salman of Saudi Arabia in Riyadh, the Saudi capital.

The Iranians and Saudis back opposite sides in the conflicts in Syria and Yemen. Iran remains furious over the deaths of many Iranian pilgrims last September during a stampede near Mecca that the Saudis have yet to fully explain. The Saudis, historically suspicious of Iran, broke diplomatic ties in January after Iranian protesters stormed the Saudi Embassy in Tehran in response to the Saudis’ execution of a prominent Shiite cleric.

Mr. Zarif held out little hope for an improvement in relations, accusing the Saudis of fabricating issues with Iran because they saw such a strategy as in their interest.


