


YARNELL, Ariz. — Ben Palm, the fire chief here, got a call on Wednesday afternoon alerting him to a fire burning on the mountains on the edge of town. Those were familiar words.

On June 28, 2013, a bolt of lightning sparked a cluster of parched brush on Yarnell Hill. Two days later, 19 firefighters were killed and half of Yarnell was destroyed by flames. It was the deadliest day in American firefighting since the Sept. 11 attacks.

For those who lived or worked in Yarnell then, there was life as it was before the deadly fire and there is life after it, forever transformed. As this week’s fire roared to life, growing tenfold in two hours, it awoke painful memories.

Flames fed on the bone-dry vegetation on the east side of town, opposite the side that burned in 2013. Sheriff’s deputies knocked on the doors of homes that stood in the fire’s path, urging residents to leave. This time, they did.

Fuel breaks carved in the vegetation after the 2013 fire stopped this week’s fire from reaching the town. Only a handful of structures had been lost by Friday. In 2013, 127 homes burned.

“We’ve learned our lesson in the hardest possible way,” Chief Palm said.

From a home in town, an emergency shelter in nearby Prescott and at the incident command post in Peeples Valley, Yarnell’s neighbor to the north, Chief Palm and four others talked about what they learned from the two fires they experienced — and what they would rather forget.

Chuck Tidey, 69, president of the Yarnell-Peeples Valley Chamber of Commerce

After the smoke cleared and the devastation of the 2013 fire came into full focus, Mr. Tidey helped pull together a group of volunteers to rebuild homes and soothe broken hearts in Yarnell. He was attending one of the group’s regular Wednesday meetings when somebody called to tell about the follow-up fire.

“I was, like, a fire? We’re still recovering from a fire,” Mr. Tidey said.

“I’m not really worried about now. I’m worried about a week or two from now. We kind of suck it up and go on. But it’s when the time passes and people start thinking about it that’s dangerous. There’s all sorts of dark feelings that bubble up, a lot of sadness. Right now, we’re just marching ahead.”

Melody Belloff, 60, a school nurse from Phoenix and volunteer for the American Red Cross

Ms. Belloff carries a picture of her brother Bob, crestfallen in front of the charred remains of the house he lost to fire 22 years ago. “It’s my reminder,” she said, “of why I do this.”

In 2013, she cared for people and pets pushed out of Yarnell by the out-of-control fire at an emergency shelter south of town. She returned this week: different fire, different shelter, same toil.

“I know that the people of Yarnell went through a very difficult time three years ago, the uncertainty of not knowing if they had a home to go back to, the loss of the firemen. I feel a little bit protective of Yarnell,” she said.

Her eyes welled.

“In Arizona, people are rugged individualists,” Ms. Belloff said. “It’s sometimes hard for them to ask for help. They like to do everything for themselves, to be self-sufficient. I’m here for whoever needs me, you know?”

Carole Ryan, 68, a nutritional counselor and longtime resident of Yarnell

Ms. Ryan’s home of 36 years, an L-shaped structure flanked by oak and mulberry trees, was turned to ashes in 2013. She was out of the country when it happened and caught the first flight home from Prague. She remembers waiting for her luggage at the airport and thinking, “This may be everything I own.”

She had her luggage and, later, found her mother’s wedding ring buried in the rubble of her house

Ms. Ryan heard about this week’s fire while at work on Wednesday. A day earlier, she had received the certificate of occupancy for the new house she built where the old one once stood.

“I got so worried about losing my new house,” she said. “This can’t be happening again.”

Ben Palm, 43, chief of the Yarnell Fire Department

Chief Palm received state and federal grants to pay for the hard work of thinning the wild vegetation on the east side of Yarnell. “The brush was so thick,” he said, “you couldn’t walk through it.”

The fire in 2013 had taken care of clearing the west side of town. The fire breaks built on the east side helped stop this week’s fire.

Yarnell is still on the mend from the damage of three years ago. Tax revenue is 25 percent lower than it was “before everything changed” in June 2013, Chief Palm said.

The fire department has four full-time employees and 15 volunteers. “Come January, I’m probably going to have to cut some of the full-timers into part-timers,” he said. “Have to make ends meet.”

Deborah Pfingston, 56, whose son, Andrew Ashcraft, was one of the 19 firefighters killed in Yarnell in 2013

If any of Ms. Pfingston’s sons ever gave her reason to worry, it was her older boy, TJ. He is a sergeant in the United States Army and has fought in Iraq and Afghanistan.

She knew there was great risk to fighting wildfires, but never imagined that Andrew — her baby, the firefighter — would be the one she would lose.

She thought, at first, that the fire in Yarnell she had heard about on the news was the one that burned three years ago.

Driving south to the command post on Friday from her home in Prescott, Ms. Pfingston watched airplanes dropping chemicals and water to slow down the flames.

She passed crew carriers just like those that carried her son and his crew, the Granite Mountain Hotshots.

“The emotions are so complicated. But they’re on it. They’re on this fire and they’re going to get it,” she said.


