


Susan Davidson, the chief executive of the Zac Posen fashion house, remembers seeing great potential in the raw, cavernous space offered for sale in a co-op conversion at 82 Greene Street in the late 1980s.

The top-floor loft in a cast iron building in the SoHo-Cast Iron Historic District, for which she and her former husband paid nearly $460,000, was once part of a textile warehouse. What it lacked in walls, fixtures and finishes, it more than made up for in industrial charm.

“It was one big open space with plywood floors,” said Ms. Davidson, who has helped run other retailers besides Zac Posen, including Scoop NYC, Liz Claiborne and DKNY Jeans.

Today the impeccably revamped loft, now a triplex of about 3,200 square feet, can easily be described as rustic chic, retaining some of its early-1870s architectural detail alongside modern conveniences. Ms. Davidson and her current husband, Allen Miller, a corporate lawyer, spent around $4 million to painstakingly transform the space with the help of the designer Todd Klein, and contracted Tyler Horsley to landscape three terraces totaling around 1,100 square feet with plants, flowers and fruit-bearing trees.

But the couple now plan to move to an even older home — a late-1830s house on 30 acres in the Hudson Valley, where entire fruit orchards can be harvested. They are putting the loft, unit No. 5F, just off Spring Street, up for sale. The asking price is $11.75 million, according to Rebecca Edwardson and Bonnie Chajet of Warburg Realty, who are listing the apartment.

The monthly maintenance is an unusually low $1,592, reflecting the co-op building’s paid-off mortgage. (Ms. Davidson also noted that the five-story structure underwent an extensive renovation about five years ago that included new windows and a roof.)

The home has three bedrooms, three baths and six skylights. The first level — with dark-stained oak floors, 13-foot ceilings and original wood columns — is entered through double doors with a glass transom just off a semiprivate elevator landing where potted kumquat and lemon trees greet visitors.

The foyer flows into a gallery and a spacious dining room with a connected sitting area — a space where numerous parties have been held, including fund-raisers attended by Hillary Clinton and other dignitaries. The chef’s kitchen, separated with pocket doors, has marble countertops and high-end appliances, including two Miele dishwashers.

Nearby is a marble bath that leads to a sizable dressing area and a walk-in closet, where Ms. Davidson keeps her extensive collection of shoes, handbags and designer frocks, many from Zac Posen.

The 31-by-16-foot living room, with three oversize windows overlooking the cobblestone Greene Street, has a wood-burning fireplace with a carved marble mantel brought back from the Porte de Clignancourt flea market in Paris. Modern and antique furnishings mingle throughout, among them: mid-18th-century bull’s-eye Regency mirrors, a Christian Liaigre dining table, a Biedermeier table and chairs, and an 1840 Steinway baby grand piano. (Mr. Miller is the one who plays.)

A spiral staircase of raw steel connects the other two floors. The second level, with exposed wood beams and built-in cabinetry, is made up of a library/TV room and an en-suite bedroom, separated by a wall of steel and glass.

The third-floor master suite connects to the three terraces, which offer cityscape views, and includes a walk-in closet and a tucked-away washer/dryer. It features a bathroom of polished concrete that leads out to a smaller terrace with a hot tub. “We use it every night — rain or snow,” Ms. Davidson said.

There are two bedrooms in the suite, including one currently used by Mr. Miller as an office. Both rooms have access to another small terrace as well as the largest outdoor space, a 49-by-15-foot terrace adorned with an assortment of climbing white roses, impatiens, arborvitae and hydrangea, as well as weeping cherry, pear, apple and ficus trees, to name just a few of the plantings.

“It’s a very tranquil place,” Mr. Miller said, adding that he would miss the garden and the light-filled rooms.

Ms. Davidson said she especially enjoyed having a ready supply of fruit for pies and crumbles.

Among the distinctive features on the third floor are the original steel beams that line the walls. They were put in place years ago to hold up the original wooden water tank that still sits atop the building’s roof but is no longer functioning.

Though the couple are making plans to move out, they say they likely won’t be leaving the neighborhood entirely. They also own another SoHo loft, which they are currently renting out, and may eventually use that apartment as a pied-à-terre.


