


The two pilots had to trust each other. In more than two decades of aerobatic performances, they would turn loops in the air and swoop down low enough to fly just a few yards above the ground. In some maneuvers, their wings would be inches from each other, all while crowds of people watched from below.

“I knew every move he was going to make, and vice versa,” William Segalla said of his longtime flying partner, William Gordon, who together formed the Iron Eagles Aerobatic Team. The men traveled throughout North and South America for performances with their Christen Eagle biplanes.

“You’ve got to have a certain bond with each other,” Mr. Segalla, 55, said, “and we had that. We had that.”

Mr. Gordon, who first trained as a pilot in the late 1980s, could fly aerobatic planes and helicopters, and, in recent years, he had taken an interest in so-called warbirds, vintage military aircraft, like the P-47 Thunderbolt he was flying on Friday night when it crashed into the Hudson River.

The World War II vintage plane, which had been flying alongside two other planes as part of a promotional photo shoot, plunged into the river around 7:30 p.m., a few miles south of the George Washington Bridge, near the Manhattan shoreline. Mr. Gordon’s body was recovered by police divers a few hours later on Friday night.

An Army Corps of Engineers ship equipped with a crane was dispatched to the crash site and pulled the P-47 Thunderbolt, which belonged to the American Airpower Museum in Farmingdale, N.Y., from the water on Saturday, appearing largely intact. The cause of the crash remains under investigation.

On Saturday, Mr. Gordon, 56, was remembered as a careful yet versatile pilot. Friends said he found his way to flying somewhat by accident, but once he did, he became an expert, reading voraciously about the subject and becoming a skilled mechanic.

Mr. Gordon was scheduled to fly this weekend in the Bethpage Air Show, a two-day event at Jones Beach on Long Island that in past years has attracted more than 300,000 people. He was set to fly the Thunderbolt as part of an exhibition celebrating the 75th anniversary of the plane, a single-seat fighter plane prized for being able stay in the air even after being battered in combat.

“The pilot was a friend to us all and we send our deepest sympathy to his family and our friends at the American Air Power Museum,” the organizers of the Bethpage Air Show said in a statement posted on the event’s website. The show would “continue as planned, but with heavy hearts.”

On a warm Saturday afternoon near the museum in Farmingdale, six vintage aircrafts flew overhead in a V shape, performing a so-called missing man formation in a tribute to Mr. Gordon, who flew warbirds for the museum. On a second pass, the center plane broke away from the others, leaving behind a trail of white smoke. One by one, the others took off in different directions, their white smoke trails intersecting against a blue sky.

Mr. Gordon, who had worked in construction for decades, retired about five years ago, friends said, and turned his focus toward aviation. He has two adult children, and in recent years, he remarried. His wife died of cancer last year. Friends said that Mr. Gordon was in the process of moving to Key West, Fla., and taking over an aviation-related business.

Another pilot, Dan Dameo, who met Mr. Gordon about 20 years ago, acknowledged that his friend might have looked tough — he was quiet and muscular, with a mustache that curled downward. “But when you knew him,” Mr. Dameo, 79, said, “he was a gentle lamb.”

“He never bragged,” he added. “He never boasted.”

Mr. Segalla said he immediately felt a kinship with Mr. Gordon soon after they met in the 1970s; they both went by Bill, they both had sons who went by Bill and they were both in construction. And that was before they started flying together.

“Believe it or not, it was on a whim,” Mr. Segalla said of how his friend started flying. “A guy bet him he could never get his pilot’s license. He’s the type of guy who, if someone said he couldn’t do it, he did it.”

But he was anything but capricious when it came to flying. The two men trained for two years before they started their acrobatic performances, and, Mr. Segalla added, he was fastidious about safety. (They disbanded the Iron Eagles about two years ago.)

“A lot of people call us stunt pilots,” Mr. Segalla said. “We’re pilots who have trained and trained to do these things until we felt comfortable enough to bring it in front of a crowd.”

Mr. Gordon also spent several years as the chief pilot of the Old Rhinebeck Aerodrome in Red Hook, N.Y., which describes itself as a living museum that features vintage aircraft dating back to the pioneer era of aviation. Over the years, he logged plenty of time flying fighter planes from World War I and World War II.

His friends said he knew the risks that flying entailed, particularly when performing daring maneuvers. “He would still go in and do it,” Mr. Segalla said, “just because it was his passion.”


