


MIAMI — David Wright went into the 2016 season with a lot of anxious looks being cast in his direction. At 33, could he still be a productive player as he dealt with the fact that he has spinal stenosis? Or was he inevitably headed toward a diminished role on the field and perhaps an injury retirement long before his contract with the Mets expires at the end of the 2020 season?

None of that anxiety abated during the first two months of this season as Wright struggled to hit for average, struck out an inordinate amount of times and, in the field at third base, made repeated submarine-style throws to first that suggested he could no longer throw the ball the way he wanted to.

And now, the concern over his physical condition has only deepened, with the Mets announcing Friday that Wright, as expected, is going on the disabled list with a herniated disk in his neck and will avoid any baseball activity for the next six to eight weeks in an attempt to alleviate the situation.

That timetable suggests that Wright will not be available to the Mets until August at the earliest, which would be after the July 31 trading deadline. Wright flew to California on Friday instead of joining the team in South Florida and was expected to visit with a doctor who has been addressing his condition. From the Mets’ point of view, none of this is good.

“We were talking the other day about the 15-day, so it’s pretty shocking to hear about the length of time,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said as the team prepared to play the Marlins on Friday night. In light of the latest negative development for Wright, his team captain, Collins still expressed confidence that Wright would play again this season.

“It’s going to be tough,” Collins said. “We’ve got to pick it up, certainly, in the clubhouse. His leadership off the field is second to none. We need to pick that part of it up and just hope he gets better, just hope he gets through this.”

In contrast to Collins’s understandable prediction that Wright will return this season, the team’s front office cannot afford to be that optimistic.

So will the Mets, in effect, seek a capable replacement for Wright on the trade market while he is still being treated and before the trade deadline arrives? That would create a lot of awkwardness because of Wright’s stature with the team: He is the only long-term star in franchise history who has been a Met and only a Met. But with a shot at going back to the postseason for a second straight year, the Mets may do what they feel they must to compete.

Wright has a .296 career average with the Mets, but this season, in 37 games, he hit just .226, with 55 strikeouts in 137 at-bats. His only saving grace at the plate was that he was drawing a lot of walks, which left him with a respectable .350 on-base percentage.

In his absence, at least for now, the Mets will give Wilmer Flores a chance to be the everyday third baseman.

“Well, obviously, you don’t ever want anybody to get hurt, but it happened — and since I got here, I’ve been waiting for an opportunity, and it’s an opening,” said Flores, who entered Friday’s game with a .167 batting average this season in limited action. “Knowing that you can be in the lineup every day, it changes everything, because it’s something that I’ve done a lot, and I know what to do. And so it’s definitely going to be easier for me to find my way out there.”

If Flores does not provide enough offense — although Wright was not generating all that much to begin with — the Mets could look at promoting the 22-year-old Dilson Herrera, a top prospect, from the minor leagues, and installing him at second, where he played a modest amount for the Mets in 2014 and 2015. They could then move the veteran second baseman Neil Walker to third, where he has experience, although not a lot.

“I haven’t played third or first in six or seven years, so I think that transition, I could do it, but it wouldn’t be the easiest transition,” said Walker, who has a solid first season for the Mets in the field and at the plate. “I’d need to get a lot of early work and brush the rust off, but I’m willing to do what it takes to help this team win.”

Other moves involving Mets minor leaguers are possible, too. Meanwhile, Wright will presumably be trying to find a way to become part of the mix again, too. But can he?

INSIDE PITCH

In his first start since being ejected last Saturday for throwing a pitch behind Chase Utley of the Los Angeles Dodgers, Noah Syndergaard held the Miami Marlins to two runs over seven innings as the Mets rallied for a 6-2 victory.

Syndergaard struck out nine batters, improving to 6-2 on the season and helping end a three-game winning streak by Miami. Marcell Ozuna’s solo homer in the bottom of the second was the only real damage against him.

“Noah pitched another great game,” Terry Collins said. “I was really anxious to see how he was going to do after he pitched just a couple of days ago.

“He was very good and that last pitch to Dietrich was electric,” Collins continued, referring to a swinging strikeout by Marlins second baseman Derek Dietrich that ended the bottom of the seventh with runners on second and third base.

The Mets got home runs from shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera, a solo shot in the top of the fourth; James Loney, whose two-run blast in the top of the seventh broke a 2-2 tie; and a two-run shot by catcher Rene Rivera in the top of the ninth.

“That’s huge, especially with Duda and the unfortunate news about David today,” Syndergaard said of the Mets’ offensive performance. “That’s the thing about us, the ability to pick up one another. I feel like we were able to go out there and handle a lot of adversity and to be able to pick each other up. It’s a great thing to be a part of, and I really feel like we’re going to really take off from here.”


