


When she tired of her rented five-story walk-up in Manhattan, Ava Volandes spent two years hunting for a one-bedroom co-op to buy. In 2002, she bought a one-bedroom in a postwar tower on East 17th Street near Gramercy Park for around $350,000.

A few years later, she met Alex Tavantzis, an actor who primarily uses his stage name, Alex Tavis. She knew his second cousin. They married in 2008.

Mr. Tavis moved into her place. He then rented out his alcove studio in a co-op building on West 34th Street, which he and his parents had bought in 2004 for $210,000, before selling it two and a half years ago for $393,000.

The couple, now in their 40s, had two sons. They gave the children the bedroom and created a makeshift bedroom for themselves in the living room.

For years, they discussed with their next-door neighbor the idea of buying his one-bedroom to combine with theirs. The neighbor, who had grandchildren who visited, was willing to sell if he could buy a larger unit elsewhere in the building.

Meanwhile, the couple also watched for two-bedrooms there. One became available on a low floor, facing the noisy Third Avenue side of the building. “We are a family that likes to open up our windows a lot,” said Ms. Volandes Tavantzis, who works in the nonprofit field.

They kept their eye on a family with three children. “Of course they’re going to move,” she said. They stayed put.

The couple hoped to stay put, too, because they knew and loved the building, the neighbors and the neighborhood. But when nothing suitable arose, they set a budget of around $1.2 million and went apartment-shopping. Hunting on the Upper East and West Sides for a pet-friendly building with a doorman and an elevator, they found only low floors and air shaft views.

“We were all over the map, because we were looking for a place that didn’t particularly exist,” Ms. Volandes Tavantzis said. “If we had unlimited resources, sure, we could get a three-bedroom.” But in the neighborhoods they preferred, $1.2 million didn’t go far enough.

A two-family house with rental income seemed like a reasonable idea, so they checked out a two-family detached house in Ditmas Park, Brooklyn, for almost $1.7 million.

They visited on a hot summer day. The air grew cooler as they climbed the stairs, which they feared meant an enormous cooling bill. It probably would: The seller said heating and cooling the two units cost him $6,000 a year. But even with the prospect of rental income, they couldn’t afford the place. The house sold for $1.455 million.

Later, in Flatbush, they visited a well-maintained brick single-family rowhouse on Bedford Avenue. It was on Ms. Volandes Tavantzis’ old turf, just three blocks from her alma mater, Midwood High School. The asking price was $745,000.

“It was a super-sleepy neighborhood that hadn’t changed since I was there,” she said. “There were no supermarkets around.” They made an offer, but the house went to someone with a better financial situation for $785,500.

Still hoping to remain in their Gramercy neighborhood, the couple looked at a postwar building where friends had converted a big two-bedroom into a three-bedroom. But two-bedrooms there were too expensive. One-bedrooms, with around 850 square feet, were too small to convert.

During the hunt, Mr. Tavis checked the real estate website Brick Underground daily. Last summer, he read a post that mentioned Concord Village, a seven-building complex, constructed about 1950, in Downtown Brooklyn. A 900-square-foot two-bedroom there was listed for $675,000.

“Any place that big and for that price, something’s wrong,” Ms. Volandes Tavantzis declared.

But Mr. Tavis went to see it and reported back: The apartments, in their own little pocket across from the on-off ramps to the Brooklyn Bridge, were spacious. The two units he saw — one already in contract and one in bad shape — weren’t feasible, but prices there did indeed seem reasonable across the board.

Along came another listing for a Concord Village apartment for $789,000, with monthly maintenance of just under $1,100. “I saw two humongous bedrooms,” Ms. Volandes Tavantzis said.

Their attempt to buy their neighbor’s place was going nowhere. Instead, they sold their Manhattan place for $685,000 to the neighbor, who himself wished to combine the units. “He waited us out,” Ms. Volandes Tavantzis said.

The couple closed on the Concord Village place in late fall, paying the asking price. During the walk-through, she was worried. “What am I doing?” she asked herself. “I opened up the window waiting to hear the worst traffic in the world. And it was white noise.”

The couple spent around $45,000 on renovations, turning the galley kitchen into an open one, refinishing the floors, redoing the bathroom and upgrading the electricity.

The children have space to run around indoors, and the family can now entertain more than a handful of people. Visitors assume that their dining table is new, because it seems small. But it’s just that it seemed enormous in their old place.

“If you look inside the apartment you think you are in SoHo, but if you look outside you know you are in Concord Village,” Mr. Tavis said. Some common areas are “a little dingy,” he said, “but they are working on that.”

The building, less polished than their old one, is also less formal. The other day, Ms. Volandes Tavantzis said, the doorman took her younger son, a toddler, by the hand and walked him down the stairs. “There is a community kind of feel here that just blew me away,” she said.


