


The woman who walks the most famous turtle in New York City reported for duty at his home in Harlem on Monday afternoon.

He had left her a large present in the apartment hall and was leaving another in the kitchen.

“Thank you, buddy,” Amalia McCallister said to Henry, the African spurred tortoise, also known as the Notortoise BIG on his Facebook and Instagram accounts. “I really love that.”

Ms. McCallister, who recently beat out hundreds of people to make $10 an hour cleaning up after a reptile the size of a roasting pan, was unfazed. She swabbed Henry with baby wipes, rubbed turtle conditioner into his bumpy shell and pointed him toward the door.

Henry, surprisingly agile for a 17-pound tortoise, raced for the exit. Ms. McCallister locked the door behind him and carried him down two flights, mindful of his legs, armored with spiky scales, and the possibility that he would soil her long blue dress.

Under the stairs were two strollers. Ms. McCallister pulled out the one with the label “For pets only.”

“This one is his,” she said.

Dogs, it turns out, are not the only pets that crave outdoor exercise. Henry’s owner, Amanda Green, a copywriter for the lifestyle site Refinery29, used to take him to Central Park only on weekends, but he was tearing up her place. “He scratched all over the hallway walls,” Ms. Green said. “I knew he was pacing the hallway all day long while I was out, and I started feeling really bad.”

So in March, she placed a Craigslist ad seeking “a responsible animal lover” to take Henry to the park on weekdays. “Henry can roam freely under your watchful eye,” it said. “No tortoise experience necessary.” An avalanche of media attention ensued.

Applications poured in from around the world. Ms. McCallister, 24, a former art student who works at Petland Discounts a few blocks away, got the job.

Monday was her second solo walk with Henry. She tucked him facing backward into the stroller. “I try to keep him turned round so he doesn’t get too excited,” she said. “But he turns himself around.”

They got only one block down St. Nicholas Avenue before being stopped by the police.

“Hi!” said an officer who jumped out of her van to greet Henry. She looked through the mesh window of the stroller. Henry stuck a leg through a hole he had made.

Ms. McCallister pushed the stroller along. Two more blocks to the park. Henry stuck his head out of the hole, like a dog in a car with the window rolled down.

Darrell Johnson, sipping a soda in the plaza by the park, called out, “Is he a boy or a girl?” Boy, Ms. McCallister said. “Where’s the woman at?” asked Mr. Johnson, 50. “How are we gonna make more little turtles?” He offered to hold a sign seeking a girlfriend for Henry.

Inside the park, sunbathers gathered on the bank of the Harlem Meer and mallards splashed in the water. Ms. McCallister chose a quieter spot, a lush lawn by the wall at 110th Street.

“The way you can tell where’s a good spot for Henry is if there are weeds or dandelions,” she said. “Because there’s no pesticides there, so he can eat the grass. He also really loves to eat dandelions. It’s like a field full of French fries for him.”

She set him on the lawn, where he spent the next two hours avidly devouring grass, broadleaf plantain, sweet clover. Ms. McCallister presented him with a small bouquet of dandelions: a feast offering.

Everyone who walked by did at least a double take. Visitors grew more frequent after schools let out.

“It’s a turtle!” Stacy Burroughs said to her 3-year-old nieces, Sophia and Grace Burroughs.

“If you want,” Ms. McCallister said. “you can touch the shell.”

The girls balked, but their aunt stepped up gamely. “I’ll touch the shell,” Ms. Burroughs said. “It’s nice and cool.”

Henry’s curiosity gets him in trouble sometimes. Ms. McCallister texted Ms. Green: “There were some mushrooms hiding under some grass that Henry got to. I stopped him, but I think he got like one bite of one. Should I be worried?”

“We’ll keep an eye on him,” Ms. Green wrote back.

More young children and their caretakers dropped by. “Are turtles slower than tortoises?” asked Louis Sclafani, age 5¾. Ms. McCallister confessed she wasn’t sure.

Soon it was time to wheel Henry home. Ms. McCallister said that so far, she found the job very much to her liking. “I think it’s really important if you live in New York to get out in nature,” she said. “I’d love to do more things like this, taking people’s weird pets out.”

At the apartment, Henry ambled off to the bedroom, where Ms. Green keeps a little blanket set atop a heating pad on the floor. “I think he’s passed out for sure,” Ms. McCallister said.

Indeed. Henry sat on the heating pad, head toward the wall, motionless. You could imagine him dreaming of dandelions.


