


VERO BEACH, FLA.

WHAT: A waterfront contemporary with three bedrooms and three bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $2,250,000

SIZE: Approximately 2,700 square feet in the main house and 400 square feet in the outbuilding

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $726

SETTING: Vero Beach is a coastal city in Central Florida, about 100 miles from Orlando. The city straddles the mainland and a barrier island across the Intracoastal Waterway. This house is on the island side, in a beachfront neighborhood where the housing is a mix of midcentury design and large new construction. The house is on Bethel Creek, which connects to the Waterway about two blocks away, and within a mile of the beach, shopping and dining, and the city’s art museum.

INDOORS: The clean-lined contemporary was built in 2012. A concrete structure clad in stucco, dark brick and cedar, it was designed by Sanders Pace Architecture of Knoxville, Tenn., the winner of several awards from the American Institute of Architects on the state and regional levels, including three for this house.

The floor plan is L-shaped and open plan, cradling a front courtyard. Ceilings are 10 feet tall almost everywhere except the living area, where the height is 22 feet. Walls of windows and sliding glass doors on opposing walls of the living area give the space a gallery-like feel, with views of the Waterway and access to a patio and dock. Floors on the first floor are polished concrete. The custom cherry cabinets throughout were made by Forrest Forms of Vero Beach. The door hardware and hinges are concealed, for a clean, seamless look.

The kitchen’s extensive custom storage is made of Parapan, a solid acrylic. The countertops are Corian; the stainless-steel appliances are mostly Thermador and Sub-Zero. The floor between the island and the range is cork, to give the cook’s feet a break from the polished concrete. The lighting and window shades can be operated by a tablet or a phone.

The wall of glass continues from the living area into the master bedroom, which is partitioned off by two 10-foot pocket doors. The bedroom is part of a suite with a dressing area with extensive closets, shelves and drawers, and a bathroom with a glass-enclosed shower and a double vanity.

The other first-floor bedroom also has an en-suite bathroom. The third bedroom is in the loft overlooking the living room, which is reached by an open staircase with cast concrete treads. Here, the floor is ipe wood, while the wall conceals a remote-controlled Murphy bed made by Zoom-Room. This bedroom also has an en-suite bathroom.

The property has a free-standing structure used as a workshop, and a two-car garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about a half-acre, with a dock, and a waterfront yard shaded by a massive old-growth live oak.

TAXES: $16,177 in 2015

CONTACT: Jane Schwiering and Lucy Hendricks, Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Florida Realty, (772) 473-6048 / (772) 559-8812; bhhsfloridarealty.com

•

FRANKLIN, TENN.

WHAT: A Neoclassical house with three bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms, a three-bedroom log cabin and a banquet hall

HOW MUCH: $2,250,000

SIZE: 4,985 square feet in the main house, about 12,000 square feet overall

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $188

SETTING: Franklin is a city about 20 miles south of Nashville. This house is a few miles from Franklin’s downtown, a historic district lined with low-lying brick buildings, cobblestone streets and brick sidewalks, cozy bars and an Art Deco theater. Between this property and downtown are a golf course and a Civil War battlefield, now a park.

INDOORS: The white brick house, built in 1835, is on the National Register of Historic Places. Most of the interior is original, including oak and pine floors, brass door hardware and several fireplaces. Other features, like ornate chandeliers in the common rooms and Tennessee marble in the bathrooms, were selected to complement the original design.

The proportions in the common rooms are grand, with 12-foot ceilings in the living room, the dining room and the library, all of which are more than 350 square feet in size and have large pocket doors to close them off from the spacious entry hall. Many of the rooms have egg-and-dart molding, possibly added during a 1905 renovation; double doors in the dining room open to the porch.

The kitchen has exposed brick walls and ceiling joists, features discovered during renovations that began about 10 years ago. Among the room’s updated appliances is an old-fashioned-looking cast-iron AGA stove. Most other appliances are hidden behind extensive wood cabinetry, which continues into the butler’s pantry. Off the kitchen is a family room.

Bedrooms are upstairs. The master is part of a suite with a dressing area with a walk-in closet that makes use of hardwoods recycled from other parts of the house. Three additional bedrooms are in an 1833 log cabin about 20 feet from the main house, the interior of which is almost entirely original, preserved over the years. Also on the property is a banquet hall with a den, a smokehouse and a carriage house now used as a workshop.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is about six and a half acres, manicured and landscaped, with a pool. A fence runs along the perimeter, part of which is dotted with oaks.

TAXES: $10,707 in 2015

CONTACT: Donnel Milam, the Milam Group at Fridrich & Clark Realty, (615) 400-4211; themilamgroup.com

•

SALT LAKE CITY

WHAT: A house with four bedrooms and five and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $2,250,000

SIZE: 7,169 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $314

SETTING: This 1924 house is in a section called the Avenues, just outside downtown Salt Lake City. Named for its neat, grid-like plan, the neighborhood is one of the oldest in the city, known for its eclectic mix of Queen Annes, Craftsman bungalows and other examples of early 20th-century architecture. Bars and restaurants, ranging from Tibetan to American gastro pub, are within a few blocks.

INDOORS: The stucco house, a neat, orderly take on a storybook cottage, was designed by Georgius Young Cannon, a Salt Lake City architect whose designs include renovations to the Beehive House, where Brigham Young once lived.

The interior is defined by raked-concrete ceilings and walls, barrel-vaulted ceilings, dark woodwork and arched doorways, all original to the house. The leaded-glass windows and solid wood doors are original, too.

The house faces west, with views of the sunset, downtown and the state capitol.

The living room has a wall of dark-wood shelves, as well as a wood-burning fireplace. Doors open to a deck. The floors in most of the house are dark wood, matching the doors, trim and window frames. Updates occurred within the last 10 years.

The kitchen has a wall of windows facing the yard. The stainless-steel appliances include a hidden Sub-Zero drawer. The tiles on the range’s backsplash were salvaged from a monastery in France. The antique sconces are from Karla Katz Antiques in New Orleans. Glass doors open to a cutting garden with roses and peonies in front of the house. The first floor also has a sunroom with a brick floor and a wood-burning stove.

Two bedrooms, including the master suite, are on the first floor. The master bedroom has a fireplace and a barrel-vaulted ceiling, and opens to the back deck. A third bedroom is on the second floor, and the fourth in what was once the attic, with dormer windows and plenty of sun. The basement is fully finished, with an exercise room, a playroom, a family room and an art room, as well as a wine vault.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is a little more than a half-acre, with a tiered garden and stone paths leading to a broad backyard with a large Japanese maple.

TAXES: Approximately $13,400 a year

CONTACT: Cody Derrick, cityhomeCollective, (801) 718-5555; cityhomecollective.com


