


Tom Brady’s lawyers asked a federal appeals court in New York for a new hearing before an expanded panel of judges, arguing on Monday that it was not just a silly dispute over underinflated footballs — it was the basic right to a fair process that was shared by all union workers.

Setting the stage for the Deflategate scandal to stretch into its third season, and putting Brady’s four-game suspension back in the hands of the courts, the players’ union asked the 13 judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit to hear the case that a three-judge panel decided in the league’s favor.

In the appeal filed Monday, Brady’s lawyers said that Commissioner Roger Goodell’s “biased, agenda-driven and self-approving appeal ruling must be vacated.”

Brady was initially suspended four games in what Goodell said was an illegal scheme to use improperly inflated footballs in the 2015 A.F.C. championship game. The suspension was overturned by a federal judge on the eve of last season, but a circuit court panel ruled last month that Goodell was within the rights granted to him by the collective bargaining agreement.

FITZPATRICK WANTS TO RETURN TO JETS The free-agent quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick, locked in a contract stalemate with the Jets, said he wanted to return to the team and had no plans to retire.

Fitzpatrick said he “would like to be back,” according to ESPN and The New York Post.

Fitzpatrick, 33, appeared to be a certainty to re-sign at the start of free agency in March, but he and the Jets have been unable to agree on financial terms.

Two days after the first loss of his career, the Kentucky Derby winner Nyquist developed a slight fever, leaving plans temporarily in limbo for a rematch with the Preakness winner Exaggerator in the Belmont Stakes in New York.

Jack Sisterson, an assistant to Nyquist’s trainer, Doug O’Neill, said blood work on the horse had been done “to make sure nothing is going on.”

Nyquist finished third behind Exaggerator in the Preakness on Saturday.

Nyquist was scheduled to be shipped to Belmont Park on Monday, but the plan was scrapped when he had a temperature of 102 degrees.

Josef Newgarden flipped the script by posting the fastest lap in the final full practice for the Indianapolis 500 in Indiana.

Less than 24 hours after losing the pole to James Hinchcliffe, Newgarden turned a lap of 227.414 miles per hour.

Only one practice session on Friday remains before Sunday’s 100th running of the race.

Haris Seferovic scored to keep Eintracht Frankfurt in the Bundesliga with a 1-0 win at Nuremberg in the second leg of their end-of-season playoff.

Seferovic’s 66th-minute strike gave Frankfurt a 2-1 win aggregate victory and left Nuremberg, which placed third in the second division, without top-flight soccer for at least another season. The first leg was a 1-1 draw.

Pittsburgh starter Ryan Vogelsong was carted off the field after being struck in the head by a pitch during the second inning of a 6-3 home win over the Colorado Rockies.

With the bases loaded and the Pirates leading, 1-0, Rockies starter Jordan Lyles hit Vogelsong in the left cheek with a 92-m.p.h. fastball. Vogelson was making his second start of the season, filling in because of a rainout on Sunday.

The Pirates later said he was admitted to a hospital with injuries to his left eye, and the team expected to receive an update on his condition Tuesday.

SUZUKI WIELDS A HOT BAT Ichiro Suzuki had four hits, including a single in Miami’s two-run eighth inning, and the host Marlins rallied past the Tampa Bay Rays, 7-6.

Suzuki, 42, has 10 hits in the past three games to raise his batting average to .417 (25 for 60) and increase his career hit total to 2,960.

PUJOLS HITS ONE Albert Pujols hit a two-run home run, the 569th of his career, as the visiting Los Angeles Angels beat the Texas Rangers, 2-0.

Pujols’s home run, in the third inning, tied him for 12th in career homers with Rafael Palmeiro.

DARVISH NEARS RETURN Texas starter Yu Darvish, nearing his first start in nearly 22 months, is expected to start for the Rangers in Saturday night’s home game against Pittsburgh after five rehab outings this month.

Darvish, a right-hander from Japan, last pitched in a major league game on Aug. 9, 2014, and then missed the end of that season with right elbow inflammation. He had more problems the next spring and had Tommy John surgery on March 17, 2015.

INJURY LIST The Royals placed the All-Star outfielder Alex Gordon on the 15-day disabled list with a fractured right wrist. The Rangers’ five-time All-Star outfielder Josh Hamilton will miss the entire season for more surgery on his left knee. The Indians placed reliever Joba Chamberlain on the 15-day D.L. with a strained left chest muscle.

The two-time Olympic pole vault champion Yelena Isinbayeva said she would file a lawsuit if Russia’s ban from global track and field competition was upheld and she was barred from competing in Rio de Janeiro.

Russia’s athletics federation was suspended by the International Association of Athletics Federations after a World Anti-Doping Agency commission report detailed systemic state-sponsored doping. The I.A.A.F. was to rule next month on whether to reinstate Russia ahead of the Games.

The University of Texas football team said a new longhorn steer mascot, Bevo XV, had been selected and would be introduced at the season opener against Notre Dame on Sept. 4.

University officials had to select a new mascot after Bevo XIV died in October 2015. He had been on the Texas sideline since 2004.

TWO FORGO N.B.A. DRAFT Xavier forward Trevon Bluiett, the Musketeers’ leading scorer during the past two seasons, withdrew from consideration for the N.B.A. draft and will return for his junior season.

Also, Nevada forward Cameron Oliver, who set a Wolf Pack record with 99 blocks, the most in a season by a freshman in Mountain West Conference history, decided to return for his sophomore season.


