


A former operator of flophouses who was profiled in an investigation last year by The New York Times is facing additional criminal charges that he defrauded tenants and illegally evicted them, prosecutors said.

Yury Baumblit, 65, and an assistant, Edwin Elie, 42, were arraigned in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn on Wednesday on felony charges of scheming to defraud and misdemeanor charges of unlawful eviction and criminal contempt. The most serious charges against them could result in up to four years in prison.

For years, Mr. Baumblit, whose company was called Back on Track, ran so-called three-quarter houses, seen as something between regulated halfway houses and actual homes, that cater to addicts, poor people and the mentally ill. The unregulated homes are typically crammed with bunk beds, and are often run-down, with mold, blocked exits and bed bugs. After The Times’s investigation, New York City formed a task force to crack down on the homes, which have multiplied in recent years.

On Wednesday, the Brooklyn district attorney, Ken Thompson, accused Mr. Baumblit and Mr. Elie of not having the necessary court orders when they evicted more than 10 residents who had lived in the homes for more than a month. Mr. Baumblit and Mr. Elie were accused of putting residents’ belongings outside, removing their mattresses, breaking stoves and locking the doors to prevent people from getting inside — actions also documented by The Times.

“These defendants are charged with taking advantage of vulnerable New Yorkers who were in need of assistance,” Mr. Thompson said. “They provided them with the opposite — allegedly evicting these tenants unlawfully.”

Mr. Baumblit also required tenants to attend certain outpatient treatment centers to be able to live in his network of homes, according to former residents and employees. In a separate case brought by the New York State attorney general’s office, Mr. Baumblit and his wife, Rimma, were indicted in May on money laundering and Medicaid fraud charges, because the outpatient providers were suspected of paying companies run by the Baumblits more than $2 million in Medicaid kickbacks in return for clients. Those charges are punishable by up to 15 years in prison. Mr. Elie was not charged in that case.

Both Mr. Baumblit and Mr. Elie pleaded not guilty on Wednesday. Mr. Baumblit remained in jail on a $500,000 bond, or $300,000 cash, for the attorney general’s charges. Mr. Elie was freed on bail.

“As for Mr. Elie, the charges against him are baseless,” said Howard Tanner, Mr. Elie’s lawyer. “I think the facts when they come out will show that he is not guilty.”

A lawyer for Mr. Baumblit did not respond to a message seeking comment.


