


Across New York City’s 520-mile shoreline, shimmering towers are replacing docklands and warehouses and factories. In barely a decade, “On the Waterfront” has given way to “Miami Vice.” But as these areas foster much-needed housing and a renewed connection to the water, much of their character, traditions and jobs are lost.

What if the city did not have to choose? Imagine a 21st-century factory floating above shops and promenades, with a tower of apartments for the working-class and well-off cascading dozens of stories above — vertical integration of a very different sort.

It used to be that people lived over the shop. Now, as more crowd into New York, the de Blasio administration wants to marry housing and manufacturing once again. And while developers are typically the ones tearing down old plants for new apartments, a number of the city’s top builders are lining up for the chance to combine them, on an almost five-acre site on the waterfront in Long Island City, Queens.

If successful, these projects, along with a novel set of design guidelines created by the city, could shape new developments in old industrial neighborhoods from the South Bronx to Sunset Park, Brooklyn, and Staten Island’s North Shore.

“I think we’re all drawn to interesting industrial buildings with interesting things going on inside,” Alicia Glen, the deputy mayor for housing and economic development, said last week outside a hulking, rust-splotched warehouse on 44th Road in Long Island City. She glanced a few blocks east past more tumbledown buildings to the Citigroup tower, a sentinel for decades, now one among many. In the other direction, the view toward the waterfront was filled with those Fort Lauderdale familiars, sleek towers studded with balconies, stuffed with yoga studios and wine shops.

“It could be anywhere,” Ms. Glen said. “It’s not what’s cool about this neighborhood. It’s not what built this neighborhood, what built New York.”

As oil refineries and brickworks have been replaced by less noxious artists, artisans and entrepreneurs, property values have jumped. Residential rents in Long Island City now cost an average of $53 per square foot, according to StreetEasy.com. That is three to six times higher than what industrial tenants pay, giving landlords an incentive to push them out.

City Hall is juggling the oft-conflicting agendas of promoting employment and encouraging thousands of new housing units. Over the past decade, nearly 9,000 apartments have been built in Long Island City, with twice as many in the works. And while overall employment has risen in recent years, manufacturing jobs have remained stagnant, according to the Long Island City Partnership, a local business group.

And even if landlords wanted to mingle apartments and businesses, zoning tends to forbid it.

Efforts to accommodate both have worked elsewhere: Barcelona and Stockholm have had considerable success in repurposing industrial areas for both new housing and renewed manufacturing; San Francisco, Seattle and Chicago are testing similar approaches.

No one has tried anything on the scale of New York, however, where such lofty towers could surpass 60 stories.

“It’s bigger than anywhere else, but it has to be, because this is New York,” Adam Friedman, director of the Pratt Center for Community Development, a research and advocacy organization, said in an interview. “I don’t mean that as a boast. The land is just too valuable not to maximize everything.”

In February, the city released a request for proposals for 4.5 acres of property adjacent to Anable Basin, a shipping inlet on the East River. The initiative calls for 1.4 million square feet of development, more space than the Chrysler Building.

In place of a parking lot, a pier and Transportation Department facility, developers could build two to three towers between 350 and 500 feet tall. If bidders include additional commercial and manufacturing space, they could add an extra 150 feet to the new buildings.

This could create about 1,000 new apartments, some of which would be set aside as affordable, and at least 300,000 square feet of commercial space. A third of that would be required to be “productive,” including food or furniture makers, not computer programmers or architects, who often compete with manufacturers for space. Developers would also be permitted to build bigger if they include cultural tenants, like galleries, clubs, breweries and bookstores.

To help ensure compatible spaces — and make this look more like New York Harbor than South Beach — the city is proposing to revive the wedding-cake-style buildings of the prewar era. These are not only a better fit aesthetically, but by requiring boxy layouts on the lower floors, they would also be less suited for apartments, and thus harder to convert into lofts.

Kenny Greenberg, who has been making neon signs in the neighborhood since 1981, welcomes such a plan, even though he is wary of it. “It’s kind of weird to bulldoze a whole way of life and then replace it with this fake facade and declare, ‘Oh, we love industry,’” Mr. Greenberg said. “The spaces have to work for everyone, and does a loading dock work next to a cafe?”

“Still,” he added, “it would be nice not to have to leave the neighborhood.”

Brian Staresnick, an architect who has lived in one of the waterfront towers for two years, worried that some of the new businesses might not be industrious enough. “Is a guy from Williamsburg making pickles in my building really that authentic?” he said while sipping a beer at the Rockaway Brewing Company.

Already, the city’s plan has attracted some of the biggest players in the industry, many of whom were at an April informational session, according to a copy of the attendance records: Forest City Ratner, builder of Atlantic Yards; TF Cornerstone, developers of much of the neighboring waterfront; Rose Associates, among the city’s largest residential landlords; and the Durst Organization, co-owners of One World Trade Center.

Responses are due May 26, though with rezoning and remediation work to be done, construction is years away. Still, City Hall hopes its plan could provide a guide for other industrial properties, and officials are urging developers to get creative. In Williamsburg, a new office complex near Bushwick Inlet that would include dedicated space for manufacturers is under review.

“The city is growing and getting bigger,” Ms. Glen said, “which we want, so we have to think about new ways we can make all the messy pieces of the city fit together.”

Alan Suna, who founded Silvercup Studios in Long Island City in 1983 with his brother, has already embraced a similar mixed-use idea for a six-acre site next to the Queensboro Bridge. There, apartment towers would rise above film studios and offices. Environmental cleanup work is scheduled to begin later this year.

Much as Mr. Suna is a fan of the city’s plan, he thinks it could be bigger, or rather smaller: “I see no reason you couldn’t do the same thing where you demolish an old two-story warehouse, or you build on top of it, and you get a five- or eight-story building, and on the first few floors they’re still making stuff.”

There are still limits to such visions. Just ask Harvey Heffner.

His family has run Empire City Iron Works in the neighborhood since 1911. To lean on a railing at Yankee Stadium or the Metropolitan Opera is to admire their work. A condominium building opened opposite the Heffners’ factory in 2009. Work at the factory starts at 6 a.m., and often someone stops by not long after to complain.

“We’ve been doing this 105 years,” Mr. Heffner said. “I’m not about to change that.”


