


WASHINGTON — The House on Thursday approved an $81.6 billion spending measure for veterans affairs and military construction programs after hours of contentious floor debate that at times focused on cultural disputes, including efforts to restrict the flying of the Confederate flag and a bitter split over workplace protections for gays and lesbians employed by federal contractors.

Those disputes showed once again that the societal fissures that divide Republicans and Democrats are never far below the surface of any debate in Congress, even over a relatively routine spending measure.

The debate over workplace protections had spilled over from Wednesday night when Republicans inserted an amendment to the annual military policy bill that would overturn an executive order by President Obama banning federal government contractors from discriminating against employees based on sexual orientation.

The bill, which was considered must-pass legislation, passed along with the amendment by a vote of 277 to 147.

During floor debate on the spending measure on Thursday, some Democrats pushed back. Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, Democrat of New York, turned to Representative Pete Sessions, Republican of Texas, and asked: “Is it necessary to discriminate against gays and lesbians to support our military?”

Mr. Sessions fired back, accusing Mr. Maloney of coming to the House floor “with spilled milk” on his face to “relitigate a decision that was made last night.”

The argument led to an unusual skirmish on the House floor, with Democrats accusing Republicans of abusing the process to allow their party members to anonymously switch votes at the last minute and sustain the amendment. As the vote closed, Democrats on the House floor shouted, “Shame, shame, shame.”

In a separate legislative tussle, the House on Thursday approved an amendment to the spending measure prohibiting cemeteries operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs from flying the Confederate flag. Democrats failed in a broader effort to ban any school that receives federal financing from flying the Confederate flag.

The veterans affairs and military construction spending bill is the first appropriations measure adopted by the House this year.

The annual military policy bill included several provisions that Republicans said showed increased support for service members and their families, including a 2.1 percent pay raise for troops. It also included a provision to continue a ban on the transfer to the United States mainland of any prisoners held at the detention center at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.

Amid the skirmishing in the House, the Senate on Thursday adopted a combined spending measure for veterans affairs and military construction programs, as well as for transportation and housing programs.

The Senate legislation includes a measure to provide $1.1 billion in emergency financing to combat the mosquito-borne Zika virus, which can cause severe neurological defects in infants born to infected mothers. The vote in the Senate was 89 to 8.

Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who managed the bill in the Senate, emphasized a provision that would provide $57 million in housing vouchers to help homeless veterans.

“The bill makes vital investments in our nation’s infrastructure, helps meet the housing needs of the most vulnerable among us and provides funding for economic development projects in our communities that create jobs,” Ms. Collins said in a statement.


