


Last week, an ape sat eating his bacon and eggs at a Dumbo cafe. An extremely polite ape. An ape who asked if he could please leave the tip.

This ape is a recent creation of the actor Ben Foster. For each of his roles — a murderous outlaw in “3:10 to Yuma,” an injured soldier in “The Messenger,” a crystal meth addict in “Alpha Dog” and beyond — he has taken an immersive approach to character that transforms his body, his mind, his very self.

In the revival of Tennessee Williams’s “A Streetcar Named Desire,” which opens on Sunday, May 1, at St. Ann’s Warehouse, he plays the wounded, wounding Stanley Kowalski. While preparing for the role, he took to heart Blanche DuBois’s words, here spoken by “The X-Files” actress Gillian Anderson, that there is something “apelike about him, like one of those pictures I’ve seen in — anthropological studies!”

Mr. Foster made his own studies. He examined pictures of Francis Bacon’s baboons. He screened YouTube videos of silverbacks encountering mirrors in the jungle. “Watching how they live in their bodies was very important to me,” he said.

With the help of a trainer, he bulked up his arms and chest, giving himself a deliberately hulking, top-heavy physique. “I don’t want to have some beach body, abs and stuff,” he explained as he drank his coffee. “Stanley’s an ape. See. Grab. Take.”

To demonstrate, he raised and arched his shoulders, thrust his chin out slightly, hooded his eyes. Suddenly a gorilla hunched — wary, dangerous and, judging by the untouched fried potatoes and toast, apparently avoiding carbs.

Mr. Foster, 35, has worked as an actor since his early teens. Born in Boston, he moved at the age of 4 with his family to Fairfield, Iowa, where he attended the Maharishi School of the Age of Enlightenment. After dropping out in 10th grade, he landed a role in the Disney series “Flash Forward,” and the family relocated to Los Angeles.

He described Hollywood as “a crazy-making place” that “doesn’t have a great track record for most people’s development.” He credits his survival in the industry and his relatively smooth transition to adult roles to “the grounding that my parents provided” and “a lot of good luck.”

Transcendental Meditation, which he still practices daily, may also have helped, though he said it imposes little order on his personal life. “It’s a big stew,” he said with a laugh, declining to elaborate. (Though Mr. Foster has mostly managed to keep his relationships out of the spotlight, his engagement to the “House of Cards” star Robin Wright, which ended last summer, was widely reported.)

Over breakfast, once he had dropped the ape act, he was unfailingly friendly, though also strongly focused, answering thoughtfully and asking nearly as many questions as he responded to. His face, with its frosty blue eyes and pointed chin, rarely relaxes, and there seems to be little that he says or does offhandedly.

Professionally, he has developed a reputation for intensity and rigor. Oren Moverman, who directed him in “The Messenger” and “Rampart,” described Mr. Foster as “someone who goes so deep into the research that it’s almost like his chromosomes change.”

“No one likes to take risks as much as Ben in his work,” Mr. Moverman said in a telephone interview.

Mr. Foster relishes giving himself over to a character. “I don’t think I’m particularly shy,” he said. “I just don’t like being front and center as myself.” His ways of creating a role can border on the extreme. He said he took performance-enhancing drugs to play the disgraced cyclist Lance Armstrong in “The Program.” He spent several urine-soaked days on Skid Row while preparing a small role as a homeless man in “Rampart.” He ate handfuls of dirt as a member of a Navy SEAL team on a botched assignment in “Lone Survivor.”

Chris Pine, who has starred with him in two films, the recently released “The Finest Hours” and the forthcoming “Hell or High Water,” described watching him prepare for a part. “He loves to build,” Mr. Pine wrote in an email. “He loves the juju of it all. And it is intensely fun and self-smartening to watch him figure it all out, throw it away and then wrestle it all back together again.”

It’s method acting, sure. But is it madness, too?

Mr. Foster doesn’t think so. “I’m not just going out there like a wild man,” he said. Besides, he’s never found a way to approach a role casually: “I recognize how lucky I am within this industry to be able to work, to have the luxury of considering these ideas as a job. I don’t know how not to care.”

As Woody Harrelson, who starred with Mr. Foster in “The Messenger” and “Rampart” said, “When he’s working on a project, he’s all the way in.” But even Mr. Harrelson, who visited Mr. Foster recently in New York, said he was surprised by the physical transformation he had wrought for “Streetcar.”

“I really thought: ‘Wow, that’s not really Ben. That’s Stanley Kowalski.’”

Working steadily in television and film, Mr. Foster, who enjoyed stage acting as a kid, had steered away from the theater for 20 years. But in 2013, when Shia LaBeouf was let go from the Broadway revival of Lyle Kessler’s “Orphans,” he stepped into the role of Treat, a petty thief, tender and brutal, who cares for his younger brother. It was a difficult process, he said, likening it to arriving at summer camp two weeks late, “when everyone is friends or not friends, and all the bunks are taken.”

Though reviews for the show were mixed, his interest in theater persisted. When the Australian director Benedict Andrews approached him about playing Stanley in this production, which originated at London’s Young Vic, he agreed.

Mr. Andrews, in a telephone interview, said he was particular interested in Stanley’s identity as an ex-serviceman and that Mr. Foster’s role in “The Messenger” had resonated with that. He sensed in Mr. Foster a desire to work on something “raw and physical,” he said. Casting an actor with so little stage experience was dicey, “a leap in the dark,” Mr. Andrews called it, but a leap both he and Mr. Foster willingly took.

Stanley is one of the great male roles of midcentury American drama and one of the most difficult. A former soldier now working as a factory-parts salesman, he is living in New Orleans with his wife, Stella (here played by Vanessa Kirby), when his sister-in-law Blanche (Ms. Anderson) comes to stay. A guy’s guy — he loves beer, poker, bowling — he is also powerfully attracted and attractive to women, with what Williams called an “animal joy in his being.”

As he and Blanche struggle for dominance in the household, Stanley appears as a thug and an innocent, an aggressor and a victim. He is on the one hand a wife-beater and a rapist, on the other a troubled, possibly traumatized man who wails like a child when his wife flees from him. The part is made more difficult by the legacy of Marlon Brando, who originated the role and whose anguished cries of “Stella!” still echo.

But in reviewing the London production in 2014 for The New York Times, Matt Wolf remarked that Mr. Foster was the first stage actor to “erase” memories of Brando “by making the role less about the character’s pectorals and more about his battered pride.”

At a recent rehearsal, Mr. Foster certainly cut a drastically different figure. Instead of the leonine presence of Brando, you have Mr. Foster’s more lumbering hominid gait, the sense of a man who has never quite made peace with the postwar world or his domestic environment. On Mr. Andrews’s revolving set, Mr. Foster’s Stanley hulks around, explosive and combative, yet somehow achingly displaced and vulnerable.

His hands seem naked without a bayonet to wield or a ball to bowl. His casual clothes hang awkwardly on him, another deliberate choice. Mr. Foster recalled taking a trip to Old Navy and asking himself, “An animal who’s trying to pass as a man, how does he dress?” What would “an ape or a warrior” wear as camouflage? Polo shirts and cargo pants, he decided. (The tattoos Stanley sports, which include an octopus missing a few tentacles and a skull with “Coyote” written underneath, are Mr. Foster’s own.)

He doesn’t at all condone Stanley’s actions. “You can’t hit a woman — period,” Mr. Foster said. “You can’t rape.” But he still brings his sympathies to Stanley. “He’s a man who’s served his country,” he explained, “who loves his wife more than life itself, who is about to have a baby.” And when Blanche arrives, with her scents and furs and graces, he feels his position threatened and his animal lust stirred.

The play only works, Mr. Andrews said, if the actors convey “a spark of really volatile sexual attraction, a mix of sexual attraction and violence.” In rehearsal, that was visible, too, in the ways that Mr. Foster and Ms. Anderson circled and attacked each other. Ms. Anderson, in a telephone interview, said she enjoys the ways in which the all-American heartiness of Mr. Foster’s Stanley contrasts with the brutality he layers in just underneath. “You feel the danger there,” she said.

Mr. Foster described Ms. Anderson as “one of the most elegant and savage performers I’ve worked with.” When they’re onstage together, “that’s a total battle,” he said. “We’re boxing each other off the stage every night, with love.” For Mr. Foster, this isn’t so much a drama of truth and illusion or magic and reality as it is “a war play.”

At each performance, his Stanley, however strong, however apelike, suffers, a pain that Mr. Foster feels keenly. Before he steps out onto the set, he knows that the arc of the play will hurt him, psychically if not physically. And each time, he tries to experience it anew. “Don’t anticipate the blade,” he tells himself. “Lean in.”


