


Before I even got to ask him a question, the actor Sean Hayes jumped in. “How long have you been doing your job?” he asked on the phone from Los Angeles.

“Thirteen years,” I said.

“Did you ever want to be an actor?” he inquired.

“At one point,” I replied. “But dreams sometimes get crushed.”

“O.K., dear,” he said, cheerily. “Let’s get started.”

Perhaps Mr. Hayes is full of questions because he is coming to Broadway to play the man with all the answers. In the return engagement of David Javerbaum’s comedy “An Act of God,” starting previews at the Booth Theater on May 28, a white-robed Creator inhabits the body of Mr. Hayes, parks himself on a chic couch and spends 90 mostly solo minutes — God’s got angels, people — dishing on everything from Caitlyn Jenner to the Ten Commandments. (Jim Parsons had the title role in the play’s 2015 Broadway premiere.)

Mr. Hayes, an Illinois native who grew up Catholic, starred in previous runs with the show in Los Angeles and San Francisco. He remains best known as the jaunty gay-next-door Jack McFarland on NBC’s “Will & Grace.” In the 10 years since it went off the air, he has received a Tony Award nomination for his role in the 2010 revival of “Promises, Promises.”

A subsequent sitcom was quickly canceled, but he has built a parallel career as a producer of series like “Hot in Cleveland.” Mr. Hayes said his coming projects include a new play about the pianist and composer Oscar Levant and a feature film of the musical “Avenue Q.”

Mr. Hayes, who in 2014 married his longtime partner, Scott Icenogle, recently talked about religious belief, high school drama and more. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.

Do you believe in God?

Everybody has a different definition of God. When people say “Do you believe?,” I think they mean the Christian God. There are a lot of gods, so I think they cancel each other out.

You’re the second gay man to play the role on Broadway. Is there a pattern here?

I think that’s a coincidence. I don’t see sexuality.

As you take on new projects, do you have a hard time shaking Jack?

I gave up caring about that a long time ago. I think one of the worst mistakes an actor can make is run away from the role that made them beloved in the first place, that gave them an audience.

You’re coming back to Broadway six years after “Promises, Promises.” Why the wait?

I wanted to wait to come back to Broadway until there was something worth coming back for, and to me this show is. I know it was done a year ago, but I think it’s important to do it again, and now. Religion is constantly being talked about, debated, pondered, worried about. Only in art can you really peel the layers away and ask the important questions.

How does the material fit your comic style?

It’s very uncanny that David Javerbaum wrote in cadences that are familiar to me as I speak and as the person I am. The sardonic tone of the piece and the sarcasm and the different colors that make up the God he created in the script seem to be in my wheelhouse.

I’m guessing you were always a theater guy.

I always wanted to act. I loved comedy growing up. Being in theater in high school was a wonderful escape from home life. It was chaotic. My mom raised five kids by herself, and she did an amazing job, but we parented ourselves. I never felt like I could be myself at home. There weren’t any funny people in sports or the Spanish club. All the really creative, witty, funny people that made your belly hurt were in the theater program.

That feeling never goes away, does it?

I still feel like I’m that age. I’m 45.


