


Workers arrived at Maspeth Federal Savings Bank on Monday only to discover that several dozen safe deposit boxes were missing.

They did not have to look far to find them.

When the police arrived at the bank branch in Rego Park, Queens, they found the boxes piled on the roof, next to a wide hole through which, it appeared, thieves had broken into the vault over the weekend.

The full extent of the theft remained unclear; the vault held not only safe deposit boxes but also teller’s cash, the bank said in a statement on Monday evening. The branch is expected to remain closed for several days, the statement said, and the bank will “keep our customers informed as to whether or not their safe deposit boxes were affected by the burglary.”

Outside the bank on Woodhaven Boulevard, caution tape roped the front doors as customers arrived to see if their belongings had been taken. Dozens of pilfered boxes had been left piled on the roof, according to the police, next to a makeshift plywood scaffold that appeared to have been constructed over the hole.

“There’s a lot of memories inside the box,” said Nicola Maurello, who arrived on Monday afternoon to check if his family’s jewelry collection was still intact. But the bank was closed to all but investigators and law enforcement, and Mr. Maurello left without any answers.

Gunther Duy, who owns the Mobil gas station and Gunral Service Center next door to the bank, said he wished he had noticed unusual activity before the theft.

“For a small community bank, and for a community, it’s devastating,” Mr. Duy said.

Mr. Duy said he watched from his filling station all Monday afternoon as customers found out what had happened.

“They were crying on the side of the building,” he said.

The police may have had some warning. John Greco, who owns the house behind Maspeth Federal Savings Bank, said he called them on Saturday to report suspicious findings in his backyard: a hole in the fence, an aluminum ladder painted flat black, a black box on the roof of the bank.

He made the call at 4:11 p.m., Mr. Greco said. The desk sergeant said he would get back to him, Mr. Greco said. And he did.

“He says, ‘I guess you own a ladder.’ Quote,” Mr. Greco recounted Monday evening.

The police said they could not comment on whether they received a call.

The police have not yet made any arrests, and the investigation is continuing.

The audacious crime echoes an April robbery of a bank in Borough Park, Brooklyn, where nearly $300,000 was stolen from an HSBC vault via the roof. No arrests were made in that robbery. Detectives will look into whether the two are linked, the police said.

Some safe deposit boxes, which are rented by a customer from a bank, come with content insurance, while others require users to buy insurance.

Tunneling into vaults, or dropping into them through the ceiling, is not just the stuff of Hollywood heists.

Last year, in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, thieves dug through a hole in a closed restaurant next door to a bank and made off with valuables; the same year in Bayside, Queens, another break-in was carried out through a bank’s back wall.

And in 2010, thieves entered the safe deposit vault at a bank in Gravesend, Brooklyn, but for some reason, according to news reports at the time, they appeared not to have stolen anything of value.


