


Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in a new version of the Playlist column. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like the new format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.

Beck’s deadpan, and his omnivorous craftsmanship, are back on “Wow,” his first solo single in nearly a year. “Wow” has got some synth-pop, with a four-note sliding motif that repeats through the song; it’s got some drum-machine trap percussion sounds; it’s got a pop-vocal hook of na-nas and la-las and it’s got plenty of the semi-sequitur rapping that harks back to his 1993 hit “Loser”: “Standing on your lawn doin’ jujitsu/Girl in the bikini with the Lamborghini Shi Tzu.” But the song’s message is far brighter and less ambivalent than much of Beck’s catalog. It is, more or less, to seize the moment: “It’s my life, your life/Live it once, can’t live it twice/So nice.” JON PARELES

A power ranking of sharp bars on the first single from the coming “Cruel Winter” compilation on G.O.O.D. Music, Kanye West’s label, which had its premiere on Big Boy’s morning radio show on Friday:

Gucci Mane: “Now that Gucci home, it’s over for you Gucci clones”; “I heard your bitch ride on the bus, you don’t give a damn/My bitch drive a Lamb’, you should call her ma’am”

Kanye West: “Pray for me/I’m about to hit the Ye button”

2 Chainz: “I wear pajamas to Ruth’s Chris”; “I got a mansion full of marble floors/It look like I could go bowl in this bitch”

Quavo: “You might think I’m too aggressive/Really I think I’m too passive/‘Til I pull out the chopper, start blasting”

Yo Gotti: “The roof on that Wraith in the lost and found”

Big Sean: “I can’t dap you without hand san”

Travis Scott: ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Desiigner: ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ JON CARAMANICA

The last time we heard from the Australian group the Avalanches was in 2000, when they made the clever and likable album “Since I Left You,” largely constructed from thousands of vinyl samples. The group has been working on its second album for over a decade. That album, “Wildflower,” is to arrive on July 8, and the band released its first single and video from it, a song called “Frankie Sinatra.” It rests on a repeated sample of “Bobby Sox Idol,” by the calypso singer Wilmoth Houdini, and then turns to the melody of “My Favorite Things.” The video is not lovely: an ice cream truck sells a radioactive-looking yellow drink at an everglades fair, creating a violent, tripped-out, Diane Arbus vision of country folk gone wild. And the song is not amazing: except for the rap verses by Danny Brown and MF DOOM (not as good as Houdini’s lyrics), it sounds like lesser work from the early aughts. BEN RATLIFF

To remake Rihanna’s tale of sexual power imbalance, “Needed Me,” the Canadian producer ATTLAS opens with soft piano figures cut with abrasive industrial noises. Is it a caress? An act of menace? With Rihanna, it’s always both, and ATTLAS understands that deeply on this remix, which evolves into brisk, electric nature-film house music. This remix is included in a pair of new remix EPs for the songs “Needed Me” and “Kiss It Better” that include elegant contributions by R3hab, Four Tet, Feenixpawl and Kaytranada. These are remixes that solve a problem — “Kiss It Better” and “Needed Me” are slightly outside of conventional radio formats, and some of these remixes get them closer. But as much as a remix is an act of commerce, it can be an act of love, and the best of these songs break down and reconstitute her songs in order to build Rihanna a glorious pedestal. J.C.

“Maybe you know that it’s been too long/Going through the motions as you sing your song.” So begins “Intern,” the intriguing new track by Angel Olsen, which unfolds as a synth-pop dirge, shimmering and glacial. It’s a pointed departure from the strummed-guitar sound of “Burn Your Fire for No Witness,” the breakthrough album Ms. Olsen released in 2014. As if to embody the shift, she appears in the video with a silver wig and various other props: a blocky headset, a telephone receiver, someone listed in the credits as a “clever young interviewer.” Throughout the clip, which cuts short before the end of the song, Ms. Olsen fixes the viewer with a dispassionate stare. But her singing, which still carries an echo of Roy Orbison, is ripe with feeling. “I’m gonna fall in love with you someday,” she pledges. Who’s to say this is drudgery? NATE CHINEN

Xavier Dphrepaulezz, the singer who leads Fantastic Negrito, reaches back to both the raw Chicago blues of Howlin’ Wolf and its rock extrapolations by way of Led Zeppelin and Captain Beefheart. But on his album “The Last Days of Oakland,” which includes “Hump Thru the Winter,” he’s got current concerns in mind: poverty, gentrification, income inequality and perseverance. “I’ve been working three jobs just to pay my bills,” he yowls over stop-start guitar chords in a tricky, irregular meter. All he can do is urge himself and listeners forward: “You’ve gotta keep on pushin’, gotta keep it moving,” he exhorts, and the sweat is audible. J.P.

Last year, Tenement, the band from Appleton, Wis., put out a double-album called “Predatory Headlights.” It was a serious accomplishment of Amos Pitsch’s broad-minded songwriting. (Pop-punk, or one or the other? Roots rock? Experimental music? Was it an extension of the Descendents, the Rolling Stones, NRBQ, or John Cage?) It was also a test case for actual underground music in the new economy. Made with care and released with little fuss, the record seemed to turn people on one at a time, and that became part of its power; the slow domino effect is still in process. Since then the band has put out the second volume of “Bruised Music,” collecting stray songs that the trio has recorded in the last few years. And this week it’s got a brand new, short, seven-song self-titled album out on the Canadian label Deranged Records. (Five of the songs were on a cassette the band sold on tour in the last year.) The album is streaming on Deranged’s soundcloud page. It doesn’t have the same power as a self-contained document of the double album, but it satisfies the urge to hear more of Mr. Pitsch’s rough perfectionism. B.R.

On her deliriously kinetic third album, “Tempo,” the composer, singer and electronic producer Olga Bell puts a high-minded spin on dance music, coming up with something poplike but wonderfully strange. The video for “ATA,” a collaboration between Ms. Bell and the Japanese digital artist Baku Hashimoto, nails the elusive feeling of this music with 3-D effects: an image will suddenly pull apart, refract or splinter, in trippy and disorienting ways. Meanwhile, the lyrics pay homage to a poem by Frank O’Hara, “A True Account of Talking to the Sun at Fire Island.” Ms. Bell sings both sides of the conversation, including the sun’s evenhanded assessment of her work (in a close approximation of O’Hara’s language): “You’re maybe not the greatest, but you’re good/You’re different.” N.C.

Someone’s about to be let down not so easily in Margaret Glaspy’s “You and I,” the advance single from her June 17 album “Emotions and Math.” Her voice is raspily matter-of-fact and her guitar delivers a blunt, distorted riff — grunge with a twang — as bass and drums thump along. Apparently her current bedmate has started to mistake sex for love, and she’s not interested. “You and I have been a mistake/I let it linger too long,” she concludes, leaving the guitar riff to kick the door shut. J.P.

Pomp doesn’t last long in “How It Felt,” the latest free-associative track from the Canadian electronica producer Ryan Hemsworth. It wanders from plinking bell tones and samples of hummed notes to hints of Japanese koto into drums and synthesizers that sound like the start of a big trance buildup. But that’s abruptly deflated, back to plinks and high-hat taps. Later, a pretty piano chord progression, a potential crowd pleaser, appears and gets quickly discarded too, as does another big beat, all in favor of more plinks and hums. There’s comedy in some of the ups and downs, as well as introspection; at the end, there’s snoring, which may explain the track’s dream logic. J.P.

The vocal line of “Lonely Lover,” the first single from Xenia Rubinos’s new album “Black Terry Cat” is a long, teasing, jazzy, chromatic zigzag, pausing only to wiggle a little and then veer off at one more different angle. She’s got plenty of room to swivel over little more than a bass line, a backbeat and cool electric piano chords that link her to Erykah Badu, Chaka Khan and Stevie Wonder. But in the song and across the album, Ms. Rubinos builds her own persona, freely admitting private imperfections in some songs while calling for “brown” pride and solidarity in others (like “Mexican Chef” and “Black Stars”). “Lonely Lover” is a playful little plaint: “Give a little space ‘cause I’m going insane/And I just need to breathe today,” she sings, with a poise and agility that suggest she’ll get by. J.P.

The Los Angeles garage-rock band Death Valley Girls proved itself right out of the gate: hear “Arrow” from its first cassette-only album two years ago, a song that boils down the entire business of rock to riff and rumble. Next week the group releases its second album, “Glow In the Dark.” Its first single, “I’m a Man Too,” blocks your path and folds its arms. The form of the song is simple and its sound overdriven: a fuzzed-out electric piano bangs out quarter-note chords through the whole thing, in sync with the guitars. “If you’re a man, I’m a man, too,” holler its female vocalists in the chorus. “If you’re a man, I’m twice the man as you.” B.R.

Ryley Walker, a guitarist and singer-songwriter from Chicago, has a knack for wriggling free of expectations. He has use for the sound of pastoral British folk-rock from the 1960s, but you can’t really keep him there: He’s also drawn to psychedelia, experimental jazz and endless variations on a drone. Last year he released an excellent album called “Primrose Green,” on Dead Oceans; his next one is “Golden Sings That Have Been Sung,” slated for release on Aug. 19. “The Halfwit in Me,” its lead single and opening track, suggests a declaration of intent. It opens with a lonesome prelude for clarinet and acoustic guitar, before tumbling fully into gear, with Mr. Walker’s vocals and fingerpicking up front. Over a flowing, sun-dappled arrangement — produced by the former Wilco associate LeRoy Bach, and reminiscent of recent work by Jim O’Rourke — Mr. Walker sings about homecomings and misgivings, along with the feeling of being one step out of sync with the crowd. N.C.


