


BERLIN — President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey tried again to silence one of his German critics, but failed this time when a court denied his request on Tuesday to block an open letter by the head of one of Germany’s most powerful media companies expressing support for a comedian who lampooned the Turkish leader.

The court’s decision to refuse Mr. Erdogan an injunction against the letter by Mathias Döpfner, the chief executive of the media firm Axel Springer, is the latest round in a fight over free expression in Germany that began when the comedian, Jan Böhmermann, read on television a crude, satirical poem he has said was intended to insult Mr. Erdogan.

The Turkish president, who has jailed critics and cracked down on free speech in his own country, took the comedian’s bait: He seized upon a little-known German law, dating from 1871, to press charges against Mr. Böhmermann.

Although Chancellor Angela Merkel allowed the proceedings to go ahead, German citizens responded with outrage at what they saw as an attempt by a foreign leader to stifle freedom of expression in their country.

Mr. Döpfner wrote an open letter to Mr. Böhmermann on April 10 that said he was willing to defend the comedian’s every word in the name of Germany’s tradition of “freedom of expression, art and satire.”

That public show of support for one of Mr. Erdogan’s critics further angered the Turkish leader, who this week won a preliminary injunction against the filmmaker Uwe Boll, for criticizing Mr. Erdogan in a video posted online.

Ralf Höcker, a lawyer representing Mr. Erdogan in Germany, said he had a mandate to seek an injunction against anyone who publicly insults the Turkish president, to try to stop what he described as an “avalanche” of scornful abuse.

“Everyone thinks they are allowed to insult Mr. Erdogan in any way that they want because they do not find him very sympathetic,” Mr. Höcker said. “But this is not about sympathy, it is about human dignity, namely to protect it.”

In its ruling on Tuesday, the Cologne state court upheld Mr. Döpfner’s right to freedom of expression, saying his comments were “a contribution to building public opinion in a controversial debate.”

His staunch letter in support of Mr. Böhmermann’s satire drew widespread attention, in part because Axel Springer, the media company led by Mr. Döpfner, has a conservative reputation.

Prosecutors in Mainz are still investigating whether to formally open proceedings against Mr. Böhmermann on grounds that he offended a foreign leader with his satirical poem.

Mr. Böhmermann’s show, which was taken off the air after the sketch that ignited the diplomatic spat, is to return to German public television later this week. But the comedian has said he will avoid addressing Turkey in his repertoire for the time being.

Ms. Merkel has defended her decision to allow the judiciary to decide where the boundary between freedom of expression and insult lies in the case of Mr. Böhmermann’s comedy.

The chancellor has been the chief proponent of a European Union deal with Turkey that has helped stem the number of migrants reaching Europe in exchange for billions of dollars in aid and other concessions to Turkey, including looser visa restrictions for the country’s citizens.

But Mr. Erdogan has used his new leverage to pursue his critics in Europe, extending a crackdown at home that has targeted more than 1,800 opponents, including journalists, for insulting him.

Edda Fels, a spokeswoman for Axel Springer, said the company considered Mr. Erdogan’s motion “baseless.”

Mr. Erdogan has the right to challenge the ruling and Mr. Höcker, his lawyer, said he would recommend that his client appeal to a higher court.

“Our intention is to stop this unbridled online lynch mob,” Mr. Höcker said. “Everyone has lost all restraint and believes they can do as they please. We intend to stop this.”


