


On Feb. 14, 1892, the Rev. Dr. Charles H. Parkhurst delivered what Daniel Czitrom, a Mount Holyoke College historian, calls “the most politically explosive sermon in New York history.”

Billy McGlory’s brothel on East 14th Street operated openly, protected by the police and prosecutors and by the “lying, perjured, rum-soaked and libidinous lot” who ran New York, Parkhurst said furiously from the pulpit.

Within weeks, a Manhattan grand jury, convened to call Parkhurst’s bluff, rejected his claim. Instead of retreating, however, the dogged Presbyterian minister teamed up with a suburban Republican state senator, Clarence Lexow, marshaled evidence of officially sanctioned vice, and started a decontamination crusade that resonates today in echoes of police brutality and corruption, income inequality, restricted immigration, vote suppression, links between evangelicals and politics and, as Professor Czitrom writes, “the nation’s profound fear and distrust of New York City.”

In “New York Exposed: The Gilded Age Police Scandal That Launched the Progressive Era” (Oxford University Press, $27.95), the author describes the Lexow Committee as the first in a cycle of police investigations, perhaps the one that exposed the most pervasive corruption (nearly half the force’s captains were implicated) and brought about the least immediate reform (virtually all the criminal cases against the police collapsed).

Still, Professor Czitrom’s evocative account reveals that the nexus between politics, policing and biblical trespasses in the late 19th century introduced the term “organized crime,” spawned the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, demonstrated the power of mass media and even presaged reality television shows when George Appo, a notorious swindler, and Tom Gould, owner of a disreputable saloon, played themselves when “In the Tenderloin” opened at a theater on the Bowery.

The Lexow Committee found little evidence that the Democratic bosses of Tammany Hall committed vote fraud (the influx of immigrants was enough to supply them with loyal constituents) or profited primarily from vice (their most lucrative investments were from “honest graft”).

New Yorkers eventually soured on Parkhurst’s crusade. His patrician righteousness against vice came to be seen as bigoted, hypocritical and puritanical. At the trial of Hattie Adams, a brothel owner, her lawyer, the bombastic Abe Hummel, eviscerated the minister’s motives in feverishly exploring the city’s dens of iniquity and reporting back on nude gambols. “It is for you to decide,” Hummel told the jury, “whether this man went to this house and witnessed that dance for the object which he has stated or to gratify his lustful tendencies by looking on.” Adams was convicted; the jury recommended mercy.

Samuel Langhorne Clemens’s first public lecture, at New York’s Cooper Union in 1867, was so poorly subscribed that his manager filled the auditorium by donating free tickets to teachers. Three decades later, the writer now known as Mark Twain lost his entire fortune, and he discharged all his debts from the proceeds of a grueling global speaking getaway (during which reports of his death were prematurely anticipated and greatly exaggerated in the New York press).

In “Chasing the Last Laugh: Mark Twain’s Raucous and Redemptive Round-the-World Comedy Tour” (Doubleday, $30), Richard Zacks, the author of “Island of Vice” (on Police Commissioner Theodore Roosevelt’s campaign to decontaminate New York), takes readers on a rollicking excursion that includes Elmira, N.Y., and Hartford, where Twain was most prolific, and Manhattan, where he returned home to a hero’s welcome.

Twain expressed concern about the affordability of housing but settled into a pricey townhouse near Washington Square (the same one in which 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg would be fatally beaten by her father in 1987), introduced Winston Churchill at the Waldorf-Astoria and, when suffering from a cold, sportively extorted the finest Scotch as a curative from Andrew Carnegie.


