


AROUND six years ago, Hyundai figured a 10-year warranty was not enough to attract shoppers and conjured up daring design for more attention. Sonata was the first to get the Fluidic Sculpture makeover, but the fifth-generation Elantra ended up being the swoopiest of the fleet. Hyundai’s newest gamble? Toning down those curves.

The South Korean brand is after a more sophisticated and — ahem — mature look. Alas, Sonata simply became more conservative. The 2017 Elantra’s new wrapper is also less emotional, but more successful. The departing Hot Wheels flame motif yields to a more refined appearance, and everything beneath the shape delivers on that promise.

The previous Elantra had three problems: The steering hero-worshiped Novocain, occupants grew hoarse from shouting over road noise, and large potholes betrayed a lack of structure. The tires now offer the fingertips some feedback through the steering wheel, acoustical tricks quell the roar and the chassis gets twice as much high-strength steel. As it is welded, nearly 400 feet of adhesive is applied for additional structural strength.

A 147-horsepower, 2-liter, 4-cylinder engine makes it go (the Eco model runs with a 1.4-liter turbo). Connecting it to the front wheels is a 6-speed automatic gearbox with a manual mode, although there are no steering wheel paddles. Drive modes allow steering weight and throttle response adjustment.

Getting from 0 to 60 takes about eight seconds, on the leisurely side of brisk. Unlike in most modern cars, the gearbox shifts down smartly with a throttle stab. Elantra is for the masses — quiet, comfortable, controlled and predictable. Driving enthusiasts should wait for the expected Sport model or buy a Mazda 3. Officially, the government rates fuel economy at 28 miles per gallon in the city, 37 highway. I saw 32.

Intelligent people always cross-shop. That means browsing sedans like the Chevrolet Cruze, Ford Focus and Nissan Sentra. As with the Elantra, many compacts like the Toyota Corolla and Honda Civic have grown up. The Environmental Protection Agency classifies their cabin volumes as midsize, about as roomy as a BMW 3 Series. Check them out for size before pulling the trigger on a Honda Accord, Toyota Camry, Chevy Malibu or Hyundai Sonata.

Materials look and feel good in comparison with other models in its class, but don’t expect soft-touch materials throughout the interior. Storage cubbies are plentiful and the sun visors get extra adjustability. Laugh at that detail now — you won’t when the sun is blinding you at 75 miles an hour on a curve. A backup camera comes standard on Limited models (cough, cough, BMW and Mercedes).

The back seat is plenty spacious for two adults and doors open wide to help with the child seat shuffle. Heated cushions are available in back but a power port and pocket on the back of the driver’s chair are not. The large trunk, complete with split seat backs, is ample for airport shuttle runs, something your mooching friends don’t need to know.

Elantra begins its price climb at $17,985 with a 6-speed manual transmission. As tested, the loaded Limited model tops out at $27,710 when stuffed with blind-spot warning, adaptive cruise control, a well-executed lane-keep assist system and auto-braking with pedestrian detection. That is technology found only in luxury cars 10 years ago, when Elantra’s auto-opening trunk and available Android Auto and Apple CarPlay did not even exist.

While the previous Elantra had visual appeal, the new one is far better in motion. Talk about throwing competitors a curve.


