


LONDON — For Kevin Nakache, the breaking point came last year. First, one of his friends was gunned down in the attack on a kosher supermarket in Paris a few days after the Charlie Hebdo massacre. Then, in October, Mr. Nakache’s former Hebrew teacher barely escaped a knife attack in Marseille, his hometown in southern France, where violence against Jews is on the rise.

Fed up, Mr. Nakache decided last fall to follow many other French Jews and leave the country. But rather than going to Israel, an increasingly popular destination for those choosing to leave France after the Charlie Hebdo attacks, or the United States, Mr. Nakache chose to emigrate to London. In so doing, he joined a growing stream of French Jews who see the British capital as a convenient and less threatening option as France grapples with the radicalization of young Muslims and a rise in anti-Semitism.

“When people around you get attacked, it’s frightening,” he said. “You start thinking you’re next.”

Watching the terrorist attacks on Charlie Hebdo unfold, “I just knew that the next victims would be Jews,” he said. He was right. Four Jews, including his friend, died in the kosher supermarket in Paris after being taken hostage with 25 other shoppers by a militant claiming allegiance to the Islamic State. More recently, after Mr. Nakache left, a rabbi in Marseille was nearly hacked to death by a supporter of the Islamic State.

“For goodness sake,” he said, “why do they have to kill us just because we’re Jews?”

About 5,000 French Jews are thought to have moved to Britain over the past two years, according to the Conference of European Rabbis. Britain is now a leading destination for French Jews, after Israel, which welcomed 7,800 French Jews last year, said Avi Mayer, a spokesman for the Jewish Agency. The number moving to Israel has more than doubled in just two years, he said, a trend that started in 2012 when Mohammed Merah, who called himself a Qaeda jihadist, shot French soldiers and Jewish schoolchildren in southwestern France.

Even though Britain has its own problems with anti-Semitism, London has emerged as a prime destination for French Jews primarily because there are better job opportunities in Britain than in France and it is easy to move: It is a train ride away from Paris, and visas are not required for citizens of the European Union to live and work in Britain.

Since two large-scale terrorist attacks in Paris last year, the influx has been substantial enough that a number of synagogues in London have started offering services that cater to the growing French Jewish population.

The Western Marble Arch Synagogue has begun offering services to Sephardic Jews, many of whom are French. Sephardic Jews are descendants of Jews from Spain, Portugal, the Middle East and North Africa, like Mr. Nakache, who is of Tunisian and Algerian origin. Most British Jews are Ashkenazi, whose ancestors were mainly German and Eastern European. Although prayer services are done in Hebrew for either group, there are differences.

“We want to provide a service the French are familiar with,” said the synagogue’s chief rabbi, Sam Taylor, adding that their numbers have grown “significantly.” About 20 percent of the synagogue’s 700-member congregation is French, he said, and they now make up the largest minority group. His synagogue also recently began offering Bible classes in French.

The Anshei Shalom Synagogue in St. John’s Wood, a Sephardic synagogue, opened 13 years ago with few French Jews. Today, 70 percent of the 160-member congregation is French, said Chief Rabbi Mordechai Fhima, who is also French. Mr. Fhima now gives several lectures in French during the week and invites rabbis from France to speak to the congregation.

At the nearby St. John’s Wood Synagogue, Chief Rabbi Dayan Ivan Binstock said that social events were now increasingly a mix of Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews because of the growing French crowd.

“I’m increasingly starting my sermons in French,” he said.

France is forbidden by law to collect statistics based on race or ethnic origin, so the exact number of French Jews in Britain is unknown. But Marc Meyer, the director of the Conference of European Rabbis, estimates that about 25,000 of them live in London, out of about 500,000 French citizens. In some Jewish schools, he said, the number of French children has risen by as much as 60 percent over the past year.

French Jews are also moving to Israel, the United States, Canada, Australia and elsewhere in Europe like Belgium and Luxembourg. Mr. Nakache’s sister lives in New York, he said, and at least 20 of his Jewish friends have also left Marseille.

An official at the Paris-based Jewish Consistory of France, a body that oversees all Jewish congregations in the country, said that at least 4,000 families left France in 2015 alone. “We are deluged with calls,” said the employee, who asked not to be named because the issue is sensitive. “These families are afraid for their children,” she added.

Global jihadists, the rise of far-right groups, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and conspiracy theories found on the Internet have all made French Jews choice targets. “The level of violence committed against Jews in France is increasingly deadly,” said Michel Wieviorka, the director of France’s School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences.

A more virulent strain of anti-Semitism is emerging in some areas of French society that are often poor and have large Muslim populations, Mr. Wieviorka said. “The blurring of lines between Islam and Palestine has become the heart of anti-Semitism.” Others, however, emphasize that to be pro-Palestinian does not mean to be anti-Semitic.

Then there is the rise of far-right groups like the National Front, whose former leader Jean-Marie Le Pen minimized the Holocaust. Although the current leader, his daughter, has rejected those views, French Jews say they are unconvinced.

In London, French Jews who were interviewed said they felt safe even though the number of anti-Semitic attacks in Britain is slightly higher than in France. For one, they are harassed less for wearing skullcaps, they said.

Ilan Tall, who left Marseille in July, said that wearing a skullcap there “is dangerous,” adding that he wore his under a baseball cap for years. After the machete attack on a rabbi by an Islamic State supporter in January, the main Jewish leader in Marseille advised Jews to stop wearing skullcaps.

Olivier Gozlan said he was taken aback when colleagues in London encouraged him to wear a skullcap at work, something that is rare in France. Minorities appear to be better integrated in Britain, he said, because Britain emphasizes multiculturalism, unlike assimilation in France. Britain also has a more diverse Muslim population than France, where most Muslims are from North Africa.

Thousands of surveillance cameras placed in almost every nook and cranny of Britain also help. “If you get attacked, at least everything’s recorded,” Mr. Nakache said.

Simon Tobelem, a French venture capitalist in London, said he appreciated the French government’s efforts to protect Jews, including posting soldiers outside schools in the wake of the terrorist attacks. Still, “in spite of everything, there is a pervasive feeling that we’re no longer welcome in France,” he said.

French Jews from Paris say they miss the lifestyle there — there are far more kosher restaurants there than in London, at least two Jewish radio stations, and lots of synagogues.

But most of them said they do not plan to return home: They will either settle in Britain or move elsewhere, just not France. “My culture is French, and I’ll defend it to my death,” Mr. Tobelem said. “But is France my homeland anymore? No.”

Mr. Nakache agreed. “Too bad if France loses all of its Jews.”


