


Working quickly to establish a new foundation, the Nets hired Kenny Atkinson, an assistant coach with the Atlanta Hawks, as their head coach on Sunday. Terms of the deal were not released.

Atkinson, 48, a native of Huntington, N.Y., was an assistant coach with the Knicks from 2008 to 2012, and he was the director of player development for the Houston Rockets in 2007 and 2008. He has spent the last four seasons with the Hawks.

“I’d like to extend a personal welcome to Kenny and wish all of us success as we begin a new era at the Brooklyn Nets,” the Nets’ owner, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, said in a statement. “Aside from his tremendous skills and experience, he has the mind-set we need to build a winning team day by day, step by step. Together, we can do great things.”

Atkinson will remain with the Hawks until the end of their postseason run. Atlanta leads its first-round series against Boston, 1-0, with Game 2 on Tuesday.

Atkinson will replace Lionel Hollins, who was fired on Jan. 10. Tony Brown coached the team through the end of the season, and the Nets finished 21-61.

The team hired Sean Marks as general manager on Feb. 18, and Marks has stressed the need to reshape the culture of the organization.

“Kenny’s years of N.B.A. coaching experience working under successful head coaches such as Mike Budenholzer and Mike D’Antoni have provided him with the foundation and experience we were looking for in a head coach,” Marks said in a statement. “We believe that Kenny’s core principles, leadership, communication skills and exceptional background in player development make him an ideal fit for the culture we are building in Brooklyn.”

Atlanta has made the playoffs in each of Atkinson’s four seasons under Budenholzer.

After attending college at Richmond, where he helped the Spiders to the round of 16 in the N.C.A.A. tournament in 1988, Atkinson played professionally for 14 years in six countries.

“Together with Sean and his staff, we look forward to building a winning tradition here in Brooklyn,” Atkinson said in a statement.


