


Chris Sale pitched eight innings and led the visiting Chicago White Sox past the Toronto Blue Jays, 10-1, Tuesday night for their fifth straight win.

Sale (5-0) has won all his starts this season and leads the majors in victories. Sale, a left-handed ace, has a 1.66 E.R.A.

Sale carried a one-hitter into the seventh inning, retiring 13 straight batters before Edwin Encarnacion homered. Sale gave up four hits in eight innings, striking out six and walking two.

Dioner Navarro hit a two-run homer, and Avisail Garcia and Adam Eaton added solo shots for Chicago.

The three home runs, 10 runs and 15 hits were all season highs for the White Sox.

R. A. Dickey (1-3) allowed six runs and eight hits in six innings. Dickey, a knuckleballer, is winless in his past four outings and dropped to 2-6 in 12 career games against Chicago.

PHILLIES 4, NATIONALS 3 Andres Blanco’s three hits included a two-run homer, and he scored the go-ahead run on Maikel Franco’s seventh-inning double, helping visiting Philadelphia edge Washington.

Jeanmar Gomez, the Phillies’ fourth pitcher, got Bryce Harper to ground out to third with a man on first in the ninth to end the game and earn his fifth save.

Before the game, Philadelphia Manager Pete Mackanin spoke of “a theory” on how to pitch to Harper, the reigning National League most valuable player, who came in leading the N.L. in homers and R.B.I.

Philadelphia walked Harper three times, but he delivered a run-scoring single off Vincent Velasquez in the fifth.

RED SOX 11, BRAVES 4 David Price matched his career high with 14 strikeouts, Travis Shaw homered and drove in five runs, and Boston crushed host Atlanta as the Braves’ home run drought reached 15 games.

Atlanta, which opened the season with nine straight losses, has now lost seven straight.

The home run drought is the longest for the Braves in their 51 years in Atlanta. It is the team’s longest period without a homer since a 16-game streak in September 1946, when the Braves were in Boston. Atlanta is 1-12 at home.

Price allowed two runs on six hits in eight innings. The left-handed Price struck out the side in the eighth to match his career high.

Shaw hit a three-run homer off Matt Wisler in the first and added a two-run double off Ryan Weber in the Red Sox’ five-run ninth.

RAYS 3, ORIOLES 1 Kevin Kiermaier hit a two-run homer, and host Tampa Bay defeated Baltimore.

After Steven Souza Jr. had a two-out single in the sixth, Kiermaier put the Rays up, 3-1, with his two-run shot off Ubaldo Jimenez.

The Rays have won three in a row, with 11 of their 13 runs in that stretch coming with two outs.

Reliever Enny Romero gave up a hit in one-plus innings for the win. Alex Colome got the final two outs to earn his fifth save.

Jimenez allowed three runs and six hits in six innings as the Orioles lost for the eighth time in 12 games after beginning the season 7-0.

ATHLETICS 5, TIGERS 1 Rich Hill allowed four hits in seven scoreless innings, and Oakland won in Detroit.

Marcus Semien homered for the A’s, and Hill had little trouble in breezing through a Tigers lineup heavy on right-handed hitters. Hill, a left-hander, struck out eight and was not threatened after he escaped the first inning with two on.

Mike Pelfrey allowed five runs and nine hits in six and two-thirds innings and remained winless since signing with Detroit this past off-season. He allowed three runs in the fourth inning, then gave up Semien’s two-run shot with two out in the seventh.

TWINS 6, INDIANS 5 Miguel Sano ended the game with a one-out, run-scoring single in the ninth inning, giving Minnesota a win over Cleveland in Minneapolis.

The Twins rallied after Mike Napoli homered off Kevin Jepsen in the top of the ninth to tie the game, 5-5. It was Jepsen’s third blown save in five chances.


