


PARIS — Roger Federer withdrew from this year’s French Open on Thursday, putting an end to one of tennis’s most remarkable streaks.

The last time Federer, 34, did not take part in the main draw in singles at a Grand Slam event was in the last millennium. That was in August 1999, when he lost in the second round of the qualifying tournament at the United States Open to a fellow Swiss, Ivo Heuberger.

Since then, Federer has played in a record 65 straight Grand Slam singles tournaments, winning a record 17 titles and firmly establishing himself as the most successful men’s player of the Open era.

“I have been making steady progress with my overall fitness, but I am still not 100 percent and feel I might be taking an unnecessary risk by playing in this event before I am really ready,” Federer, who is ranked third, said in a statement Thursday. “The decision was not easy to make, but I took it to ensure I could play the remainder of the season and help to extend the rest of my career. I remain as motivated and excited as ever.”

Federer did not cite a specific injury in his withdrawal statement. His remarkable longevity has been grounded in sound technique, serious preparation, intelligent scheduling and an attacking mind-set and skill set that have allowed him to keep rallies shorter than most of his rivals have been able to.

But his health has become a major concern during a deflating season in which he has played in only four tournaments and won 11 of 15 matches.

“This is sad, but it’s also smart,” Paul Annacone, Federer’s former coach, said of the decision to withdraw. “It’s going to be a really busy next few months.”

Annacone added: “He’s wrestled Father Time to a stalemate so far, and I hope he can keep Father Time in check a little while longer. But we all know who’s undefeated.”

Federer had surgery on his left knee on Feb. 3 — the first operation of his career — after tearing the meniscus while running a bath for his twin daughters shortly after losing in the semifinals of the Australian Open. His back problems — long-running but long manageable — also have flared up, forcing him to withdraw from the Madrid tournament this month.

Last week, he lost to Dominic Thiem in the third round in the Italian Open in Rome and appeared to be hampered in his movement.

“I saw a lot of it in 2013,” Annacone said. “When Roger’s back is not right, I can see when he’s going out for wide balls and trying to protect it a little bit. It’s hard to play like that, just really hard, and I think more times than not you end up hurting yourself more.”

After the loss to Thiem, Federer said he was not certain he would play at Roland Garros. As it turned out, he was only able to practice, traveling to Paris and training briefly on the red clay at the stadium on Wednesday.

Guy Forget, the new French Open tournament director, said Ivan Ljubicic, Federer’s coach, had made a preliminary request for Federer not to play his first-round match until Tuesday, which is the last day reserved for first-round singles play at Roland Garros.

“I told him, of course, we’d try to do the most we could, depending where he ended up in the draw,” Forget said. “When a player asks for this kind of thing, it shows that each day counts.”

Darren Cahill, the ESPN analyst who is coaching Simona Halep, said the cool and clammy weather in Paris this week had probably not helped Federer’s chances.

“Been coming here many years, never felt it so cold on court like it was today,” Cahill said Thursday. “The weather makes it tough for anyone with a back issue, or any issue, for that matter. Roger’s made a career of making smart, educated decisions, so I’m sure he’s doing the right thing.

“Watching him in Rome, he was always going to be iffy here, considering it now means five-set battles. He knows his body. He knows the risk and potential setbacks to the grass-court season if there’s a hiccup in Paris. It seems like the right move if he’s not near 100 percent.”

Federer, a three-time singles finalist at the French Open before winning the title in 2009, would have been seeded third this year. His withdrawal, announced on the eve of Friday’s draw, means the nine-time champion Rafael Nadal will move up to the No. 4 seeding. That eliminates the possibility of a quarterfinal rematch between Nadal and No. 1 Novak Djokovic, who played in that round in 2015, with Djokovic winning in straight sets.

While his rivals focus on clay, Federer will shift his attention to grass and the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, where he plans to chase his first gold medal in singles.

“Given his chances at Wimbledon are far greater than Roland Garros, this would seem to be a wise choice,” said Jim Courier, the United States Davis Cup captain and two-time French Open champion. “It’s a busy summer, with the Olympics added to the mix this year, so there is a lot of meaningful tennis ahead for him.”

In preparation for Wimbledon, which he has won seven times, Federer has entered the grass-court event in Stuttgart, Germany, for the first time and is also expected to play, as usual, at the tournament in Halle, Germany. But respecting that schedule depends on Federer’s ability to recover.

“My plan is to achieve the highest level of fitness before returning to the ATP World Tour for the upcoming grass-court season,” he said in his statement.

When Federer last missed a Grand Slam singles tournament, Pete Sampras was No. 1 and social media was a term that referred to chatty reporters. On Thursday, he announced his decision on Facebook, and it was not long at all before there was a suitable hashtag: #WhenFedererLastMissedASlam.

It has been nearly 17 years. Federer’s record, like many tennis records, is difficult to compare across eras. The greats of the pre-Open era rarely stayed amateurs for long and were thus ineligible to play in the Grand Slam tournaments for long. The greats of the early Open era often skipped the Australian Open. But Federer’s mark still merits an exclamation point in a period during which the game has become faster and more physical.

“People go, ‘Great, 65 in a row,’ but if you really want to know how good that is, think about how much tennis Roger has played in those 65,” Annacone said. “How many times has he been in the quarters, semis and finals?”

Federer is three ahead of Ai Sugiyama, the women’s leader, who played in 62 straight major singles tournaments from 1994 to 2009. Federer is nine ahead of the closest men: Wayne Ferreira and Feliciano López, who are tied at 56.

Ferreira, the former South African star, is long retired, but López, a flashy Spanish left-hander, is ranked No. 23 and entered in the French Open. If he plays, he will break his tie with Ferreira, but he would need to play singles in every major tournament through Wimbledon in 2018 to break Federer’s record.

That is far from a sure thing. López, like Federer, is 34. The threat to Federer’s mark is more likely to come from younger players, including the 30-year-old Tomas Berdych, who is about to play in his 51st straight major, or Djokovic, who will turn 29 on Sunday and is about to play in his 46th in a row.


