


Examining the standings in mid-June may feel premature, with just under 100 games remaining in the season. But when the team is the defending National League champion with sky-high expectations, the pressure to do so can feel inexorable. Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.

A peek at the position of the Mets in the National League East after a three-game sweep at the hands of the lowly Atlanta Braves reveals a sputtering team with much work to do. After Sunday’s 6-0 loss to the Braves at Citi Field, the Mets sat in third place, a half-game behind the Miami Marlins and six games behind the Washington Nationals.

“You don’t want to panic early, but right now, with what’s going on, we may shake some things up,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “When you’re not swinging the bats good, obviously the game looks ugly.”

The Mets, who at 36-32 are also a half-game out of a wild-card spot, hope to keep their division deficit manageable until help arrives or their play improves. But even the team’s strength, its pitching, has not been all that effective.

“We did not pitch well in the last three days,” Collins said. “We haven’t made pitches that we normally make, and it came back to haunt us.”

Fighting his command at times, the Mets’ starter on Sunday, Jacob deGrom, allowed three runs over six innings, which under normal circumstances might have kept them in the game. But Braves starter Julio Teheran completely baffled the Mets’ offense, allowing one hit in a complete game.

There is no shame in falling to Teheran, one of the league’s best starters this season, with a 2.66 E.R.A. But the Mets’ slumping offense and losses in two winnable games against rookie pitchers earlier in the series provided cause for concern.

“We just have to keep fighting and keep trying to have good at-bats,” shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera said in Spanish. “That’s how it starts, with good at-bats and people on base. Stretches like this happen during the season. And it’s good that it’s happening now and not toward the end of the season.”

June 19 may feel early for boos, but the fans began a chorus of them when Mets right fielder Curtis Granderson grounded out to end the sixth inning. The booing returned when reliever Antonio Bastardo, meandering through the seventh inning, gave up two runs, including one when he was called for a balk. An encore came in the eighth when Hansel Robles coughed up a run on a wild pitch.

“Surprising and frustrating,” Collins said, describing the weekend.

Although Collins said the team would not need a sense of urgency with the standings until after the All-Star break, he is dealing with a hobbled roster. Three everyday players remain on the disabled list, and other minor injuries seem to appear daily. Catcher Travis d’Arnaud is expected to return Tuesday, but even Collins said he did not know what to expect from him because d’Arnaud has been out for so long. The meager offense has been a drag on the team’s talented pitching. The margin for error is thin.

“We haven’t hit very much,” center fielder Yoenis Cespedes said in Spanish. “But that doesn’t mean we’re bad. We’re going through a tough time, like all teams do. But we do have to stay strong mentally and keep the mentality that we can do this.”

The coming weeks present land mines, starting with a familiar foe coming to town Tuesday: the reigning World Series champions, the Kansas City Royals. The Mets have seven games against the Nationals before next month’s All-Star break, which could drastically swing the standings. The Chicago Cubs, the Marlins and the Braves are sandwiched in there, too.

Collins declined to elaborate on how the Mets planned to “shake some things up,” but he suggested it might involve roster changes. Left fielder Michael Conforto, who had the Mets’ lone hit Sunday, is hitting .137 this month. He said that he hoped to stay with the big league team but knew it was not up to him whether he was demoted to Class AAA Las Vegas.

“Michael Conforto either plays, but he’s not going to come off the bench,” Collins said. “He’s not going to come sit here on the bench. We’re going to look at every angle we can.”

DeGrom did his best Sunday despite uneven command. It was better through the middle innings, but he gave up two runs in a laborious third and a solo home run to Nick Markakis in the sixth. Teheran, on the other hand, moved his pitches well around the strike zone, and the Mets helped by swinging early in counts.

“We’ve got to be better,” Collins said. “We’ve got to start playing better. We’ll see what we can do.”

At no point last season did the Mets trail the Nationals by more than four and a half games. Because they stayed within striking distance, the Mets took off once trades injected life into the offense.

And through 68 games last season, the Mets had the same record they do now but held a one-and-a-half-game lead over the Nationals.

“The season is still young,” Cespedes said. “There are a lot of games left. A lot can still happen.”


