


“We live in a society that is increasingly ‘Yelpish’ — if that can be used as an adjective,” says the artist Alexandre Singh. “My current hobby is to read the Yelp reviews of, well, anything.” (He mentions a recent deep-dive into the online assessments of N.Y.C.-area hospitals — the ratings are either one-star and joined by anecdotes like, “I waited for hours and was bleeding the whole time,” or five-star paeans that read, “We just had a baby! It was an amazing experience! The nurses were so wonderful!”) Yelp.com is the perfect case study of our “world of real extremes,” Singh continues. “We only care to comment on things that we feel strongly about, and our act of commenting, or judging or giving one to five stars prevents people from engaging with what they’re looking at.” Art included.

Of course, this isn’t some breakthrough in the analysis of human behavior; the process is just more immediate today thanks to social media and apps. It all certainly weighed on the mind of Molière, who, in response to his much-talked-about 1662 play “The School for Wives,” penned “The School for Wives Criticized” the following year — and it’s upon the latter that Singh’s “The School for Objects Criticized AE” is loosely based. The one-act play, set on the Bowery in the present day, was written in 2010 for a group show at the New Museum. Versions were later restaged at Paris’s Palais de Tokyo — and, starting tomorrow, at Sprüth Magers, Berlin. Though the recorded dialogue remains the same, the actual installation changes depending on the space; for Sprüth Magers, Berlin, Singh built a window that overlooks a three-dimensional rendering of Manhattan.

Action-wise, “The School for Objects Criticized AE” portrays a conversation between an opinionated group of miscellany: There’s Daphne Spring, a children’s Slinky toy and seductive realist; Penny Powder, an emotionally malleable, unformed sculpture; the pseudo-intellectuals Lucian Samasota and Osmin Moses, both tape players; Sergei Skoffavitch, a “neo-post-Marxist” bottle of bleach; the feminist Despina Hall, an electric toaster; and the doorman, a taxidermic skunk. A spotlight shines on each object, mounted on a pedestal, while it “speaks,” and the dialogue spans a variety of topics such as ready-mades — and Singh. “Well, that was a nice little discussion,” says Osmin in the penultimate scene, lamenting that the group didn’t make a recording to send to “this Mr. Singh.” Despina replies: “Oh, please, that’s exactly the kind of self-reflexive tautological garbage these young artists are all up to these days. It all seems very clever, a work of art about itself, everyone claps, and nobody thinks very deeply about it. It’s simply an overly elaborate and smug way to say absolutely nothing at all.”

Singh doesn’t exactly contest her point. “The play circles around lots of ideas; by the end, the characters have touched upon so many different topics that whilst they may not have really arrived anywhere, they’ve gotten ‘there’ via everywhere else,” he says. “At its heart, there are a few serious moments in the story when the characters talk about their own mortality — they seem to touch on the idea of intelligent design, which is rather absurd because they, obviously, were designed.” He bills the work as “a mocking way to think about the human condition,” but resists labeling it “art” or “theater” and settles on “theatrical” when pressed. “In the play, there is the idea that something important is out there, and that we should be making art about it, but it’s hard to say what that is,” Singh remarks. “You only know what it isn’t.”


