


When guard Malachi Richardson walked off the elevated court at NRG Stadium in Houston after his Syracuse men’s basketball team lost to North Carolina in the Final Four in April, he spent the next two weeks not thinking about his future.

“It wasn’t a rushed decision,” he said in an interview this month. “I had a lot of time.”

Richardson said he went back to campus and concentrated on his classes. He worked out on his own time and, even though he was still a freshman, learned that he had been invited to the N.B.A. scouting combine. After performing well there, he signed with an agent, a point of no return in leaving college ball behind. Many mock drafts predict he will be selected in the first round next month.

“I had to believe in myself, and the opportunity existed at the time, and I thought leaving school would be the best,” he said.

Richardson not only was able to say he was testing the waters of professional basketball, but he was able to do it in a meaningful way without compromising his eligibility. Under an N.C.A.A. rule change, reached in cooperation with the N.B.A. and in use for the first time this year, the deadline for players to declare they were turning professional — and thus forfeiting their remaining college eligibility — was extended more than a month, and a new apparatus was put in place to give prospects feedback on their draft stock.

In past years, any college basketball player with remaining eligibility effectively had to decide to turn pro by early April. Only then could he have participated in the scouting combine, worked out for teams and received a good sense of how N.B.A. front offices valued him. But if he fared poorly or was projected as a late pick, it was too late: His decision to leave college was final.

But in January, the N.C.A.A.’s Division I Council adopted a proposal that allowed players an extra five weeks upon declaring for the draft to make up their mind and withdraw their names. This year, the ultimate deadline came last Wednesday, just before midnight.

Several players used the expanded window to announce a decision only last week. The Seton Hall sophomore Isaiah Whitehead stayed in the draft; Maryland’s Melo Trimble, Oregon’s Dillon Brooks and Wisconsin’s Nigel Hayes returned to college.

“It’s really student-athlete-friendly,” Jim Haney, executive director of the National Association of Basketball Coaches, said, casting the rule as another concession the college sports establishment has made as advocates clamor for the rules of amateurism to be relaxed.

The earlier, stricter policy, Haney added, “was meant to help coaches know with certainty what their roster would look like for the next year, but the reality is, it wasn’t helping kids make informed decisions.”

There are only 60 draft spots, and rookie salaries under the collective bargaining agreement are strictly slotted. As a result, the decision of when to go pro can involve millions of dollars.

Leave college too early, and a late draft position — or none at all — could force a player to compete overseas or in the N.B.A. Development League, where he might not receive the same quality of development or the high profile that a strong college program could offer. Wait too long, and a player could lose a year of earning power or find himself in a draft class loaded with talent at his position.

Because of N.C.A.A. amateurism rules, signing with an agent remains a red line. So while top-of-the-draft talents like Louisiana State’s Ben Simmons and Duke’s Brandon Ingram signed with agents shortly after the season, players like Richardson waited weeks as they consulted coaches, scouts and family members.

“Getting the opportunity to gather information about the N.B.A. and visit with professionals at that level was a really valuable experience for me,” Hayes, the Wisconsin player, said in a statement.

The new rule was also notable in that it represented a collaboration between the N.B.A. and the N.C.A.A. In the past, some top college officials, including conference commissioners, have chafed at the enormous impact the N.B.A. has had on the college game without their consultation.

The N.B.A.’s decade-old rule (agreed to by its players’ union) that players must be a year removed from high school has spawned a college game dominated by top players who compete only as freshmen. And it is no secret that the N.B.A. would prefer most players to stay in college longer.

“The longer you stay in school and play,” Kiki Vandeweghe, the N.B.A. executive vice president for basketball operations, said, “the more information we would have about you: The more you would be scouted, the more familiar we would be with your game, the better predictor you can have for success — keeping in mind that these draft picks are worth millions of dollars.”

If athletes’ situations appear improved from the previous system, those arguably harmed are coaches, who have lost more than a month of knowing which of their star players is likely to return.

Purdue Coach Matt Painter, for example, learned only last week that forward Caleb Swanigan would return for his sophomore season.

“It’s just a challenge,” he said, noting that adding a replacement this late in the recruiting year would be difficult.

For advocates of players’ rights, the logical place to push further would be allowing players to consult with professionals with a fiduciary interest in their futures before the decision deadline. Villanova Coach Jay Wright said on a podcast recently that he favored allowing players to meet with agents without losing their eligibility.

“If he decides he’s going to go,” Wright said of Josh Hart, Villanova’s leading scorer last season, “then he needs an agent to handle that process immediately. To be prepared for that, he should be interviewing agents right now.”

As it happened, the situation resolved itself: Last Wednesday, Hart announced that he would return for his senior season with the Wildcats and help them defend their national title.


