


 Jorge De La Rosa lost command of his pitches, and his attention to base runners waned. That added up to a bad inning that the Colorado Rockies could not overcome.

Jay Bruce had two of the Reds’ five steals in the second — their biggest inning on the bases in roughly a century — and the host Cincinnati Reds held on for a 4-3 victory on Tuesday night.

Brandon Phillips had four hits, and Billy Hamilton doubled home two runs during the Reds’ four-run second inning, which included the five steals.

De La Rosa was having trouble placing his fastball, so he threw more changeups and ignored the runners, who took off at every opportunity.

“I have to do a better job than that,” De La Rosa said.

The Reds had not stolen that many bases in an inning since at least the 1920s, according to Elias Sports Bureau.

RAYS 3, RED SOX 0 Drew Smyly and Tampa Bay’s bullpen held Boston to one hit, Kevin Kiermaier hit a solo home run in the 10th, and the Rays prevailed at Fenway Park for their third straight victory.

Smyly allowed one hit over eight innings and struck out 11.

BLUE JAYS 4, ORIOLES 3 Marcus Stroman allowed three runs in seven innings, Troy Tulowitzki drove in two runs, and Toronto won in Baltimore.

Jose Bautista had two hits and an R.B.I. for the Blue Jays.

BRAVES 8, DODGERS 1 Tyler Flowers went 4 for 4 and drove in three runs, Mallex Smith had three R.B.I., and host Atlanta trounced Los Angeles.

Sloppy defense and a poor start by Alex Wood doomed the Dodgers, who had three fielding errors, two hit batters, a wild pitch and a passed ball.

ROYALS 8, TIGERS 6 Salvador Perez hit a three-run homer and had a career-high five R.B.I., Yordano Ventura twice escaped bases-loaded jams, and host Kansas City held on against Detroit.

NATIONALS 7, MARLINS 0 Bryce Harper hit a grand slam, one of four home runs in a seven-run seventh inning for Washington, and the Nationals won in Miami.

The four homers in an inning were a Washington record, as well as a record for Marlins pitchers.

WHITE SOX 5, ANGELS 0 Mat Latos did not allow a hit until the fifth inning, Todd Frazier and Jose Abreu hit solo home runs, and host Chicago defeated Los Angeles to halt a three-game skid.

Latos allowed two hits in six and a third innings, lowering his E.R.A. to 0.49 in three starts.

INDIANS 3, MARINERS 2 Francisco Lindor had three hits, Carlos Carrasco allowed a run in six and a third innings, and host Cleveland survived Seattle.

Mike Napoli scored Lindor with a go-ahead double in the third inning, and the Indians took advantage of Mariners starter Wade Miley’s wildness to score twice in the fourth.

BREWERS 6, TWINS 5 Scooter Gennett hit a tiebreaking single in the ninth inning, and Milwaukee beat Minnesota in Minneapolis, ending the Twins’ four-game winning streak.


