


VIENNA — The election for president of Austria turned into a cliffhanger on Sunday, with a former Green Party leader battling a populist who is seeking to become the first far-right politician to be elected head of state in Europe since 1945.

With all votes cast on Sunday counted, the race between Norbert Hofer, 45, of the far-right Freedom Party, and Alexander Van der Bellen, a 72-year-old economist, was too close to call. The outcome will be determined by mail-in votes.

Nearly 900,000 postal votes, a record, were requested before Sunday’s election and will be counted Monday.

Both candidates, after a five-month race, said they would celebrate on Sunday evening. But the tension over who becomes president remained palpable, with the 50-50 division of Austria starkly illustrated.

“This signifies the split of the country, no doubt about it,” said Hans Rauscher, a centrist columnist for the newspaper Der Standard. “You can work at changing that, but it is, of course, the result of an anti-establishment mood.”

Outside Austria, Mr. Hofer’s unexpected first-place finish in the first round last month and strong showing in Sunday’s runoff will likely be seen as a boost to other right-wing, nationalist forces already wielding power and influence in neighboring Hungary and in Poland.

Aware of the strong foreign interest, the two camps in Austria were restrained when the first projections appeared on giant screens at their respective gatherings on Sunday. But in their final pre-election rallies on Friday, the two candidates made clear their contrasting styles.

Briefly addressing several hundred supporters at a low-key gathering in a central Vienna park that day, Mr. Van der Bellen encouraged supporters to get colleagues, friends and family out for what he said was a vote with huge implications for Austria’s future. He urged voters to support “an open, Europe-friendly, Europe-conscious Austria.”

Mr. Hofer, by contrast, addressed thousands of supporters at a boisterous two-hour rally in one of his party’s Vienna strongholds. He stressed that he welcomed foreigners and migrants to Austria, but only if they obeyed its laws.

“Those people who do not value our country and go to fight with ISIS or rape women — Austria is not your home,” he said. “You cannot stay in Austria.”

Mr. Hofer, who has portrayed himself throughout the five-month campaign as the “voice of reason,” left the heavy hitting to his party leader, Heinz-Christian Strache.

Speaking for an hour, Mr. Strache denounced Mr. Van der Bellen as the epitome of a worn-out establishment whose “welcome culture” for migrants endangered Austria. “Crime by foreigners is exploding because of the irresponsible politics of this government,” Mr. Strache said, touching on a familiar theme of the far-right party.

That message, amplified by the tabloid news media, seems to have struck a chord with Austrians wary of admitting more migrants.

The rightward lurch in the first round of voting last month, in which Mr. Hofer won 35 percent and Mr. Van der Bellen 21 percent, reflected disappointment with the two mainstream parties: the center-left Social Democratic Party and the center-right People’s Party. Those parties received a combined 22 percent of the vote.

That showing led to the resignation of Chancellor Werner Faymann, a Social Democrat, on May 9. Mr. Faymann’s successor, Christian Kern, a former head of the state rail system, took office with promises of a “New Deal” and has fueled hopes that Austria’s long-stagnant establishment politics might be revived.

Neither of the mainstream parties gave a recommendation to voters before Sunday’s election, but Mr. Kern made plain that he would vote for Mr. Van der Bellen.

Outside a polling station on Sunday in Simmering, a former Social Democrat stronghold in Vienna that fell to the Freedom Party in city elections last fall, voters seemed evenly divided between the two candidates.

Three sisters wearing head scarves — Amin, Samar and Esra Salem, ages 18, 21, and 23, and all students — said they had voted for Mr. Van der Bellen but expected Mr. Hofer to get a majority in the district.

Those who said they had voted for Mr. Hofer were more guarded about how they had voted, but agreed with Van der Bellen supporters that Sunday’s vote was historic. “It is a matter of our future,” said Silvia Tallian, 48, who works at a publicly funded investment bank.

Hermann Pomper, 75, declined to say how he had voted but made plain that he did not think highly of either candidate.

“Somebody has to represent Austria, so we must vote,” he said. “But the best did not make the cut” from last month’s first round.


