


Brooke Henderson and Mirim Lee withstood a wild weather day on Friday to share the lead at two under par halfway through the KPMG Women’s PGA Championship in Sammamish, Wash.

Top-ranked Lydia Ko was a stroke back along with Gerina Piller and Brittany Lincicome. Ko scrambled to a 70 in her bid to win her third straight major. Piller had a 69, and Lincicome shot 70.

Playing in the afternoon, Henderson and Lee fought through a mix of heavy rain, wind and a significant drop in the temperature at Sahalee Country Club. After six straight pars, Henderson, an 18-year-old Canadian, birdied the par-3 17th, but she bogeyed the 18th for a two-over 73 that dropped her back into a tie with Lee, who shot 69.

AROUND GOLF Bailey Tardy, 19, and Monica Vaughn, 21, teamed to win two matches to help the United States tie Britain and Ireland, 3-3, after the first day of the Curtis Cup. The United States leads the biennial series, 28-7-3, having won by 13 to 7 in 2014 in St. Louis. Daniel Berger shot a six-under 64 and took a three-stroke lead in the St. Jude Classic at TPC Southwind in Memphis. Tom Hoge was second with a 69 for 134. Dustin Johnson, the 2012 champion, and was tied with Phil Mickelson (65) and Brooks Koepka (65) at five under.

The police are investigating an allegation that a Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver, Nelson Agholor, sexually assaulted a dancer at Cheerleaders Gentlemen’s Club on Thursday afternoon, the day the Eagles wrapped up their off-season workouts.

Fortunato Perri Jr., a lawyer representing Agholor, would not discuss the allegation but said, “Nelson has not been involved in any criminal conduct whatsoever.”

The N.B.A. All-Star guards Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder and James Harden of the Houston Rockets said they had withdrawn from consideration for the United States team for the Rio Olympics. Other United States stars who will miss the Games include Stephen Curry, LaMarcus Aldridge, Anthony Davis, Blake Griffin, Chris Paul and John Wall.

Canada’s Olympic hopes suffered a blow when Minnesota Timberwolves guard Andrew Wiggins said he would not play for his country at the Olympic qualifying tournament in the Philippines in July.

UCONN REUNION Alyssa Thomas scored on a tip-in with 0.6 of a second left, and the Connecticut Sun (2-7) beat the Seattle Storm, 77-76, in Uncasville, Conn., ending a six-game losing streak. Breanna Stewart missed a contested attempt for the Storm (3-6) at the buzzer. Stewart’s former UConn teammate Morgan Tuck scored 20 points for the Sun, and another UConn alumna, Sue Bird, led Seattle with 24 points. UConn Coach Geno Auriemma was at the game.

The Devils acquired forward Marc Savard and a second-round pick in 2018 from the Florida Panthers for two minor league players, Graham Black and Paul Thompson. Savard, 38, has not played since the 2010-11 season because of concussion-related problems. He has 207 goals and 499 assists in 807 regular-season games with the Rangers, Calgary, Atlanta and Boston.

Joey Logano posted a lap of 199.557 miles an hour to win the pole in the Nascar Sprint Cup FireKeepers Casino 400 at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich. “It’s a lot of fun,” he said. “You’re booking down to the corners at 200 and something.”

Stephen Strasburg struck out 10 and won his 13th straight decision despite a rocky beginning, and the host Washington Nationals overcame a four-run deficit to beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 9-6.

The Nationals scored in five straight innings after trailing by 4-0 in the third. Wilson Ramos, Stephen Drew and Danny Espinosa homered off Jeremy Hellickson (4-4), and Daniel Murphy drove in three runs with a pair of doubles.

Strasburg (10-0) retired the final 14 batters he faced after yielding Tommy Joseph’s two-run homer in the third.

AROUND THE MAJORSThe Cincinnati Reds placed center fielder Billy Hamilton on the seven-day concussion list. Hamilton was hit in the head while sliding into third base on Wednesday. The Philadelphia Phillies placed the right-hander Vince Velasquez on the 15-day disabled list with a right biceps strain two days after he was pulled from a start after throwing only two pitches. He is 5-2 with a 3.65 E.R.A.


