


For the 400th anniversary in April of Shakespeare’s death, the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, perhaps unable to arrange for his exhumed remains to be put on public display, produced the next best thing: a traveling exhibition of the First Folio, destined for all 50 states. The Folio is the first collection of Shakespeare’s plays, printed posthumously in 1623, and there are only 234 known copies; the Folger, which owns 82 of them, is dispatching a rotating cast of 18. Thousands of people nationwide have been lining up to view what the Shakespeare scholar Emma Smith calls his “bibliographic embodiment,” encased in a high-tech vitrine to prevent decomposition.

The exhibition is precisely the sort of affair that interests Smith, who observes in SHAKESPEARE’S FIRST FOLIO: Four Centuries of an Iconic Book (Oxford University, $29.95) that “many — perhaps a majority — of encounters with the First Folio would not be classified as ‘reading.’ ” You can do plenty of other things, after all, with the Folio, such as buying, selling, annotating, collecting, bequeathing, inheriting, stealing and forging it. (Also: writing a 379-page book about it.) Smith concerns herself with all these activities, paying special attention to how, over time, they have invested the book, as well as the figure of Shakespeare, with meaning.

For example, gifts of the First Folio from colonial powers to colonized nations often became culturally problematic, another manifestation of imperialism’s troubled legacy. A copy donated in 1861 to a library in what is now Cape Town, South Africa, was from the outset kept apart from the general collection, subsequently neglected and ultimately surpassed in national significance by the so-called Robben Island Bible — a 1970 edition of Shakespeare’s complete works smuggled to political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, by supporters of the African National Congress.

All this attention to the First Folio is well and good. But let’s not forget the quartos. For many of Shakespeare’s plays, such as “Richard III,” “Othello,” “Hamlet” and “King Lear,” there exist not one but two authoritative texts: the version in the First Folio and a single-volume quarto edition (sometimes more than one). Unlike the Folio, which was published seven years after Shakespeare’s death, many of the quartos were published during his lifetime — though also without his participation, it seems. The problem is that the two versions differ. Some discrepancies can be substantial, involving hundreds of lines. Others may be small but significant. In the 1604 quarto, Hamlet’s flesh is “too too sallied” (besieged), whereas in the Folio it’s “too too solid” (real, of this world).

How to construe the relationship, for a given play, between the two sources and whatever Shakespeare had in mind? Because of the irregularities of Jacobean editing and printing processes, a traditional approach, favored by the literary historian Sir Brian Vickers in THE ONE “KING LEAR” (Harvard University, $45), is to assume the Folio and quarto versions are both corruptions, and to draw on both texts, along with other resources, to try to reconstruct Shakespeare’s original, lost intention. (Hamlet’s flesh ends up being “too too sullied,” or sinful, in one such effort.) A competing school of thought, however, ascendant among Shakespeare scholars since the 1980s, views each text as an independent representation of Shakespeare’s vision for the play, but at different points in time: an early version (the quarto) and a revision (the Folio) incorporating refinements from stage productions.

In the case of “King Lear,” Vickers staunchly opposes the revision theory, claiming it lacks “any material evidence.” The situation with “Lear,” roughly speaking, is that the quarto (1608) has 285 lines not in the Folio, while the Folio has 100 or so lines not in the quarto. For the revisionists, the extra lines in the Folio are later additions by Shakespeare, and the missing lines represent his prudent cuts. Vickers, on the other hand, believes the extra lines in the Folio were supposed to have appeared in the quarto as well, and the missing lines in the Folio were never supposed to be taken out. Shakespeare, that is, wanted to include virtually all the lines varying between the two sources.

Vickers’s argument for his theory might sound fanciful if it weren’t advanced with such expertise. On the basis of elaborate typographical scrutiny, he speculates that the printer of the quarto, Nicholas Okes, was forced to cut lines because he underestimated the amount of paper he would need for the play. Okes’s desperate attempts to squeeze the text — using mechanical space-saving techniques as well as editorial tricks like setting passages of verse as prose — had come up short. Vickers devotes some 150 pages to this argument, demonstrating that the “Lear” quarto has an unusually high incidence of ad hoc compressions, even by Jacobean printing standards. As for the lines missing from the Folio, he concludes, relying on less technical evidence, that they are a result of “officious editorial interventions.” Thus the two texts of “Lear” should be merged — which was standard editorial practice from the 18th century until the revisionists came along — ­re-establishing the one “Lear” Shakespeare intended.

Murky as Shakespeare the author can be, Shakespeare the man is an even darker pond. “The history of Shakespearean biography,” writes the English professor Adam G. Hooks, “is a history of failure.” This is not a lament. As Hooks explains in SELLING SHAKESPEARE: Biography, Bibliography, and the Book Trade (Cambridge University, $99.99), he wants to advance a new type of biography, or “biblio-­biography”: a story of how 17th- and 18th-century stationers, booksellers and bibliographers, who were in the business of creating and marketing authorial personas, gave rise to Shakespeare’s “life in print.”

In practice, this means Hooks is interested less in speculation about, say, Shakespeare’s “lost years” (1585-92), and more in figures like the stationer Andrew Wise, who took the unusual and consequential step of adding Shakespeare’s name to the title pages of his plays. As a result of Wise’s particular trade practices, and the aesthetic niche he cultivated in the book market, he helped transform “Shakespeare” from a poet known for a sweet, “hony-tongued” style to a playwright associated with formidable characters like Richard III and Falstaff.

Other scholars are sticking to the quest for the actual Shakespeare. The archivist Robert Bearman, in SHAKESPEARE’S MONEY: How Much Did He Make and What Did This Mean? (Oxford University, $34.95), offers a surprisingly affecting portrait. Although there exists very little of the sort of documentation you would need to write a traditional biography, patchy records of Shakespeare’s business dealings do survive. These include such pulse-quickening affairs as the purchase of New Place (the second largest house in Stratford-upon-Avon), the Addenbrooke case (recovering a debt of 6 pounds, plus 4 shillings in damages), the Welcombe enclosures (protecting his property income), the curious acquisition of the Blackfriars Gatehouse and his dabbling in the local malt trade.

Unpromising as this material might seem, Bearman uses it to suggest an endearing side of Shakespeare: the social striver, working frantically not to achieve recognition for his contributions to English theater but rather to elevate his family from a lowly position (in part a result of his father’s business failure in the 1580s) to that of a gentleman, capable of living comfortably off income from investments. That Shakespeare never quite achieved this aim, while still succeeding in restoring his family to respectable status as minor gentry, makes the story only more poignant. “Shakespeare in Debt” would have been a better movie.

The question might now occur to you: Does anyone, you know, read these plays any more? In his lightly erudite and consistently imaginative HAMLET: Fold on Fold (Yale University, $35), the novelist Gabriel Josipovici restores the faith. Should he, he wonders, provide a static analysis of “Hamlet,” and thereby risk losing touch with the play’s “relentless forward motion”? Or should he just go along for the ride, and thereby risk “being carried not towards understanding but away from it”? Josipovici (who sees in his predicament a parallel with Hamlet’s own quandary) chooses to do both, reading through the play section by section (or fold on fold, in his preferred terminology), offering commentary along the way. It’s fun: like watching the play with a clever friend whispering in your ear.


