


Los Angelenos have come to see the Echo Park Craft Fair as a kind of pilgrimage: a semiannual bonanza for independent goods from makers, crafters, designers and chefs. This Saturday and Sunday, crowds will head to Mack Sennet Studios for the market — which was founded in 2009 by Beatrice Valenzuela and Rachel Craven — for what promises be the fair’s biggest, and most varied, selection yet. “I wanted to become an exhibitor because I believe in the good that Rachel and Beatrice have created and continue to create with each fair, and with the personal work that they do,” says Lauri Kranz of Edible Gardens LA, a new vendor who will be participating this year. “It is very special, this passion that they have and then share with the rest of us.” The Kosas Cosmetics founder Sheena Yaitanes agrees: “I jumped at the chance to become an exhibitor,” she says. “It will be a joy to be in the presence of talented artists.” Here, a look at six first-time vendors that won’t get lost in the mix.

When the sisters Margaret and Katherine Kleveland launched Dôen online in February, much of their modern bohemian collection was snapped up on the first day. The direct-to-consumer line brings its wares to the craft fair for the first time, which the designers hope will be a way of introducing themselves to customers — offline. “We wanted to be able to connect with our Los Angeles community and meet some of our amazing customers,” says Margaret. “Also, since we are direct-to-consumer and have no storefront, we thought it would be nice for people to be able to see items in person, feel the material and get to know us and the brand. All of our pieces have intricate handwork, are high quality and have special details, which we wanted customers to see and touch.” While shoppers should look for seaside-friendly pieces and beach cover-ups, fans should be prepared: Many of the highly coveted, sold-out pieces from the spring collection will be available in real life.

“Like many of my friends that went to art school with me, I had fallen into a career and fallen off on making art,” says David Scheid, who first started creating and installing stained glass at a studio in Cincinnati in the mid-’90s as a part-time job. Nearly two decades later, he found himself looking for a creative outlet while tour managing bands like Girl Talk and Beirut. So when his friends Valenzuela and her husband Ramsey Condor casually mentioned they needed a stained-glass window for their front door, Scheid created a piece for them. Now, known around L.A. for his site-specific installations and multicolored triangle hangings, Scheid has made a range of stained-glass pieces for the Echo Park Craft Fair, which vary in size, pattern and colorway. “When hung in a place where light can really pour through, the shadows cast will change the whole vibe of the room. It’s a fleeting thing,” he says, of why he loves the medium. “Once the sun is gone you have to wait until tomorrow to see it again.”

Edible Gardens LA designs, builds, plants and maintains organic vegetable gardens and edible landscapes. That includes walk-in garden houses, which the company’s founder, Lauri Kranz, describes as similar to a “greenhouse but with screens instead of glass so that the air flows through and the bees and butterflies can come and go.” For the craft fair, Edible Gardens LA will offer items from its garden-to-table line, and debut a few new collaborations, including a denim market bag made with the designer Agnes Baddoo, a waxed canvas lunch bag created with Catherine McCord of Weelicious and a special Nature Is Slow dark chocolate and rose-petal bar with Valerie Confections.

“I’m doing my part to stimulate the postal economy,” says the artist Clare Crespo, who has teamed up for a second round of her Deli Post stationery collaboration with Paper Chase Press. “It feels important to keep this tactile magical custom alive in our civilization.” Unlike her first edition of paper sandwich fixings, this spring Crespo has been inspired by her illustrated mandalas of fruits, vegetables, snacks and dishes of spring and summer. Paper Chase Press, Nicole Katz’s print house in Hollywood, applied Crespo’s delectable drawings to a new suite of paper goods — including postcard pads with bright green colored edges, quirky notebooks and greeting cards. Consider this a preview of the paper goods food market Crespo plans to launch online and in stores later this year. “Food and mail make people happy. They are two of our great joys!” she says.

With years of combined experience in the coffee business and the restaurant industry, friends Emily Erb and Anna Morton co-founded Leaves and Flowers in 2014 with the goal of creating food and beverage products with a sense of well-being. Working closely with farmers in California and Oregon, the pair’s line of herbal infusions and small-batch teas take inspiration from plants themselves. “The freshness of these ingredients enhances the flavor and potency of our product, making it a truly unique tea experience,” says Morton, who attended the California School of Herbal Studies. “While we bear in mind the medicinal properties of each ingredient, we never compromise on flavor, and in so doing our herbal infusions are as delicious as they are medicinal.” In addition to selling their blends at the craft fair, the pair will be preparing organic matcha lattes, hot and iced, using a batch of organic matcha that just arrived from Japan, as well as their turmeric wellness tea, a therapeutic mix of turmeric, rosemary, ginger, citrus peel and black pepper.

Kosas Cosmetics launched last October with only four shades of lipstick and, according to the company’s founder Sheena Yaitanes, stands out for its “willingness to keep beauty simple.” This translates to luxe mango and shea-butter-infused formulas with ingredients like green tea, rose hip, sweet orange and grapeseed oils that give a pretty sheen in one swipe — and up the intensity as they build. Kosas will introduce four new, warm-weather colors at the fair, and Yaitanes will be there herself, with her lipsticks and a mirror in hand. “We will be helping women discover shades that flatter them that they will actually wear,” she says. “It’s important to me that people get use out of the lipstick they buy.” Yaitanes says her goal with Kosas is to eventually make essentials every woman needs in her makeup case. “The collection will always be concise,” she says. “That selectiveness is at the heart of our philosophy.”


