


LOS ANGELES — Mayor Ed Lee of San Francisco defended his police chief, Gregory P. Suhr, for months — in fact, he kept saying good things about him even as he forced him out of the job. “The progress we have made has been meaningful,” Mr. Lee said when he announced that at his request, Mr. Suhr had resigned.

Mr. Lee would get some vehement disagreement from protesters who have demanded Mr. Suhr’s ouster over a string of fatal, racially charged police shootings. But what happened in San Francisco mirrored recent events in Chicago and Baltimore, where in the furor over killings by the police, mayors got rid of their police chiefs — even as they and other civic leaders insisted that the chiefs had been moving things in the right direction.

Mr. Lee said he was responding to shootings that had “shaken and divided our city,” and appointed Deputy Chief Toney Chaplin, who is black, as acting chief, to take the place of Mr. Suhr, who is white.

In a news conference on Friday, Mr. Chaplin, who led departmental reform efforts under Mr. Suhr, said he would largely follow the path set by his predecessor. That is expected to include, in the near future, equipping officers with body cameras, and an overhaul, with the advice of the Justice Department, of the Police Department’s policy on use of force.

“I’m going to steer the ship in the direction we’ve already started in,” Mr. Chaplin said. “My priorities going forward? Reforms, reforms, reforms.”

He said he had worked in the department for 26 years, primarily in troubled parts of the city, including time with the anti-gang task force.

Criticism of the police, and Mr. Suhr in particular, has been running high since the fatal shootings of a black man, Mario Woods, in December and a Latino man, Luis Gongora, in April, and Mr. Suhr stepped down hours after an officer shot and killed a black woman who tried to drive away from the police and crashed in what they believed to be a stolen car.

In the earlier shootings, each man had a knife, and the first man was a suspect in a stabbing, but in both cases, witness accounts and video recordings called into question whether the suspects posed any immediate threat and whether the police needlessly escalated the confrontations. Mr. Suhr at first defended the officers in the December shooting, leading to the first concerted calls for his resignation, and then had to backtrack as evidence emerged.

After Mr. Woods was shot, protesters harried Mr. Lee in the corridors of City Hall and in public appearances. They demanded to meet with him and called on him to fire Mr. Suhr.

In an earlier time, when crime was more rampant and video cameras were rare, before the birth of Black Lives Matter and the social media that fueled it, such shootings rarely cost anyone a job. Even in recent years, while some top officials have lost their jobs over civilian deaths at the hands of officers, others have held on, in cities like Cleveland and New York, despite fierce criticism.

Unlike most cities that have been convulsed by such protests, San Francisco has a relatively small black population. But residents say the city’s stark and growing divide between rich and poor has exacerbated the racial divide, generating similar tensions.

People both for and against Mr. Suhr’s ouster said the political atmosphere demanded a change of leadership. And people on both sides said they had little faith that the change would make much difference.

“The resignation is really reflective of the state of city politics — after so much pressure, Ed Lee felt the need to offer something, even though we’d been demanding Suhr’s resignation for some time,” said Frank Lara, who is active in a group called the Justice 4 Mario Woods Coalition. “I think the new chief will have a big struggle to achieve the reforms Suhr said we would achieve. It’s a systemic problem. What’s wrong with the S.F.P.D. is so ingrained.”

The Rev. Amos C. Brown, the president of the San Francisco N.A.A.C.P. chapter, said Mr. Suhr should have been able to continue.

“You had some forces that made a scapegoat out of him,” Mr. Brown said. “If Jesus, Buddha, Muhammad and Confucius were running that department, you’d still have problems.”

Chuck Wexler, chief executive of the Police Executive Research Forum, a Washington-based group that advises police departments, said that changing a department’s culture was tough, slow work, which can increase the appeal of a quick change at the top, however cosmetic.

“For mayors, heavy news coverage of use-of-force cases has made that a defining issue,” Mr. Wexler said, “and sometimes they make a calculated decision that firing the chief will change things.”

His group has worked with the San Francisco department, and Mr. Wexler called Mr. Suhr a reformer who tried to curb use of force and improve community relations.

“This wasn’t a chief that was in denial,” he said. “There’s no question here that politics trumped what he was doing.”


