


Courtney Lee was steaming after missing a layup that would have given Charlotte the lead heading into the final minute.

His anger did not last long.

Miami’s will last for a while.

Lee’s 3-pointer with 25.2 seconds left put the Hornets ahead to stay, and Charlotte beat the Heat, 90-88, in Miami in Game 5 of their Eastern Conference first-round series Wednesday night.

The Hornets have won three straight games in the series and will take a three-games-to-two lead into a potential Game 6 clincher on Friday night.

Marvin Williams led the Hornets with 17 points, while Al Jefferson and Kemba Walker each had 14 for Charlotte, which got its first road playoff win in 14 years. Jeremy Lin added 11.

Dwyane Wade scored 25 for Miami, while Luol Deng scored 15, Joe Johnson added 13, and Hassan Whiteside finished with 11 points and 12 rebounds.

Miami thought Wade had been fouled with 2.6 seconds left, then thought they had fouled Cody Zeller in an effort to send him to the line as time was running out. Neither call came, and the Heat are a game from elimination.

Lee missed a layup with about a minute left, insisting he had been fouled by Wade. But the Heat came up empty on the ensuing possession, and Lee got an offensive rebound and eventually scored on Charlotte’s next trip down the floor.

That capped the scoring, as Miami left stunned.

Miami started the game by running out to a 14-6 lead, before the Hornets answered with a 14-0 run — featuring four 3-pointers, each from a different player. The Hornets finished with five 3s in the first quarter for a 28-25 lead and led by 40-28 midway through the second.

That was when Wade got going.

He scored 10 of his 14 first-half points in the final 5 minutes 49 seconds before intermission, setting off a 17-7 Miami burst to narrow the gap to 49-47. Everything in his bag of tricks was working; in that stretch alone he hit a short bank shot, a midrange jumper, a layup, a finger roll off a Eurostep move and a dunk in traffic that brought the capacity crowd to its feet.

JACKSON AND BLATT SAID TO MEET Phil Jackson, the president of the Knicks, met with David Blatt on Monday to discuss the team’s coaching vacancy, according to a person briefed on their discussion.

Blatt, who coached Cleveland to the finals a year ago, was fired in January with the Cavaliers in first place in the Eastern Conference. Cleveland General Manager David Griffin said at the time that the team was still underperforming, and he cited a “lack of connectiveness” in the locker room.

Blatt, a successful coach overseas before he joined the Cavaliers before the start of the 2014-15 season, coached Cleveland to an 83-40 overall regular-season record. Kurt Rambis, who took over as the Knicks’ interim coach after Jackson fired Derek Fisher in February, is still believed to be the front-runner for the job. Blatt did not immediately return an email seeking comment. Jackson’s meeting with Blatt, who played at Princeton with Knicks General Manager Steve Mills, was first reported by The Vertical. SCOTT CACCIOLA


