


For all the rejoicing that comes with the arrival of summer, we know that warmer weather brings a new set of beauty concerns: humidity-frizzed hair, newly exposed skin begging for additional SPF, and a problem area or two aching for exfoliating and toning after being covered up for months. Below, the sunscreens, hair products and spa services to get you ready for the season.

Pump Up Your SPF

To make applying SPF more appealing, there are new sunscreens that aren’t creamy or streaky. “It’s all about functionality,” said Patricia Wexler, a dermatologist in Manhattan. “There are new formulations that make using SPF much less invasive than it used to be.” Dr. Wexler also advises regular exfoliation, which can help ensure that sunscreen is evenly distributed.

Fresh Sugar Sport Treatment SPF 30 is a thick, waxy stick that comes in a tube reminiscent of the shade of an Hermès shopping bag. It’s a tweak of the popular Sugar line of lip balms, but designed to be used on the face and body as well, providing a higher level of sun protection. The water-resistant formula includes moisturizing avocado and black-currant-seed oil.

Soleil Toujours, a line of sunscreens that is sold at stores like Barneys New York, is adding several new products to its offerings next month. Set & Protect Micro Mist is applied over makeup. It leaves the skin looking pleasantly matte while providing broad spectrum SPF 30 sun protection. Another addition to the line is an SPF 30 mineral body lotion that comes in transparent and tinted formulas.

Zelens Body Defence Sunscreen was formulated by a plastic surgeon with a practice in London. It is an oil that has common sunscreen ingredients like octinoxate and avobenzone added for broad spectrum SPF 30 protection, along with squalane to moisturize and vitamin E. The texture isn’t greasy, and it blends quickly into the skin. It can be used on the hair as well as the body.

Dr Russo Sun Protective Day Cleanser SPF 30 was conceived by a dermatologist based in Britain. It works counterintuitively: a milky face wash that leaves a protective layer of sunscreen on the skin after the product is rinsed off. In the United States, where it was introduced a few months ago, the cleanser is available exclusively at Space NK.

Hydrate Your Hair

For hair in particular, switching up one’s routine with the season makes sense. “What you do in the wintertime is not what you’re going to do in the summer,” said Eva Scrivo, a hairstylist with two salons in Manhattan. She suggests washing your hair less frequently, because natural oils can help prevent the onslaught of frizz when humidity levels are high.

Goldwell Kerasilk Control Smoothing Fluid is part of a new collection of products introduced this month that aim to tame frizz and smooth the hair with ingredients like silk and glyoxylic acid. It can be used on either dry or damp hair to counteract the effects of humidity.

Also new this month is the Kérastase Nutritive Magistral Collection, which targets dryness and damage from factors like sun exposure. The line’s formulas include benjoin tree resin, sourced from Laos and Indonesia, to fortify the hair. All promise to leave the hair moisturized for three days. A standout is the Nutrive Masque Magistral, which was designed for thick locks but can help smooth any hair that’s parched.

Rahua Elixir Daily Hair Drops, introduced last month, promises to help repair hair that’s been damaged from the sun. Like the company’s other products, this one is made with ungurahua oil from the Amazon. It can be applied to the scalp and the hair itself, especially at the ends.

Ouidad, which specializes in products for curly hair, is introducing Curl Immersion Hi-Defining Custard on June 1. It includes moisturizing coconut oil as well as Kalahari melon-seed oil to fortify the hair and maintain curly and wavy shapes. Once applied, the thick gel has a light feel and delivers significant hold on humid days for even extremely curly hair.

Philip Kingsley Citrus Sunshine Swimcap is a new iteration of the popular Swimcap conditioning treatment, originally created in 1984 for the United States Olympic synchronized swimming team. Like its predecessor, it is meant to be used on damp hair to thwart the effects of chlorine and sun. This version is lightly fragrant with notes of orange and bergamot.

Be Beach-Body Ready

In time for bikini season, the Caudalie Vinothérapie Spa at the Plaza Hotel recently added Remodelage by Martine de Richeville, a Parisian aesthetician, to its menu. The treatment consists of a targeted massage to improve lymphatic drainage and stimulate the metabolism. While not the most relaxing experience — the pressured circular motions can feel a bit like a rope burn — it also aims to help rid the body of toxins.

A few blocks away, at the Peninsula Spa New York, the new Micro-Puncture Treatment aims to improve appearance areas like the neck and décolletage. Introduced this month, it stimulates collagen production by piercing the top layer of the skin with tiny sterile needles, followed by a Biologique Recherche serum that consists of 24 amino acids and vitamins. The treatment is also offered for the face as well as, without the serum, targeted parts of the body.

To slough off winter skin, the Red Door in Union Square recently introduced the Mint Julep Body Treatment. It includes a salt scrub as well as a cream that blends mint and lavender oils with shea butter, cocoa butter and jojoba seed oil to soothe and moisturize. The spa also offers a companion manicure and pedicure.

A summery cocktail also inspired the new Grapefruit Vodka Pedicure at Sweet Lily Natural Nail Spa in TriBeCa. The treatment includes a soak in a solution of 75 percent grapefruit juice, water and a splash of vodka (a natural antiseptic). Also part of the service: a scrub that is made on the premises for each client with sugar and lime oil. Like the soak, it is intended solely for beautifying, not consumption.


