


On a bright, warm day 50 years ago this week, three young men went out to have a drink that they hoped would make history.

The men, members of the early gay rights group the Mattachine Society, aimed to challenge bars that refused service to gay people, a common practice at the time, though one unsupported by any specific law. Such refusals fell under a vague regulation that banned taverns from serving patrons deemed “disorderly.”

“At the time, being homosexual was, in itself, seen as disorderly,” said Dick Leitsch, 81, reminiscing the other day in his apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.

Mr. Leitsch, then the head of Mattachine’s New York chapter, and his cohorts called their action a “Sip-In,” a tipsy tip of the hat to the civil rights lunch-counter sit-ins then being held at places that segregated black patrons. The Sip-In was a pivotal moment for the gay rights movement, predating the Stonewall uprising by more than three years. That it is largely forgotten says a lot about how the gay political conversation has shifted over the past five decades.

This history will be invoked on Thursday when a key site — Julius’, a bar in the West Village — marks the Sip-In’s golden anniversary. Largely because of the bar’s connection to the Mattachine’s actions on April 21, 1966, the directors of the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation are trying to have Julius’ declared a landmark. On Wednesday, the bar was entered into the National Register of Historic Places.

On the day of the Sip-In, the activists invited four newspaper reporters, including Thomas A. Johnson of The New York Times. The plan was to convene at noon at the Ukrainian-American Village Hall, a bar on St. Marks Place. “But we were 10 minutes late,” Mr. Leitsch said with a laugh.

The Times reporter arrived on time, tipping off the owners, who shut the place. A sign in the window made the management’s attitude clear: “If you are gay, please stay away.”

So the men moved across the street to the Dom, a club that, by night, hosted concerts by the Velvet Underground. It had a sign just as unwelcoming as the one at the Ukrainian Hall. The Dom, too, was closed.

Next stop: a place that never closed, Howard Johnson’s, at Eighth Street and Avenue of the Americas. “Gay people used to go there after hours and, in the men’s room downstairs, they’d have a little sex,” Mr. Leitsch said.

Slipping into a corner booth, the activists handed the waitress a statement that announced: “We are homosexuals. We believe that a place of public accommodation has an obligation to serve an orderly person, and that we are entitled to service so long as we are orderly.”

The flustered waitress called over the manager who, according to one newspaper report, said to the press: “Why shouldn’t they be served a drink? They look like perfect gentlemen to me.”

“I don’t think the government has any right to question a man’s sex life,” he continued.

The manager ordered the waitress to bring the men drinks — on the house. “We thought, what do we do now?” Mr. Leitsch said. “What if no one refuses us?”

The men then advanced to a Mafia-owned Tiki bar, the Waikiki. Its amused manager told them: “How do I know you’re homosexuals? Give these guys a drink on us.”

At that point, another participant, John Timmons, told the other men: “I’m starting to feel drunk. We better get this done already,” Mr. Leitsch recounted.

In desperation, the group trudged over to Julius’ on West 10th Street. “It was a rather dull neighborhood place which was about three-quarters gay,” said Randy Wicker, 78, who joined the action there. “I called it a closet-queen bar.”

The activists knew Julius’ had to refuse them, because the night before, a man who had been served there had later been entrapped by an officer for “gay activity,” meaning the bar was in jeopardy of having its liquor license revoked. As they entered, the men spied a sign that read “Patrons Must Face the Bar While Drinking,” an instruction used to thwart cruising.

As soon as Mr. Leitsch approached, the bartender put a glass in front of him. When the men announced they were gay, the bartender put his hand over the glass; it was captured in a photograph by Fred McDarrah for The Village Voice.

According to Mr. Wicker and Mr. Leitsch, their battle to be served was a subset of a larger issue: the ritualized police entrapment of gay men for intent to have sex. “With this action, we were entrapping them into obeying the law,” Mr. Wicker said.

The next day’s New York Times featured an article about the event with the headline “3 Deviates Invite Exclusion by Bars.” Two weeks later, a far more sympathetic piece appeared in The Voice. The publicity prompted a response from the chairman of the State Liquor Authority, Donald S. Hostetter, who denied that his organization ever threatened the liquor licenses of bars that served gays. The decision to serve was up to individual bartenders, he said.

At that point, the Commission on Human Rights got involved. Its chairman, William H. Booth, told The Times in a later article: “We have jurisdiction over discrimination based on sex. Denial of bar service to a homosexual solely for that reason would come within those bounds.”

In New Jersey, Mattachine decided to sue bars that refused service to gay people. In 1967, the state’s Supreme Court ruled that “well-behaved homosexuals” could not be denied service. “In our culture, homosexuals are indeed unfortunates,” the ruling added. But “their status does not make them criminals or outlaws.”

Mattachine, founded in 1950 in Los Angeles, was named for a fictional jester who told truths to the king no one else dared to. Members appeared on radio and television, representing “the homosexual point of view.” They also advised gay men on how to navigate arrests in sex-sting operations. The members presented themselves as model citizens, in suits and ties. “It was our responsibility to make gay people look as respectable as possible,” Mr. Wicker said.

The Mattachine’s assimilationist stance seemed weak once the Stonewall Inn exploded in June 1969, and Mr. Wicker spoke out against the uprising, which he later called “political suicide.”

Mr. Leitsch said he felt instantly overshadowed by a younger, louder generation. His pioneering efforts, which included showing his full face to TV cameras, instead of cloaking his identity in shadow, a common practice at the time, became old news overnight. “The day before Stonewall, I was the only gay person,” Mr. Leitsch said. “The day after, everybody was gay.”

Today, as the rights of transgender people represent the cutting edge of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender conversation, the voices of the men who made up the Mattachine Society can seem antique. Yet some are working to improve the image of both the group and Julius’. John Cameron Mitchell, an actor, writer and director, has been hosting monthly Mattachine parties for eight years at the bar.

Mr. Mitchell acknowledges that the bar has a frumpy image. “It’s the oldest gay bar in the city — with some of the oldest gays,” he said.

Yet his Mattachine parties have generated offshoot events as far afield as Berlin.

The building that houses Julius’, which dates from 1826, has been a bar since 1864 and has had a gay clientele since the 1950s. It has been a setting for films including “The Boys in the Band” and “The Normal Heart.”

The Sip-In was key to its prominence. “By all accounts, this was one of the first, if not the very first, planned act of civil disobedience for L.G.B.T. rights,” said Andrew Berman, executive director of the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. “It set a lot of incredibly important changes in motion.”


