


SCENE After learning that Alicia (Julianna Margulies) is having an affair with Will (Josh Charles), the other name partner in her law firm, Diane confronts him on the roof of their office building in this Season 3 episode and orders him to break it off.

“I think it was the quintessence of Diane, who could wield authority with a kind of centeredness and strength and integrity. In that scene you really see her lock eyes with him and really let him have it. It’s not condescending, it’s as equals, but she levels him. And the argument is on her side. I thought it represented the best of who Diane was and why I loved playing that character so much. Because I don’t think we see those kinds of women represented in television or movies.”

SCENE In a Season 3 guest appearance as a lawyer who shamelessly uses his neurological condition to advance his clients’ interests, Louis appears to be sincerely helping Alicia find her missing daughter. But Alicia soon questions those apparent good intentions.

“At one point, he went through her purse and got some texts that were positive for his case and negative for hers. And he was completely calm when he explained to her that all is fair in love and war. He’ll do anything, and he’ll justify it. What I loved about him was he kills with a smile. Fairness has nothing to do with it. The blindfold belongs on the statue, it doesn’t belong on the lawyer.”

SCENE At the beginning of Season 6, Cary finds himself behind bars, accused of conspiring to transport heroin as the authorities try to get him to turn on one of his and Alicia’s clients.

“In this scene, Cary is in jail and he gets his hand sliced by an inmate as a test of loyalty to Cary’s client, Lemond Bishop, who’s the biggest drug dealer in Chicago. It’s the ultimate test of courage and strength and heart for Cary at a time when he is most vulnerable in the entire series. Not too long before this scene takes place, Cary was a thriving, confident lawyer, and yet in an instant his life is drastically and violently altered as he’s wrongly accused and arrested and sent to prison. In this scene, I was trying to capture Cary’s fear and confusion and physical pain, while at the same time trying to show that although he may bend in this moment, his spirit will never break.”

SCENE Eli, the Machiavellian political adviser to Peter Florrick, Alicia’s politician husband, comes clean with Alicia in Season 7 that six years earlier he had erased a voice mail from Will professing his love and willingness to give up everything for her.

“The pivotal moments for me have always been a little more than just Eli’s shtick, which is great fun and everybody loves it. You know this tightly wound, ruthless, profane, uptight Jew, but you also see some humanity. This scene was part of the longer arc of Eli this season softening up a little bit — falling in love, being betrayed. He realized he had had the potential to give what he hadn’t got to Alicia, and he withheld it.”

SCENE Expecting that he is about to be arrested (again) on corruption charges in Season 7, Peter — now the governor of Illinois — says he’ll give Alicia the divorce she’s demanding if she’ll consent to one more request.

“The last episodes put a period on the continuing disintegration of a marriage that was wavering from the first episode. They seemed held together by emotional scar tissue. The final negotiation in the kitchen where he agrees to the divorce if she will stand with him when he resigns no longer seemed like the end — it was the end. A certain relief for them both, I’m sure.”


