


To the Sports Editor:

Re “Two Horses Die After Preakness Undercard Races,” May 22: The lives of these horses, Homeboykris and Pramedya, were as valuable to them as the winning profits are to the bettors and owners, and victories shouldn’t be celebrated where deaths are not mourned.

Such fatalities are all too common and often go unreported. According to the Equine Injury Database compiled by the Jockey Club, 4,649 thoroughbreds died in racetrack-related events from 2009 to 2015.

The practice of using animals for our own pleasure and profit runs throughout history and cultures. We like to pretend that we’ve shed our barbaric selves, but the violent echoes of the past resound in our amphitheaters — no matter how fancy our attire or elegant our hats.

Colleen Patrick-Goudreau

Oakland, Calif.

To the Sports Editor:

Re “Harvey’s Slide Deepens as Nationals Hammer Him a Second Time,” May 25: Instead of having Matt Harvey stay in the rotation, skip a start or go to the minors, put him in the bullpen. There is no shame in this. His pitching woes are already nakedly public. Let him pitch an inning or two here or there, building up his confidence while trying to regain his form.

Maybe this is all a result of a slower recovery from Tommy John surgery compared with other pitchers who have undergone this procedure. He should go at the pace at which he can both help the team and heal his arm fully.

Spenser Alpern

New York City

To the Sports Editor:

Re “Fastballs Can Lead to Tommy John Surgery, Study Finds,” May 20: Researchers should next look into why the pitchers who had Tommy John surgery threw more fastballs than the pitchers who did not, so that preventive measures can be taken to reduce the frequency of the operation and increase arm health.

The fastball is the easiest pitch for most pitchers to control, so naturally it is thrown most often. When pitchers fall behind in the count, the percentage of fastballs they throw increases. A lack of command for pitchers may account for the strong correlation between percent of fastballs thrown and Tommy John surgery.

Nick Sharpe

Larchmont, N.Y.

To the Sports Editor:

Re “Greater Danger at Every Turn: Safety Standards Take a Back Seat in Short-Track Racing,” May 22: When injury to participants occurs in many types of sports, the repercussions affect society as a whole.

Years ago, I was faced with repair of a leg nearly torn off a 20-year-old man in a motocross event. He was uninsured. His injury could easily cost the taxpayer millions of dollars over his lifetime. At a minimum, there should be a law requiring participants in sporting events like auto and motorcycle racing to carry medical insurance.

Jeffrey Kaufman

Longmeadow, Mass.

The writer is a vascular surgeon.


