


CHICAGO — After a new poll of Chicagoans showed that they are deeply dissatisfied with the direction of their city, distrustful of their police force and divided along racial lines, people here and around the country weighed in on social media.

Some expressed shock at some of the most painful findings in the survey from The New York Times and Kaiser Family Foundation: More than 80 percent of African-American residents said it was at least somewhat likely that the young people in their neighborhoods would end up victims of violent crimes, and about the same number said it was likely the young people would go to jail. Far fewer white residents had those expectations about young people in their neighborhoods.

Others spoke of similar entrenched racial and economic problems in their own cities, suggested ways to improve relations with the police, and opined on leadership in big cities.

Some pointed to longstanding allegations of corruption in Chicago, the nation’s third largest city.

“From a distance, Chicago has always appeared to be a city structured by cronyism and favors. ‘You do what we tell you and you got a job with the city ... for life.’ Too many big cities are constructed this way. The people who live there are victims of absentee slumlords, crumbling infrastructure, failing schools, over-policing and many of their futures are predictably bleak. Rahm Emanuel has continued the tradition of inept leadership. The poverty besieged people who live there MUST start to vote them out. The political machines know poor people don’t vote and aren’t much of a threat so they will continue to misuse and abuse them until they stand up.”

— Charlotte Scot, Old Lyme, Conn.

“The root cause of all these problems is easy to define. Crony liberal leadership that has spent more money than the city has brought in for years is the issue. Try that as an article.”

— Hozeking, Indianapolis/Phoenix

In the survey, most Chicagoans said their neighborhoods lacked good-quality public schools. But the survey also found that a majority — 59 percent citywide — supported a possible strike by the Chicago Teachers Union if it cannot settle on a contract. In a Twitter post, the teachers union seemed pleased by the finding:

While the poll showed sympathy for the Chicago Teachers Union, some respondents said the city’s troubles were caused by pandering to municipal unions and an entrenched work force.

“I was born on the South Side of Chicago, attended med school and residency on the far South Side of the city. The people want handouts, the unionized employees I worked with at Stroger [John Stroger Hospital] a.k.a. County were the laziest employed people I have ever seen. It is a cultural problem, billions of dollars has not and cannot fix the culture. See the comments from Charles Blow’s last article for numbers on state violence on blacks vs blacks violence toward each other for who is really doing the most harm. It is the fault of these communities and the people who live there if it is not safe, any other PC, SJW [social justice warrior], progressive talk is just hogwash. The police in Chicago are the best of any city I have ever lived in, just look at the murder rate and shooting statistics and consider if you would want that job. They may have made mistakes but guess what I’m a doctor and we make a lot and people die, whether because of fatigue, workload or mental illness, it happens. Chicago has major issues with pension funding, and the ‘give me that’ attitude of the teachers and other unions has resulted in a credit rating of junk. I love the city and am moving back after a year in Charleston, trust me Chicago is way more integrated than the ‘New South.’ We may have our issues but blaming the police is not the answer, blame the people who are doing the shooting and the parents of children failing in school. Until people take responsibility for their lives and their children nothing can change.”

— Doctalk, Midwest

Sixty-two percent of respondents to the survey said they disapproved of Rahm Emanuel’s job as mayor, and the numbers were worse among African-Americans. Some wondered how that would bode for Mr. Emanuel if he were to seek a third term.

Some readers said Chicago’s troubles required a response that is broader than what can be accomplished in the city limits.

“When we consider a diverse and large city such as Chicago as one entity, we often make overly large generalizations that don’t apply to the whole. Chicago is not just one city. The North Side, with a population of over a million people, basically functions as a separate city, one that is as safe and prosperous as smaller thriving cities such as San Francisco, Denver or Seattle. The South and West Sides, by contrast, resemble cities such as Detroit. So the real news here is that millions of Americans live in dangerous and impoverished neighborhoods and that Chicago has more than its share of such areas. As a Chicagoan, I am very sad about this situation, but I don’t see anything unique here. I am no fan of our mayor, but I am not sure that local politicians have much control over larger issues of economic and racial injustice that create blighted neighborhoods.”

— B Magnuson, Evanston, Ill.

“Most of the same things could be said about St. Louis, where I live. I’m not sure what the answer is. I do know that the answer will be finding ways to bring people together, not to marginalize. There is so much to be gained by living around people who are not necessarily just like you. Unfortunately, we seem to fear that today, and the result is playing out in our urban centers.”

— DDF, St. Louis

Some noted what the survey showed so bleakly: that life feels different on the more affluent North Side than it does for black residents on the South and West Sides, where shootings and homicides have increased this year.

“Chicago is two worlds. You have the North Side, Around the Loop and parts of the South West Side that were O.K. at best neighborhoods 35 years ago but now, over the last 25 years have been revitalized by young college graduates moving into the areas to enjoy city life. Then you have the West and South side that have remained 95 percent black and in poverty for more than 40+ years — in fact after the tear-down and relocation of everyone from the High Rise Housing Projects, they seem to be getting worse for various reasons.”

— John, Chicago

Some readers lamented the problems in Chicago but said it was still a great American city.

“I came to Chicago in 1974 and love this city. That said, I am not deluded about its myriad problems. There is plenty of blame to go around. Surely police misconduct has been a serious problem for a long time, yet the majority of cops are trying the best they can to do a very difficult job. The Force needs clear, unambiguous rules and swift action when misconduct occurs. One would think that the Police union would want miscreants off the Force as much as anyone else for bad behavior drags them all down.

“I am ambivalent about Emanuel. He is doing good things bringing corporations into the city. We need their business, their taxes, and their customers and employees. On the other hand, the jobs they bring will not help the city residents who most need jobs.

“Improving our schools should be a priority. I do not agree that closing schools was such a horrible thing. It is not surprising that many were in poor neighborhoods, but it makes no sense for a bankrupt system to operate large old buildings with few kids in them. Effort/money should be poured into improving CPS [Chicago Public Schools], especially on the South & West sides. Although I support and respect teachers, I am not sure how a strike removing kids from classrooms, burdening parents, and missing class time really helps rather than hurts the children.

“Our poor neighborhoods need better public transport, better schools, safer streets, job training, access to decent child care and much else. How to pay for it is, as always, the question.”

— Anne-Marie Hislop, Chicago


