


Typically given to fits of full-ranged emotion on the subject of his beloved Boston Celtics, Tommy Heinsohn, after reading a recent article published under the byline of Isaiah Thomas, said: “It made you want to cry.”

He meant himself, of course. Heinsohn, the team’s tape-measure homer of a television analyst, was born in Jersey City but has been boisterously bleeding Celtics green since his playing days in the 1950s and ’60s.

Thomas, a mercurial 5-foot-9 point guard, has become the most identifiable player among an otherwise star-challenged but overachieving cast of Celtics, who won 48 regular-season games under Coach Brad Stevens and were the first of two teams late this season to defeat the record-setting Golden State Warriors at Oracle Arena in Oakland.

But what made Heinsohn joyfully weepy was Thomas’s journalism debut — an unbridled declaration of love for Boston, still the N.B.A.’s most championship-credentialed city with 17, though seldom speculated about breathlessly as a potential place for the league’s most gifted and talented to take their talents.

Writing in The Players’ Tribune on the eve of the Celtics’ first-round playoff series, which produced two deflating losses and key injuries in Atlanta before Thomas erupted for a career-high 42 points in a 111-103 Game 3 victory on Friday night in Boston. He raved: “Playing in Boston is just one of those things you can’t prepare yourself for. You can’t understand it until you experience it.”

Interestingly enough, he had been advised of that likelihood by his Hall of Fame point guard namesake.

In his Players’ Tribune account, he wrote that Isiah Thomas had texted him after last season’s trade from Phoenix, and wrote, “This is the best thing that will ever happen to your career.”

The younger Thomas wasn’t sure why that would be, “so,” he wrote, “I called him up, and he broke it down for me.” Isiah the elder told him: “Now you’re gonna experience what real basketball is like, what real fans are like, what a real organization is like. And they’re gonna fall in love with you more than any place you’ve ever been.”

Isiah Thomas, of course, played for Detroit through the 1980s — worshipfully known as the Larry Bird era in Boston. He facilitated one of the city’s and the N.B.A.’s classic did-that-just-happen moments by floating an inbounds pass with five seconds left in Game 5 of a fierce 1987 Eastern Conference finals playoff series with his Pistons clinging to a 1-point lead.

Bird stole the pass and hit a cutting Dennis Johnson for a layup, and the Celtics won the series — more commemorative smoke from Red Auerbach’s legendary victory cigar.

But the Celtics have won one championship in three decades — in 2008, powered by the organizationally nurtured Paul Pierce along with Ray Allen and Kevin Garnett, the prize acquisitions of Danny Ainge, the team’s president for basketball operations.

What was a splendid run to the 17th title and Game 7 of the league finals against the Lakers in Los Angeles two years later ended when Allen left for Miami’s better playoff prospects in 2012 and the aging Pierce and Garnett were sent to the unnecessarily desperate Nets a year later for a trove of draft picks that Ainge is now squeezing like a key to Fort Knox.

The championship banners hanging at TD Banknorth Garden still represent pro basketball’s most auspicious history curriculum. Twenty-one retired jerseys — including Heinsohn’s No. 15 — give the rafters the look of a team store.

The great Bill Russell, 82, would be happy to misremember the old days when black players were not exactly celebrated in Boston and bearhug any worthy so-called max player willing to bless Boston as a free agent.

“Right now, we’ve got a good nucleus and a great young coach,” Heinsohn said in a telephone interview. “Obviously, we could use a guy who’s going to be an All-Star every year.

“I think what happened is that the Celtics over the years always had winning teams, but when free agency really started to be a big thing, they didn’t have winning teams and the best players went looking for greener pastures.”

Not whiter, which Boston is known for during its snowbound winters. In addition, driving in Boston, reaching the Garden at North Station, is not unlike getting to the rim against the very best N.B.A. defenses. The arena itself, futuristic compared with the suffocating hall of horrors that the old Boston Garden was to opponents, is 21 years old, not the league’s most glamorous.

What was that? Excuse Mr. Heinsohn.

“It still feels like a magical place,” he said. “It’s not just the banners, the flags. It’s the fans. It’s like Isaiah said in that story. After they got swept in the playoffs by Cleveland last year, nobody booed. The fans got up and started chanting, ‘Let’s go, Celtics.’

“I don’t know how many cities are as appreciative of a player who has a terrific career as Boston is.”

Agreeing with Heinsohn was Isiah Thomas, who said in a text message that the notion of Boston as an unsexy or less appealing market had been changing.

“I have regular conversations with former and current players,” he said. “It absolutely is a free-agent destination.”

That could be because Ainge is possibly on the verge of his second inspiring remake within a decade, when one such construction has been beyond the reach of many floundering franchises. No less a competitive stud than Kevin Durant, a 2016 free agent, said upon visiting Boston last month: “I like the city a lot. It’s cold, but they love sports here. It’s a family atmosphere I feel when I walk around the city.”

Heinsohn read that, too, and, along with the rest of Celtics Nation, immediately envisioned Ainge using a package of picks and solid role players to trade for another All-Star-caliber player with which to further entice Durant.

Speculation is free, and often worthless, but as Heinsohn said: “Smart players should want to go where there is organization, character and smart planning. That’s what the Celtics already have.”

This can’t yet be said about the Lakers, Boston’s most time-honored and successful opponent.

Nor their closest rival, geographically.

“Look at the Knicks,” Heinsohn said. “They got Carmelo Anthony but traded away the nucleus of another team to get him, and where has that left them?”

O.K., so the Boston bombast in Heinsohn couldn’t finish up without wielding a New York needle. It’s an old habit, like believing in his adopted city’s basketball pedigree, in an eternal Celtics magic, memorably scripted once more Friday night by the smallest player on the floor, the no-longer doubting Thomas.


