


Chris Kyle was decorated for killing scores of enemy fighters as a Navy sniper during four deployments in Iraq. His best-selling book, “American Sniper,” detailed his adventures as “the most lethal sniper in U.S. military history,” and the 2014 film of the same name became the top-grossing military movie of all time.

But a new report suggests that Mr. Kyle may have not been awarded some of the combat medals he claimed.

Mr. Kyle, a member of the Navy SEALs, wrote in “American Sniper” that he was awarded two Silver Stars and five Bronze Stars with valor. On Thursday, the Navy confirmed a report by the website The Intercept that found that Mr. Kyle had been awarded one Silver Star and three Bronze Stars with valor.

Mr. Kyle, who was killed in 2013 by a combat veteran he was trying to help, attained celebrity status for the tales of his adventures in Iraq and other places, including a claim that he had 160 “confirmed kills” as a sniper — more, he said, than any other member of the SEALs. His memorial service was moved to Cowboys Stadium in Arlington, Tex., to accommodate the crowd.

Since then, several claims he made publicly have come under scrutiny, including one that during Hurricane Katrina in 2005 the Navy placed him on top of the Superdome in New Orleans, where he shot 30 looters. Others have challenged a claim that he killed two men who tried to carjack him in Texas. No evidence of either episode has ever been confirmed. And in 2014, Jesse Ventura, the wrestler turned politician turned television host, won a $1.8 million defamation suit against Mr. Kyle’s estate, saying that a scene in the book where Mr. Kyle punched a man he later identified as Mr. Ventura never took place.

Mr. Kyle’s Navy records have discrepancies. His military discharge document, known as a DD214, lists two Silver Stars — the military’s third-highest honor — and six Bronze Stars with valor, but his official military personnel file lists one Silver Star and three Bronze Stars with valor. The Navy is looking into the differences, but said Thursday that it considered official military personnel files “authoritative sources.”

Lt. Jackie Pau of the Navy Office of Information said the Navy had not found evidence of additional medals.

Despite the discrepancies, Mr. Kyle’s record includes a long list of accolades. His contributions in Iraq “cannot be overstated,” the evaluations said. In the citation for his Silver Star for actions in Ramadi, Iraq, in 2006, the Navy said that “during 32 sniper overwatch missions, he personally accounted for 91 confirmed enemy fighters killed and dozens more probably killed or wounded.”

“His engagements,” the citation said, “directly prevented casualties to U.S. and Iraqi Forces on more than 30 occasions.”

Even so, the revelation is another blow to the Navy SEALs, who have been challenged for stories of heroics in the ranks that turned out to be conflated or fabricated. A recent account in Newsweek challenged several assertions made in the best-selling book “Lone Survivor,” by Marcus Luttrell, a member of the SEALs, and the writer Patrick Robinson, including the size of the attacking force and the ferociousness of the battle.

The SEALs command, under pressure to recruit more operators, until recently did little to dissuade former members from profiting from telling lucrative and often exaggerated stories.


