


BEIJING — “I’m sorry, I cannot be interviewed,” said Ding Zilin, a founder of Tiananmen Mothers, a group of families of democracy protesters killed by the Chinese military in 1989. She spoke on Wednesday, three days before the anniversary of her son’s death.

Sounding frail, Ms. Ding, a 79-year-old former philosophy professor, did not detail why she could not be interviewed. But before hanging up she added, “There are people watching and checking at my door.” Each year, the authorities guard Ms. Ding’s home in Beijing’s university district, turning away journalists and other visitors.

Reports circulating in Chinese and English on social media said that her telephone line had been cut and that the Public Security Bureau had issued her a special mobile phone with only three contact numbers, including China’s emergency medical care number, 120. Ms. Ding picked up her home landline Wednesday morning, although she hung up before she could be asked about a special phone or other details. She was also receiving text messages on her mobile, said You Weijie, a fellow member of the Tiananmen Mothers.

Nearly three decades have passed since Jiang Jielian, then 17, the son of Ms. Ding and her husband, Jiang Peikun, was killed on the night of June 3-4, 1989. He was one of hundreds, perhaps thousands, who died in the suppression of the democracy protests that convulsed the capital for weeks.

They have been years of “white terror and suffocation,” the group’s 131 surviving members said in a statement issued on Wednesday. This year, it highlighted the police harassment they face and once again called for justice for the victims.

The government has never apologized for the killings or revised its judgment that the protests in Tiananmen Square were a “counterrevolutionary rebellion.’’

Here are excerpts from the statement, as translated by Human Rights in China:

This year may be triply painful for Ms. Ding. Her husband died in September, and her daughter in December, of cancer, at the age of 49 or 50, according to Ms. You of the Tiananmen Mothers. Ms. Ding has a second son, believed to be in his 50s.

Ms. You said her own husband, Yang Minghu, then 42, was shot by soldiers on June 4 and died two days later in Tongren Hospital. She said the police recently told her that anyone wanting to visit Ms. Ding around politically delicate dates such as June 4 needed to obtain permission. That drove the group to prominently feature police harassment in their statement, she said.

“Which law restricts us from visiting an elderly person?” asked Ms. You, 63.

As family members, often parents, of the victims die, their names are added to the growing list of deceased members. This year the number has risen to 41, up from 33 in 2013.

The Chinese government is playing “a waiting game,” said Albert Ho, the chairman of the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China, which will hold its annual June 4 memorial on Saturday in the semiautonomous Chinese city of Hong Kong.

“They want it to drag on as long as possible, and they hope that, due to the passage of time and the dying of the family members, everyone will forget,” Mr. Ho, who is also a Hong Kong lawmaker from the Democratic Party, said in an interview.

“But there is always in existence the collective memory of the people living in Beijing,” Mr. Ho continued. “There were so many eyewitnesses. Even if the victims’ families die, there are so many others in a position to testify in due course,” he said.

The Tiananmen Mothers have called for an independent investigation.

A United States-based human rights group, Duihua, says the last known person to still be in prison for taking part in the movement, Miao Deshun, is due to be released in October.

But Chinese Human Rights Defenders, another rights group, said scores of people who took part in the protests were in prison for their continuing advocacy of human rights and democracy.

In Hong Kong, the world’s only museum to the Tiananmen protest movement is set to close this year over a dispute with the building’s owners and the harassment of visitors, organizers said.

On the Chinese mainland, some people who have tried to hold private commemorations have been detained, according to reports on social media posted by their friends.

And the police in Chengdu, in southwest China, detained a man, Fu Hailu, on charges of inciting subversion after he shared pictures online of liquor bottles labeled to mark the day: June 4, 1989.


