


TALLADEGA, Ala. — Two cars went airborne, 35 were involved in accidents, and Danica Patrick had the wind knocked out of her in a vicious crash into the wall.

Just another demolition derby on Sunday at Talladega Superspeedway.

Brad Keselowski won the crash-fest, which was dominated by wrecks that caused millions of dollars in damage. It was Keselowski’s fourth career win at Talladega and his second victory of the season, and it ended Joe Gibbs Racing’s streak of four consecutive victories.

“Crazy day,” Keselowski said. “Somehow we managed to stay ahead of or out of all the chaos. That’s how Talladega goes. Sometimes we run here and everybody kind of lines up against the wall, and sometimes we come here and it’s crazy side by side, wreck ‘em up, flip ‘em.

“I think that’s kind of the allure to coming here, because you don’t know what you’re going to get.”

That is not entirely true of Talladega, which more times than not turns into a mess of wrecked race cars.

Keselowski said that was just part of restrictor-plate racing at the 2.66-mile speedway.

“Racing has always been that balance of daredevils and chess players,” he said. “This has always been more of a daredevil-type track.”

Chris Buescher’s car flipped three times in an early crash, and Matt Kenseth was turned upside down in the waning laps. In Kenseth’s accident, Patrick went hard into an energy-absorbing wall that that seemed to buckle on impact. She appeared shaken after the hit and hustled out of her burning car.

“I have a pretty decent bruise on my arm and my foot, and my head feels like I hit a wall at 200,” Patrick said. “My chest hurts when I breathe.”

There were 21- and 12-car accidents in the final 28 laps. And, as Keselowski crossed the finish line, another wreck in the back of the pack punctuated the sloppy day. Nascar’s box score showed that 35 of the 40 cars had been involved in accidents.

Only 21 of the 40 cars finished on the lead lap, and 12 cars were ruled out of the race.

Kyle Busch, the second-place finisher, said he had looked in his rearview mirror at one point and had seen only four cars without some sort of damage.

“I hate it,” said Busch, the reigning Sprint Cup Series champion. “I’d much rather be at home. I’ve got a win. I don’t need to be here.”

Austin Dillon, who finished third, said he had enjoyed the race, even though it was nerve-racking. Dillon was in a horrific crash at Daytona last July and said the style of racing at restrictor-plate tracks created an atmosphere of danger.

“We all have to do it,” Dillon said. “I don’t know how many really love it. I know our moms, wives and girlfriends don’t like it. We don’t like to be part of crashes. If people are cheering for crashes, man, it’s not a good thing.”

The pace of Sunday’s race was up a tick because of the possibility of rain, which could have shortened the event from its scheduled 180 laps. Once the race hit the halfway point and was official, drivers began their charge to the front.

Patrick was inside the top 10 when she was hit by another car and turned into Kenseth, who went airborne. She said the possibility of rain had intensified the racing.

“We all raced to the halfway, then we all raced to the rain that was coming, then we all raced to the end,” she said. “It was like the whole race, you spent it racing like it was the end. There was no moments to relax at all. I’m sure that kind of expanded people’s comfort zones at the end of the race, because we were already so used to running close.

“Some people took it over the edge.”


