


PARIS — The Louvre and the Musée d’Orsay were preparing on Monday to reopen after they moved tens of thousands of artworks to higher floors last week as a precaution against the rising level of the Seine River. Other French cultural institutions, including the historic Château de Chambord in the Loire Valley, reopened and were assessing the damage.

After days of heavy rain, the Seine peaked at 20 feet, or about six meters, above normal Saturday morning, the highest level since December 1982, but short of the 26.2 feet reached in the flood of January 1910. On Monday morning, floodwaters had receded to about 17 feet.

With the river rising on Thursday evening, the Louvre activated a flood protection plan and began moving about 150,000 artworks, mostly from storage rooms, to higher floors, a task that continued through Saturday. The museum said that it was assessing the situation on Monday and that the works remained in their new, temporary locations, adding that no water had entered the building.

At the Musée d’Orsay, on the Left Bank, a small amount of water entered the underground level and the museum will remain closed on Tuesday, a spokeswoman said. The museum closed on Thursday night and moved 7,000 artworks, including 1,000 paintings, 300 pastels and 600 sculptures, to upper floors.

“There were small infiltrations in the basement but we are not up to our ankles in water,” the spokeswoman, Amélie Hardivillier, said on Monday. “All of the artworks were evacuated on Friday, so there is no damage. We just need to establish a diagnosis before we reopen.”

Outside Paris, many of the castles in the Loire Valley area were closed on Friday and Saturday. The Château de la Ferté-St.-Aubin reopened to the public on Sunday, but water had infiltrated walls and the cellars were flooded, Lancelot Guyot, the site’s manager, said on Monday.

The Château de Chambord, a Unesco World Heritage site, reopened on Friday morning. Officials from the castle estimated water damage at 200,000 euros to 300,000 euros, or about $225,000 to $340,000, including a partly collapsed perimeter wall and flooding to employee housing.


