


ROME — The distance between Novak Djokovic and his competitors remains gaping. But Rafael Nadal, his primary rival, especially on clay, gave it a good try on Friday in the quarterfinals of the Italian Open.

The top-ranked Djokovic had to stave off five set points in the second set to defeat the fifth-ranked Nadal, 7-5, 7-6 (5). Djokovic, who trailed by 2-4 in the first and 4-5 in the second, extended his streak of consecutive sets won over Nadal to 15.

“I wanted to be more aggressive whenever the ball was shorter to take advantage of it,’’ Djokovic said. “It’s easier said than done, considering the conditions in which we played. It was tornado on the court. It was really hard to control the ball and find the right balance.’’

In 49 meetings, Djokovic leads Nadal, 26-23.

Though Djokovic had routed a slumping Nadal in the French Open quarterfinals last year, he said wins on clay over the nine-time French Open champion remained gratifying.

“Certainly winning against Nadal on clay doesn’t happen often, doesn’t happen every day, so it is one of the ultimate challenges if not the ultimate challenge we have in sports,” Djokovic said. “I think he’s been playing much better than he did in clay-court season last year.”

Second-ranked Andy Murray defeated 12th-seeded David Goffin, 6-1, 7-5, in another quarterfinal match. The women’s top seed, Serena Williams, was most convincing in dismantling the ninth-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova, 6-2, 6-0, in only 51 minutes. Kuznetsova, a French Open champion in 2009, had handed Williams her most recent loss, in the fourth round of the Miami Open. Williams, who had not played since then, dominated, striking 20 winners to just three for Kuznetsova.

“I really feel like she’s probably one of the best clay-court players, and having to face her was a task and a challenge,’’ Williams said. “We always have really tough matches, so I’m just really happy to get through that one.”

Williams will face Irina-Camelia Begus. Third-seeded Garbine Muguruza will meet Madison Keys, a hard hitter who prefers to play on faster surfaces. Keys, who beat Barbora Strycova, 6-4, 4-6, 6-3, said that she was surprised to advance so deep into the tournament.

“I think over the years I have just eventually accepted that we’re not going to not have a clay-court season,” Keys said. “So going into it being positive about it is the only way to deal with it.”


