


In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Adam Kirsch and Zoë Heller discuss whether books can be judged by their politics.

What could be more cruel than Dante’s “Inferno,” with its sadistic vision of divine justice?

Good books with bad politics are not a new problem. On the contrary, the subject is one of the oldest in Western thought, going all the way back to Plato’s “Republic.” For the ancient Greeks, the “Iliad” was the ultimate good book, playing a formative role similar to that of the Bible in later times. Greek ideas about what it meant to be heroic or divine were shaped by Homer. Yet in Plato’s dialogue, Socrates observes that very often Homer represents heroes and gods doing base, cowardly and unworthy things. To provide the guardians of the perfect city with good role models, Socrates argues, Homer would have to be censored.

No one can deny that in real life, people are often wicked, and that the wicked prosper while the good suffer. But art, in Plato’s eyes, is such a powerful tool, with so much influence over human behavior, that it cannot be allowed to depict such unedifying truths. It must serve the approved moral values of its society, as Socrates insists: “We shall have to say that about men, poets and storytellers are guilty of making the gravest misstatements when they tell us that wicked men are often happy, and the good miserable; and that injustice is profitable when undetected, but that justice is a man’s own loss and another’s gain — these things we shall forbid them to utter, and command them to sing and say the opposite.”

If such statements strike us as illiberal and censorious, even dangerous, it is partly because we no longer believe so strongly in the formative power of art. Nor do we share Plato’s particular morality: his emphasis on austerity and the warlike virtues is foreign to our commercial democracy, and so we don’t particularly care whether writers praise or disparage the virtue of self-control. Plato would never have allowed a character like Shakespeare’s Falstaff — coward, braggart, deserter — on the stage. But for us, Falstaff’s love of peace and instinct for self-preservation accord quite nicely with the virtues demanded of capitalist society, and so he is a beloved character — far more sympathetic than Prince Hal, who dutifully rejects him in order to become king.

Clearly, our ideas about goodness change more rapidly than our judgments about art. Plato distrusted Homer because his heroes weren’t heroic enough; in the 20th century, Simone Weil distrusted Homer because they were too violent, and the whole epic was what she called “a poem of force.” But the “Iliad” survived their critiques, because it so vividly realizes one of the imaginative possibilities of human nature. And art will always exceed ethics, including political ethics, in the same way that the possible exceeds the desirable. Ethics is the art of limitation, of rejecting parts of our nature that we find morally intolerable. For past generations, that meant rejecting greed, lust or sloth; for us, it usually means rejecting cruelty and bigotry, which are pre-eminently political vices.

But what could be more cruel than Dante’s “Inferno,” with its sadistic vision of divine justice? What more plangently bigoted than “The Merchant of Venice,” which uses the assumption of Jewish vice to create its radiant picture of Christian virtue? Societies made in the image of these works — indeed, the societies in whose image the works themselves were made — would be utterly unacceptable to us today. But perhaps that makes the works themselves even more important, as reminders that what now appalls at one time appealed. Art tells us what we are, politics what we should be; and our ability to live with the contradiction is one measure of our freedom.

Adam Kirsch is a columnist for Tablet. He is the author of two collections of poetry and several other books, including, most recently, “Why Trilling Matters.” In 2010, he won the Roger Shattuck Prize for Criticism.

◆ ◆ ◆

By Zoë Heller

“The Kreutzer Sonata” is a bad book, though not because it is the work of a nutty Christian ascetic.

Most of the literature produced over the last 2,000 years has something in it to offend the convictions of a modern, liberal reader. If we couldn’t find anything to delight or instruct us in the works of sexists, racists, anti-Semites and people who believe in the divine right of kings, our literary canon would barely fill a medium-size handbag.

In his essay “Politics vs. Literature,” George Orwell tries to explain why it is that he dislikes the misanthropic and reactionary message of “Gulliver’s Travels” but loves the book. The answer, he decides, is that although Jonathan Swift’s ideas are false, they are not so completely false as to prohibit the reader’s sympathy: The book speaks to that part of a reader’s mind that “at least intermittently stands aghast at the horror of existence.” A great work of art may be written from any ideological viewpoint, Orwell concludes, so long as the viewpoint is “compatible with sanity, in the medical sense, and with the power of continuous thought.”

This strikes me as a bad argument — not least because it assumes that the ultimate meaning or value of a book resides in what can be summed up, ­CliffsNotes style, as its “worldview.” Orwell is not much interested in how Swift chooses to convey his satirical message. He pays fleeting homage to Swift’s “native gift for using words,” but for him, the book is essentially a delivery system for Swift’s moral philosophy, and it succeeds because it enlists our partial agreement with that philosophy. I’d argue more or less the contrary: It’s everything in “Gulliver’s Travels” that is in excess of (and often at odds with) Swift’s nihilistic “point” — its inventiveness, its originality and wit, its sheer weirdness — that accounts for its lasting appeal. It succeeds because its imaginative energies continually overflow its rather narrow political purpose.

When politics — of the good or the bad kind — mess with our enjoyment of a book, it’s usually because the author’s proselytizing impulse has muted whatever is interesting or particular about his way of seeing. Tolstoy’s novella “The Kreutzer Sonata” is a bad book, I think, not because it is the work of a nutty Christian ascetic, but because its nutty Christian asceticism has stamped out everything generous and curious and noticing in Tolstoy’s imagination.

“An artist’s mission,” Tolstoy wrote in 1865, “must not be to produce an irrefutable solution to a problem, but to compel us to love life in all its countless and inexhaustible manifestations.” By the time he wrote “The Kreutzer Sonata” in the late 1880s, his idea of the artist’s mission had radically changed. The novella offers itself as nothing less than an irrefutable solution to the problem of sex. It’s a thinly veiled tract — a piece of fictionalized propaganda in which the protagonist, Pozdnyshev, a confessed wife-killer, ventriloquizes Tolstoy’s ideas about the moral necessity of sexual abstinence. Joy in life’s countless manifestations has vanished. Pozdnyshev’s prophetic mission — and Tolstoy’s — is to let us know that there are no happy families and every unhappy family is unhappy in precisely the same way. (To make sure that the reader does not mistake his didactic intent, Tolstoy writes an afterword in which he boils the story’s meaning down still further to a set of dictums.) Even a reader who shared Tolstoy’s ideas about the vileness of human sexuality would have to judge “The Kreutzer Sonata” a failure. It’s not his worldview that spoils the book, but his renunciation of art.

Zoë Heller is the author of three novels: “Everything You Know”; “Notes on a Scandal,” which was shortlisted for the Man Booker Prize and adapted for film; and “The Believers.” She has written feature articles and criticism for a wide range of publications, including The New Yorker, The New Republic and The New York Review of Books.


