


Thinking about buying a sport utility vehicle or crossover? Get in line. According to IHS Automotive, the segment outsold sedans in the United States last year. Now, you could buy a station wagon (they handle more like sports sedans because of their lower center of gravity) or a minivan, but buyers have voted for crossovers with their checkbooks. Cheap gas helps.

But which one performs the best? With that question in mind, members of the Northwest Automotive Press Association started a competition, called Mudfest, in 1994. The name gives you the idea. Over two days this year, 26 journalists evaluated 27 vehicles, including crossovers, S.U.V.s and pickups, in six categories. Pitting a Mitsubishi Outlander Sport against a Lexus LX 570 or Chevrolet Colorado pickup is like comparing apples to oranges.

But even the categories are getting harder to differentiate. This year’s field included two hybrids (Toyota RAV4 and BMW X5 xDrive40e plug-in) and a diesel. Mazda’s CX-3 could be considered a diminutive all-wheel-drive hatchback. The fastback-style Mercedes-Benz GLE450 AMG looks and performs like a sports coupe. What’s next? A convertible Range Rover Evoque? Wait, that’s a real thing. Also, the only pickup without a diesel engine is the Toyota Tacoma.

For on-road testing, we pushed the vehicles on the go-kart course at the Ridge Motorsports Park in Shelton, Wash. There’s nothing more wrong — or joyous — than throttling a full-size Nissan Titan pickup on a track designed for vehicles that can nestle in its bed. The idea is to discover acceleration, handling and braking prowess.

The vehicles were also tested on a moderate off-road course whose dips and potholes would damage many cars. But nearly all of the competitors, including Kia Sportage, Fiat 500X, Acura RDX and Ford Explorer slogged through the mud, ruts and grades without breaking a sweat (or more important, suspension arms). The lesson? Don’t overbuy when it comes to capability. Vehicles like the Jeep Wrangler, Range Rover Sport and Lexus LX 570, as well as the pickups — Nissan Titan, Ram, Toyota Tacoma and Chevrolet Colorado — tackled a more extreme course, which in some places was difficult to traverse by foot.

The writers did more than just driving. They sampled interiors, specialty features and technology. If you have not bought a car in 10 years, you’re missing auto-braking with pedestrian detection, heated steering wheels and around-view camera systems that make it seem as if a helicopter is hovering above the vehicle.

The manufacturers provided the vehicles they felt best suited for this competition. But not all automakers participated. I was surprised that the 2016 Volvo XC90 was not there and disappointed that the Tesla Model X was a no-show. In the end, the association chose the following vehicles for their combination of value, capability and features. (Though I still suggest checking out station wagons and minivans.)

Best Compact: 2016 Mazda CX-3 Grand Touring

Best Premium Compact: 2016 Volvo V60 Cross Country T5 AWD

Best Family: 2016 Jeep Grand Cherokee EcoDiesel

Best Premium: 2016 Volvo XC60 T6 Drive-E AWD

Best Extreme Capability: 2016 Jeep Wrangler 75th Anniversary Edition

Best Pickup: 2016 Ram Rebel

Best Overall: 2016 Jeep Grand Cherokee EcoDiesel


