


WOODSTOCK, N.Y.

WHAT: A converted barn with a shop, four bedrooms, two full and two half bathrooms, and a one-bedroom, one-bath apartment

HOW MUCH: $775,000

SIZE: 10,275 square feet total, with about 3,300 square feet of the barn used as a residence

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $75

SETTING: Woodstock is a town of about 5,900 in the Catskill region of upstate New York, about two hours from New York City. The area has a long history as an arts community, including the founding of the Byrdcliffe Colony in about 1902, and the premiere of the composer John Cage’s “4’33” ” 50 years later. The town has several galleries and seasonal arts festivals, and is within a short drive of hiking, rafting and biking in the 700,000-acre Catskill Park. This converted barn, part of which is used as a gallery for antiques sales, is on a narrow road just off the main street.

INDOORS: The three-story post-and-beam barn was constructed about 1860. It was almost entirely rebuilt in the 1980s, and last updated within the past five years. Most of the interior is new, with pine floors, bluestone walls and exposed posts and beams, radiant heat in the floors, and walls of custom-made south-facing windows for passive solar gain. All woodwork was done by local artisans.

Other interior details include some antique stained glass, bulbous light fixtures salvaged from an old bank, and some hand-carved doors collected by the sellers in India. Ceilings in parts of the gallery rise two stories.

The first floor is used for the gallery, while the second floor is divided between the gallery and the owner’s residence: There are two bedrooms here. The third floor is entirely given over to the owner’s residence, with two more bedrooms, a living area, a library and a kitchen.

The living area is delineated by a set of bronze gates salvaged from a property in Connecticut. It has a vaulted ceiling with walls of glass overlooking the property. Nearly everything in the kitchen is wood, including teak surfaces, chestnut cabinets, the prep island — even the sink. Appliances are stainless-steel, recently updated.

The master bedroom has a vaulted ceiling and original exposed posts and beams framing a wall of windows. There is a wood-burning stove. The closet doors were salvaged from an Indian temple; glass doors open to a large screened porch with mountain views. The suite also has a jetted tub, a stone shower room and a redwood sauna with hand-carved redwood benches. There’s a cedar closet, too.

The one-bedroom apartment is a sunny, garret-like space with skylights, a living area, a kitchen, a bedroom and a bathroom.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is just shy of a half-acre, with a loading dock for the gallery and a parking area.

TAXES: Approximately $13,400 a year

CONTACT: Judy Steinfeld, Halter Associates Realty, (917) 596-8533; judysteinfeld.com

•

PORTLAND, ORE.

WHAT: A contemporary with three bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $739,000

SIZE: 2,524 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $293

SETTING: This house is on a winding wooded road in the Portland Heights neighborhood, a few miles from downtown. The property backs up to Marquam Nature Park, about 175 acres with seven miles of wooded trails, connecting to a greenway around the city called the 40-Mile Loop. The street the house is on, Fairmount Boulevard, forms a hilly three-and-a-half-mile loop popular with runners and bikers.

The local high school was ranked 10th in the state by U.S. News and World Report in 2016. The Oregon Health & Science University Hospital is within a mile; Portland State University is within two miles, toward downtown.

INDOORS: The three-story contemporary was built in 1983 and updated over the last few years. A clean rectangular structure sided in blue-gray cedar, it has an entry level, an upper level and a daylight lower level, following the grade of the land.

Common areas are open plan, with light-colored oak and slate floors, recessed lighting and walls of windows facing woods. The living area has a wall of glass rising about 11 feet, and is separated from the dining area by a fireplace with a sleek slate surround and a side cabinet.

The kitchen has stainless-steel appliances. A prep island with a range separates it from the dining area, where sliding glass doors open to a deck.

The master suite is on the upper level, with walls of windows overlooking the woods. Its en-suite bathroom has stainless-steel counters, a walk-in shower and a jetted tub. The other two bedrooms are downstairs. Both have en-suite bathrooms and walk-in closets; one also has a Murphy bed. Also downstairs is a study with built-ins, used as a darkroom. There is an attached garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about a third of an acre. In addition to the deck off the dining room, there are a roof deck and a rooftop garden, overlooking the park, with views all the way to Mount Adams in Washington.

TAXES: Approximately $10,000 a year

CONTACT: MJ Steen, Windermere Stellar Real Estate, (503) 497-5199; mjsteen.com

•

WALTERBORO, S.C.

WHAT: A house with five bedrooms and four and a half bathrooms, plus a cottage with two bedrooms and one bath

HOW MUCH: $750,000

SIZE: Approximately 4,700 square feet in main house; 1,100 feet in cottage

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $129

SETTING: Walterboro is a city of about 5,300 in Colleton County, about an hour’s drive from both Charleston, S.C., and Savannah, Ga. Long a summer retreat for Charlestonians escaping coastal humidity, the city remains low-key and well preserved, with two substantial historic districts covering architecture dating to the early 1800s. In 2015, Walterboro became home to a commercial kitchen that works with entrepreneurs to help develop food businesses. The area is characterized by estates, timber farms, wetlands and conservation land.

INDOORS: This elegant clapboard house is set above the street behind a low iron gate, framed by live oaks and Spanish moss, with a deep front porch and a porte-cochere. It was built in 1915 and updated over the last 10 years, inside and out. Most of the interior has been preserved, including raised-panel mahogany woodwork, hardwood floors, ornate plaster molding, trim, baseboards, doors and fireplaces.

Common rooms are on the first floor, most with pocket doors. The formal living room has built-in bookcases and ornate dentil molding, as well as a fireplace with a columned mantel. The dining room has a built-in hutch. Two double-hung floor-to-ceiling windows, known locally as Charleston windows and elsewhere as guillotine windows, open to the side porch. In contrast to the brighter living and dining rooms is a cozy music room with red walls, a coffered ceiling and a wide brick fireplace.

Updates in the kitchen include granite countertops and custom wood cabinets, as well as stainless-steel appliances by Sub-Zero and Bosch. An adjoining family room, part of an addition, has a fireplace and glass doors opening to a pool and patio.

One bedroom is on the main floor. A suite, it has a bay window facing the garden. Three of the upstairs bedrooms, including the master, are also part of suites. The master has a Miele washer and dryer in its dressing room, and a soaking tub and glass shower in its bathroom. Also upstairs is an office with mahogany trim and window brackets, and another Charleston window opening to an upper porch.

The cottage is a simple white clapboard structure, thought to have been built around the turn of the 20th century. Updated along with the main house, it has a living room, a dining room, a den, a kitchen and two bedrooms. Also on the property are a pump house for the pool, a workshop, a detached one-car garage and an outdoor bathroom.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about two acres, shaded by huge old-growth oaks. Next to the swimming pool, there’s a cabana that the sellers use for dining, with an outdoor fireplace. The property also has a koi pond.

TAXES: Approximately $5,600 a year

CONTACT: Cameran Eubanks Wimberly, Carolina One Real Estate, Historic Downtown Office, (843) 577-0001; 1126wichmanstreet.com


