


An Uber driver accused of killing six people during mass shootings in Kalamazoo is competent to understand the murder charges and assist his lawyer, a judge said Friday, a major step to putting the criminal case back on track. A mental exam of the driver, Jason Dalton, at a state hospital was not intended to determine whether he was insane at the time of the Feb. 20 shootings, but rather whether he understands the charges and can assist his defense. During a brief hearing, Judge Tiffany Ankley said Mr. Dalton is competent. Mr. Dalton, 45, is charged with murder and attempted murder. The police said he shot people outside an apartment building, a restaurant and a car dealership in between driving for Uber. Two victims, including a teenager, survived. (AP)

The Florida Supreme Court suspended the state’s 24-hour waiting period for abortions on Friday until justices can decide whether to hear a lawsuit claiming the law is unconstitutional. The 5-2 decision comes two months after an appeals court allowed the law to go into effect. Friday’s decision was immediately praised by the American Civil Liberties Union of Florida, which is suing on behalf of a Gainesville clinic to block the law. “Women should not suffer this burden while there is an ongoing challenge to this unconstitutional law,” said Nancy Abudu, legal director of the A.C.L.U. of Florida. “Forcing women seeking an abortion to make multiple visits that are medically unnecessary especially burdens poor and working women, and is potentially dangerous.” Gov. Rick Scott signed the waiting period into law last year, at the time joining at least 26 other states with similar laws. A spokeswoman for the governor’s office said Friday that the administration would review the court decision. (AP)

Widespread flooding that has claimed eight lives and displaced thousands of people in the Houston area has caused more than $14 million in damage and inundated more than 1,700 homes — figures that the authorities said Friday would rise significantly as floodwaters recede and inspectors get a closer look at ravaged neighborhoods. Houston and nearby counties have been hit with more than a foot of rain since Sunday night, straining reservoirs and pushing rivers over their banks. Southwest of Houston, the Colorado River swelled to more than 48 feet, well past the flood stage of 39 feet, before slowly starting to recede. (AP)


