


PARIS — It is too early to make definitive statements about how the expansion of the European Championships to 24 teams might (or might not) be diluting the quality of play at the tournament — although so far, scoring is down. Still, one quirky ramification of the expansion is guaranteed: Several teams will temporarily have no idea whether their tournament runs are over.

So far, Albania is the most notable team in that situation. When the final whistle was blown Sunday night and Albania had beaten Romania, 1-0, the round-robin format in Group A was complete, and Albania had its first-ever victory in a major tournament. The team’s players and fans were ecstatic.

But no one really knew what it meant. The Albanians were 1-2-0 in their three group games, meaning they had finished with 3 points and sat in third place behind France and Switzerland. In previous iterations of this tournament, the top two teams in each group advanced to the knockout rounds. Third- and fourth-place teams went home.

This time, however, four of the six third-placed teams will also advance to the round of 16. So while Albania’s group stage was finished, its players had to return to their training camp in northwestern France and wait — possibly as long as three full days — to find out whether they would play another game.

“First we will have to prepare as if we have to play Friday or Saturday,” said Gianni de Biasi, the team’s Italian coach. “In the meantime we’ll be watching other games.”

Four points seems to be the magic number guaranteeing a third-place team will advance. The last time a 24-team model was used at a major tournament was the 1994 World Cup, when the third-place teams with 4 points advanced and those with fewer did not. At this tournament, however, some 3-point teams will make it: After Tuesday’s games, Slovakia (4 points) and Northern Ireland (3 points) were guaranteed berths, the latter because of a superior goal difference over Turkey and Albania, the other third-place teams with 3 points.

Albania is still alive, but barely. On Wednesday, Sweden and Ireland, each with 1 point, will play their final games in Group E, and Group F is a total tossup. Hungary already has 4 points, Iceland and Portugal have 2 points, and Austria has 1 point heading into their final group matches.

The permutations are numerous, resulting in a barrage of explainers as well as, presumably, a run on flexible train and airplane tickets while the teams wait to see just where their next matches will be (if they happen at all).

The machinations of the entire experience are not lost on the players. After holding England to a 0-0 draw on Monday in St.-Étienne, France, Slovakia goalkeeper Matus Kovacik was clearly aware of the math when he said the tie felt like a good result.

“This wait will be more pleasant because we managed to get this point,” he said, referring to the jump from 3 points to 4.

Albania, in the meantime, had to wait until Wednesday to learn its fate. A team official said the team had spent its time at its training base, going through standard practices and video sessions, although it was impossible to focus on any single opponent.

Of course, even if Albania does not advance, the thrill of its first victory in a top tournament cannot be taken away. With Albania’s meager soccer tradition and fractured political history, the win was greeted with sheer joy: Fans cheered in the streets in Tirana; the prime minister, Edi Rama, wrote, “Goooooooooool,” on his Twitter feed.

And in what was perhaps the best news a team could receive while in limbo, the Albanian soccer federation announced this week that regardless of whether the Albanians’ long wait ended with another match, the players would be rewarded. Because of their inspiring victory, the federation said, each member of the team will receive a diplomatic passport, as well as a cash bonus.


