


On a warm spring evening, James Lee sat drinking a gin and tonic on the balcony of the apartment he shares with two roommates in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. He had the night off from his job as a server at a Manhattan restaurant, and he was talking about the high cost of living in New York and what it’s like to have roommates at his age (33).

That’s when one of the men he lives with, Andrew Rosenthal, stepped outside. “What do you want for dinner?” Mr. Rosenthal asked. “Do you want me to make the baked ziti?”

“No,” Mr. Lee said. “You put way too much salt in the baked ziti.”

“Dude, salt is amazing,” Mr. Rosenthal said. “Gandhi almost freed India because of salt. You just want to order in?”

“Yes,” Mr. Lee said. Once his roommate was gone, Mr. Lee added, “This is going to be a very expensive dinner.”

The two had not had a meal together for a while because Mr. Lee works nights and spends much of his free time with his girlfriend, Rachael Field, a vocational counselor in Brooklyn Criminal Court. Ms. Field happens to be Mr. Rosenthal’s best friend from childhood. In recent months, Mr. Lee had been pressing Ms. Field about moving in together.

“There’s definitely part of me that thinks, ‘I’m almost 34 and I still have two roommates,’” Mr. Lee said. “It’s out of economic necessity. I would do anything for my girlfriend and me to have our own place together.”

A bit later, while waiting for dinner to arrive, Mr. Rosenthal, a 34-year-old clinical coordinator at a homeless shelter, pointed out his contributions to the living space: the art on the walls, the tomato plants on the balcony, the compost heap.

“James is the definition of a nice person,” Mr. Rosenthal said of his roommate. “He doesn’t ask the hard questions, which is frustrating, but he’s a kind, generous person.”

Even so, the roommate life is not always ideal. “If you asked me 10 years ago if this was going to be my life, I would have slit my wrists,” Mr. Rosenthal said. “But I have made it, to the best of my ability, the life that I wanted. I’m going to build a life for myself and not compromise, and I’m not going to wait around for a woman to mature me, which is what I’ve seen with so many guys.”

Mr. Rosenthal is not alone in hanging on to a living arrangement more typical for people in their 20s. Data on the living arrangements of Americans from the ages of 18 to 44 suggests that nonfamily households have become more common in recent years, and a United States Census Bureau study, taking a broader view, also reported an increase, to 6.1 percent from 1.7 percent, from 1970 to 2012.

For all that, Eric Klinenberg, a sociology professor at New York University, noted that, for men, living with nonfamily members was not unusual long ago.

“There’s a long tradition of men living with something like roommates,” Dr. Klinenberg said. “Men used to live in boardinghouses quite commonly. You had places like the old Y.M.C.A.s. These were really significant parts of the housing stock a century ago. They have since become far less common.”

These days, adult men living with roommates are the outliers. “I think it’s flipped,” Dr. Klinenberg said. “There’s much less of a stigma being a 40-year-old man living alone than being a 40-year-old man living with a male roommate. Living alone has become far more viable. A hundred years ago, that would have been completely different.”

To be part of any household — whether with a partner or spouse, other family members, or roommates — means giving up the freedoms that go with the living-alone life.

But it can also ward off loneliness. And the almost constant presence of others is something that Sam Jackson, 35, likes about having roommates. Growing up in Houston, he was part of a family with 10 children, and he never had the chance to feel alone. Nor did he want to.

“There are moments where I’m not super-social, and I just go to my room and shut the door,” said Mr. Jackson, a lawyer for a city trade union. “But there’s something comforting about knowing that there’s someone possibly in the living room.

“I could ask one of the guys, if it was a Wednesday night, ‘Hey, do you want to go out and get a drink?’ With your other friends, you have to call them and you have to meet somewhere, whereas, sitting here with a roommate, you can say, ‘Dude, you’re not doing anything, either,’ and all you have to do is go to a bar.”

He was seated on a couch that has seen better days. On the walls of the apartment in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that he shares with two other men were mirrored advertisements for beer brands. A row of dusty basketballs occupied a nearby shelf. “When this place cleans up, it’s a looker,” Mr. Jackson said.

Some people may say he is living out a prolonged adolescence.

“If someone were to use that as a description of me and how I live my life, I would be totally O.K. with that,” Mr. Jackson said. “I like being perceived as young and living as a responsible adult. If I were in Pittsburgh, I would just run out of stuff to do. Your peer group would be paired off — seriously paired off. I think if I were in Houston or any other city, it would probably be a lot harder to live a prolonged adolescence.”

Jeremy Owens, too, likes having other people around, even at 41. He rents out a room of the apartment he owns in the Bronx, a place he once shared with his wife, to the 24-year-old sister of a previous roommate.

After his divorce, Mr. Owens, who teaches middle school math, lived in this apartment with two other men. He took the living room for himself and put up bookshelves as a divider. His current roommate is about to move out, which has left him at something of a real estate crossroads.

“I was talking to a friend of mine, trying to figure out what to do with the place, and he said, ‘If you want to, come live with us,’” Mr. Owens said. “He’s in late 20s, and I’d be one of four. The other guys are 26, 28, 31. Then, 41. We all get along, but one of these things is not like the other.”

Mr. Owens recalled that when his marriage ended, he found himself out of step with men his age.

“When you first arrive here in your late 20s, you have tons of people in the same situation you’re in,” he said. “But now you ask yourself: ‘Am I going to live a 20-year-old life or a 30-year-old life? Am I supposed to be doing that at my age?’”

Jon Derengowski, 31, a television script coordinator, found himself in a similar situation after a breakup. Now he lives in a rent-stabilized apartment in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, where he has lived with nine different people since 2008. But one of those people was his longtime boyfriend. When the relationship ended, after a year and a half, he had to replace his partner with a stranger who could help with the rent.

“Maybe it’s not depression, but there’s definitely a bit of self-criticism that sets in,” Mr. Derengowski said of the period after his boyfriend’s departure. “You’ve hit this very defined point on the trajectory that most people agree is the right thing to be doing, and then you’re not there anymore.”

Even though he gets along with his roommates, Mr. Derengowski said he does not necessarily want to see someone sitting on the couch when he gets home from work.

“I have a routine,” he said. “If I just want to come home and check out and open a bottle of wine, I don’t want to feel obligated to include somebody else. The worst thing is when you walk in the door and you’ve got $30 of groceries in your hand and somebody’s got every pot and pan going in the kitchen, and you go, ‘Ugh.’ So what do you do? You wait an hour or give up and go to a restaurant.”

Joe Tobal, 35, a bartender who writes fiction, has had roommates most of his adult life. At the moment, he shares an apartment in Astoria, Queens, with two women in their 20s. But having recently come into some family money, he is about to move out on his own.

“I am so excited,” Mr. Tobal said. “If I wake up in my boxers, I want to be able to walk in the kitchen and grab a glass of water.”

He added that he feels as if he has lived in what he called a “subset” of adulthood. He pays his bills and college loans on time, he owns a car and he isn’t having ramen for dinner. But, as a bartender, he is often out long after midnight.

“It’s certainly not a lifestyle I want to be in another 10 years,” Mr. Tobal said. “I don’t want to be that guy, the guy who’s 45, 50 years old, who’s trying to pick up girls every night. I hope to God that’s not the path the Lord has set me on.” Having his own place, he said, feels like moving forward.

Of his life now, he added, “This has been a fun vacation for a little while, but it’s not sustainable.”

Not long after my first interviews with Mr. Lee and Mr. Rosenthal at the apartment they shared in Crown Heights, their living arrangement was about to change. Mr. Lee and his girlfriend, Ms. Field, had decided to move in together.

To be precise, Ms. Field is the one who made the final decision. Like Mr. Lee, she was living with two roommates. But when faced with renewing her lease, she decided to act on the thing he had been asking her about for a long time. She called him and simply told him it was time.

“We’re both looking forward to having our own space,” Ms. Field said. “There’s a higher degree of ownership and permanence, at least for me. It feels a little more grown-up.”

Because of their work schedules, it turned out that she was the one to tell her longtime friend (and Mr. Lee’s roommate) Mr. Rosenthal. The first conversation did not go well, Ms. Field said, but she understood. After all, Mr. Rosenthal was losing not only a solid roommate, but also a friend.

Making it trickier for Mr. Rosenthal was the fact that Mr. Lee would be building a new life with his best friend from childhood. And now he will have to start the search for a new roommate.

“It’s always stressful,” Mr. Rosenthal said, after learning that things were about to change. “It’s always not a pleasant experience. You’re always trying to find someone who can be an adult, for lack of a better term.”


