


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. This is it, the longest day of the year and, for those of us who thrill to sunlight, the greatest: a chance to linger in the sunset until well after 8 p.m. (That’s until well after 11 p.m. in Homer, Alaska, if you’re out there and thinking of grilling salmon outside after the newscast on KTVA.) Why, even if it’s hot, we may make pierogies, off Francis Lam’s ace new recipe, which accompanied his terrific column yesterday in The Times Magazine.

We love a project in the summer, after all. And a Rosie Schaap gin and juice will keep our temperature regulated. Pierogies are delicious.

No? You could try Melissa Clark’s new recipe for hot honey shrimp, which makes for what she calls “one of the fastest, easiest and most flavor-packed dinners you can make.” (That hot honey of hers, packed with chile, garlic, lime zest, ginger and a little butter for richness, would be delicious on a peanut-butter sandwich, by the way, or drizzled across tomorrow morning’s bowl of yogurt.) Pair it with rice and an herb salad, or a big hunk of bread.

Or just get some takeout, and spend the time saved not cooking dinner to build David Tanis’s summery adaptation of a Sicilian cassata for dessert, an airy spongecake layered with sweetened ricotta and crowned with juicy fresh strawberries.

Cooking is filled with terrific recipes for the top of this week. You could grill a flank steak and serve it with kimchi-style coleslaw. You could knock down some deviled chicken thighs, and serve them with leeks vinaigrette.

You might sauté salmon with brown-butter cucumbers. This Yotam Ottolenghi recipe I scored, for a tomato salad with pomegranate seeds, has become a seasonal favorite. Or how about a fast plate of pasta with peas, prosciutto and lettuce (yes, lettuce!)?

Just browse and search, and see where inspiration strikes. Save the recipes you like to your recipe box. (Check out mine – I’ve got more than 300 ideas squirreled away!) Then do as the power users do: Cook them, rate them, and offer advice and ideas for ingredient substitutions in the notes field that lives below the recipe instructions. Together Cooking grows as a resource and a community alike. Our message: We’re all in this together, under the falling sun. And if you get jammed up, we’re standing by at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

Now, have you checked out the redesigned website for Lucky Peach yet? Did you read Nate Bethea’s essay in The Times about his experience using assault rifles in the infantry, and how he doesn’t see a place for them among civilians? Have you ever heard Trouble Funk jam at the 9:30 Club? It all makes me want to cook, to provide for others, to make things nice. Hope that’s true for you, too. Have a great week.


