


Chris Gibson, a Republican congressman from upstate New York who had taken steps toward running for governor in 2018, said on Monday that he had decided to leave politics altogether.

Representative Gibson, a retired Army colonel with 24 years of active-duty experience in the military and six in Congress, was widely seen as the strongest Republican contender to pose a challenge to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat who has battled questions over the last several days about a federal investigation into a former top aide and confidant.

Mr. Gibson had begun raising money for a potential campaign through an exploratory committee he formed in February, Gibson for New York. Traveling the state to raise his profile, he had emerged as a vocal critic of Mr. Cuomo’s leadership.

But Mr. Gibson said family considerations, as well as a job offer from Williams College, which he will join in February as a visiting lecturer on leadership, had influenced his decision to step away from public life. He and his wife, Mary Jo, have three teenage children whom Mr. Gibson, in a statement announcing the decision, described as being “in their last years at home.”

“The last year has also brought into greater clarity what our next steps should be as a family,” Mr. Gibson said in the statement. “Ultimately, for our family, the opportunity to spend increased time together, balanced with a return to academia, was one we could not pass up.”

It was not lost on Mr. Gibson that taking on Mr. Cuomo, a second-term governor with strong fund-raising and other advantages, would have been a formidable challenge.

Republicans have not won a statewide election since 2002, and have struggled to find viable candidates. The 2014 race was overshadowed early on by Donald J. Trump’s flirtation with challenging Mr. Cuomo; he later demurred after Edward F. Cox, the state’s party chairman, declined to clear the Republican field for him. (Unlike in 2016, Mr. Trump was averse to a primary fight.) Mr. Cox’s preferred candidate, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, did not manage to gain traction with voters, though his name has been mentioned for a possible rematch in 2018.

On Monday, both Mr. Cox and Mr. Astorino praised Mr. Gibson as a good public servant and wished him well.

Mr. Astorino, however, suggested that it might not be the end of Mr. Gibson’s public career.

“I’m confident this won’t be the last we hear of him,” Mr. Astorino said.

During his time representing New York’s 19th Congressional District, which extends across the Hudson Valley and sprawls out toward central New York, Mr. Gibson found points of agreement with Democrats on issues like gay rights and the environment while maintaining a conservative position on gun rights.

There is already one prominent candidate to replace him in Congress: Zephyr Teachout, a liberal law professor who mounted her own challenge to Mr. Cuomo in the Democratic primary in 2014.


