


In case you missed them, the online editors of T round up some of our favorite pieces published in May.

FASHION

Simply called Her, one new Australian label’s designs are as minimalist as its name.

ARCHITECTURE

The architect Alejandro Aravena just won the prestigious Pritzker prize by doing precisely the kind of socially minded projects that are most overlooked, which have made him a celebrity in his native Chile. Join him on a video tour of this year’s Venice Biennale, which, for a change, celebrates design that solves human problems.

BEAUTY

Instead of layers of shadow and liner, what about applying ... almost nothing? The look has runway appeal: Models at Peter Pilotto and Iris van Herpen wore a youthful slick of what looked like Vaseline on their lids; at Alexander Wang and Lanvin the area was similarly emphasized but with an added hint of rose gold or taupe.

PERFECT STRANGERS

What happened when the master impersonator, whose new variety show “Maya & Marty” premieres this evening, met the outspoken performance artist for the first time. (We captured it on film.)

ONE-THING SHOPS

Galco’s Old World Grocery was founded in 1897, and was once the neighborhood Italian store in Highland Park. Now the family business stocks only sodas — over 750 kinds of it, from independent brands only. (There is, though, an interesting anecdote about Pepsi versus RC Cola and Coke.)

GARDENS

“Objectively, it wasn’t an ideal place for a garden. Sure, a few trees grew in the dusty, scorching heat — three figs, a small cluster of pomegranates and a eucalyptus — and the view, of the sleepy, stony ground, of the ocean, was biblical, the solitude exciting. But, unfortunately, you could only get there either by scrambling along a difficult path or on the back of a mule.” — The writer and horticulturist Umberto Pasti discusses his garden.

THROWBACK

The fashion stylist and costume designer Misa Hylton shares intimate images of her clients — Usher, Mary J. Blige, Lil’ Kim — in their heyday.

WANDERLUST

Here’s a guide to the ancient, now thriving, city where Picasso was born. It was for centuries a strategic site for the various conquerors who laid claim to it, and we can see why.

RECIPE

The photographer eschews the conventional use of sweetened condensed milk in favor of a water-based filling, to delightful effect.


