


Throughout his storied career, the versatile director Joe Mantello, 53, has had success with musical spectaculars like “Wicked” and small-scale pieces such as “Dogfight.” This season, two of the plays he directs, “Blackbird” and “The Humans,” have been nominated for Tony Awards. Mr. Mantello’s latest, “An Act of God,” a comedy written by David Javerbaum, opens Monday at the Booth Theater. The never-not-busy Broadway veteran took a few moments to share five of his fashion favorites.

Suit I used to be the guy wearing jeans and sneakers to rehearsal. I never put a lot of thought into the way I dress. But I’m dressing up more these days, because my boyfriend, Paul Marlow, does these made-to-measure custom suits and shirts. Even before I met Paul, I did like pieces that were a bit more tailored and to the body. But I never had anything custom-made before, and now when I try my old things, I see they don’t fit. The interesting thing about dressing up is that it has changed the way I interact with the room and made me think about my clothes differently. It changes the way I hold myself. It changes the way people react to you. It’s kind of opened up a whole new world for me.

Shirt I tend to like things that are monochromatic. Paul’s aesthetic is that he makes these really incredible Dutch waxed-cotton shirts with a sort of African print. I’m slowly inching towards that.

Jacket I have two jackets that I default to. One is leather and one is denim, and neither costs very much. The leather jacket is very dark brown, from Uniqlo. It’s incredibly comfortable and stylish, and people are always staggered to find it’s from Uniqlo. The denim jacket is from Primark in London, which is basically like a Uniqlo.

Shoes There’s a wonderful men’s clothing store near me called Grahame Fowler. I bought a pair of Tricker’s leather shoes in cordovan. They told me in the shop they will last forever, and you really feel it.

Accessory I was given a scarf by a friend, the painter Mary Heilmann. She’s the best living Abstract painter, and she did this series of scarves on lighter fabrics that are based off a painting of hers. They are really, really beautiful. Mary’s works often seem very simple, but they are exquisite, colorful pieces of art, and she is just now getting the kind of attention she deserves. I believe the MoMA just bought two of her paintings from the early ’90s.


