


PARIS — An escalating battle between the French government and unions over labor law changes led to long gasoline lines on Wednesday as protesters blocked the entrances to some of the nation’s eight refineries.

The blockade of the refineries led the government to use force to try to disperse the union protesters in some locations. It also took the rare step of dipping into its strategic petroleum reserves in order to deal with the fuel shortfalls and keep the economy stable.

It was the latest and most prominent flare-up in a long-simmering dispute between unions and the Socialist government over legislation intended to give a boost to the economy by making it easier for employers to hire and fire workers. President François Hollande and Prime Minister Manuel Valls say the legislation is vital to promoting growth and reducing unemployment, which is stuck above 10 percent. Leaders of many unions say the plan would undercut the safeguards provided to workers, and the governing Socialists have been split by differences over the issue.

In southern France, riot police officers dismantled a blockade at a refinery in Fos-sur-Mer on Tuesday, and a second blockade, at a refinery in Douchy-les-Mines in northern France, was dismantled Wednesday morning. The police turned water cannons on the striking workers and removed burning tires and other obstacles to allow traffic in and out of the refineries.

It was unclear when the situation would become calm enough to allow fuel trucks through, and in the meantime motorists faced long waits to fill their tanks in some regions of the country, rationing in others and growing numbers of stations where gas had run out. In northeastern France, some motorists were reported to be driving over the border to Belgium to fill up.

The actions by the police did not seem to deter the unions.

“As long as the government refuses to discuss the law with us, the strikes will go on,” Philippe Martinez, the secretary general of France’s largest union, the General Confederation of Labor, said Wednesday on the radio station France Inter.

The union, known by its French initials, C.G.T., and the other unions working closely with it on the strikes are among the least amenable to negotiations, labor experts here say.

But the government appeared to be in no mood to negotiate. Speaking to Parliament on Wednesday, Mr. Valls said that there would be “no retreat” from the text of the law and that “the C.G.T. does not lay down the law in this country.”

The unions have called for a nationwide strike on Thursday that would affect public transportation including the suburban train system in the Paris area, high-speed trains nationwide and air traffic controllers, as well as planned 24-hour walkouts by workers at at least 16 of the 19 nuclear plants that provide electricity around the country, although it was unclear how severe the strikes would be and whether they would affect electricity output.

The refinery blockades have created shortages or completely drained fuel supplies at about 4,000 of the country’s roughly 11,500 service stations, according to an interview by Agence France-Presse with Pierre Auclair, a founder of the app Essence, which tracks fuel supplies to gas stations. But the shortages are not evenly distributed. The country’s north is facing far more service station closures than much of the rest of the country, and so are several major cities, including the Paris metropolitan area, Toulouse and Lyon.

The government and the unions have pledged to stand their ground, suggesting a prolonged period of confrontation.

Mr. Martinez said the leaders of seven of the country’s largest unions had demanded a meeting with Mr. Hollande to discuss the new labor law.

While Mr. Hollande appears politically weak less than a year before the next presidential election, he has shown little inclination to compromise, not least because some measures in the legislation have already been weakened as it has moved through Parliament. Even the measures remaining in the proposed law are seen as insufficient by the International Monetary Fund to revive France’s economy and generate substantial numbers of new jobs.

The government forced the legislation through the lower chamber of Parliament using a rarely invoked executive power. The French Senate will start discussing the legislation on June 13. Should the disruption in gasoline supplies continue, it could complicate life for visitors and residents alike during the Euro 2016 soccer tournament, which France will host. The tournament starts on June 10 and will continue for weeks at sites across the country.

The legislation, known as the El Khomri law for the labor minister, Myriam El Khomri, would make a number of changes in the rights of workers that could result in reduced pay or longer working hours, even though it would not change the 35-hour workweek.

The provisions that have proved most controversial in the proposed legislation would enable agreements negotiated at the company level to take precedence over those negotiated at the branch or industry level. Unions fear that at the level of individual businesses, employers would have more leverage to force concessions from workers.

The proposed law also states that pay for overtime cannot be less than 10 percent more than regular pay. Currently, it cannot be less than 25 percent more than regular pay.

Another much-contested provision would specify in a detailed manner the economic criteria for laying off workers in times of financial hardship. Now, judges in labor courts have some leeway in determining whether a layoff is justified.

Fights between unions and the government are standard fare in France, and presidents in the past have sometimes backed down in the face of large strikes. More recently, government leaders have been less willing to yield as France’s economy has struggled — and so far failed — to recover after five years of slow or no growth.

This fight has been particularly bitter because it has pitted a Socialist government against unions and other groups on the left that see the government’s policies as excessively business-friendly and therefore a betrayal and an abandonment of a tradition of left-leaning parties’ supporting workers as well as campaign promises to protect workers.

Huge strikes during Jacques Chirac’s presidency forced the government to back down from changes in the pension system that would have, among other things, raised the retirement age for railway workers above 55 and reorganized the state transportation system, cutting jobs among other changes designed to cut the government’s deficit.

Under President Nicolas Sarkozy, who raised the retirement age, drawing the wrath of the C.G.T. and other unions, protesters held strikes that in some ways resembled the current ones. All of the country’s refineries were blocked, and as many as 4,000 service stations had fuel shortages at the height of the union action. Mr. Sarkozy took some similar measures to those of Mr. Hollande, forcibly breaking the blockades at refineries.


