


LONDON — Nobody would deny that Germany is a worthy world champion, but watching the Germans evolve through a major tournament does not make them easy to enjoy. Thursday’s 0-0 tie against Poland, the first goalless game of the European Championships, had an air of helping thy neighbor.

It was goalless, and almost guileless. The tournament format invites contrived draws because, in its new bloated concept, 16 of 24 nations advance to the next stage — and with four points from their opening two games, Germany and Poland are practically assured of reaching the knockout rounds.

Then, perhaps, they might really play.

With 73,648 fans watching at the Stade de France, Germany had three shots on goal, and Poland missed the best two scoring opportunities. It was a stalemate, with the German keeper, Manuel Neuer, not forced to make a single save.

Watching that, reminding oneself that Germany is the champion of the world, one’s thoughts drifted to the Copa América tournament in the United States. There, Lionel Messi had treated the customers to a hat-trick of goals in less than half an hour in Chicago. And there, Mexico’s Jesús Corona Ruíz, known as Tecatito, had decided on impulse to take on the entire Venezuelan defense and score a most beautiful “golazo” — an amazing goal.

Now do we wonder why Barcelona hires a forward line of Messi (Argentina), Neymar (Brazil) and Luis Suárez (Uruguay) to provide the fantasy and finishing touches to their attack?

To be sure, the Euro has shown us some fine technical players. Germany’s Toni Kroos again on Thursday achieved passing efficiency with at one point 96 percent of all the passes he made finding the intended teammate.

Dimitri Payet, a late developer from the French island of Réunion in the Indian Ocean, brings a touch of fantasy, not just in his creativity, but with two spectacular goals in two games so far.

And when Luka Modric is on the field for Croatia, or Andrés Iniesta for Spain, we know there will be subtlety and supreme ability to find a colleague with passes invented out of their imagination.

Yet, we say again, Germany is the world master. It proved this in devastating fashion by the way it scored seven goals in one game against Brazil — in Brazil — during the 2014 World Cup.

So, we assume that Coach Joachim Löw has something more up his sleeve than Germany showed us Thursday.

His defense, aside from when it allowed Arkadiusz Milik to somehow miss two gaping scoring opportunities, pleased Löw. But in attack, he again started with Mario Götze, a player who has become a reserve with Bayern Munich. And when that didn’t work, the coach tried moving Thomas Müller into the center forward position, and only toward the end did he summon Mario Gómez, much more of a physical presence, to lead the attack.

“We did not have many solutions in the attack and we could not create many chances,” Löw admitted to reporters. “The problem was that the whole of our game in the last third was not very fast. We could not accelerate; we interrupted our attacks and then, there were 10 Polish players behind the ball. It was not what I expected. We simply could not impose our game style.”

Adam Nawalka, the Polish coach, saw the same stalemate differently. “We controlled the game well,” he said. “Germany had the initiative for a couple of spells because we allowed them space, but we created some good chances on the counter. I’m happy with our performance and our tactical discipline. A 0-0 draw is a fantastic result.”

For the coaches, maybe. But soccer is a spectator sport, too, and thousands of people are paying huge money and enduring difficult travel and security worries, to fill these 10 stadiums while France is on continuous terrorist alert.

There has, surely, to be a greater emphasis on entertainment.

Germany, we expect, will again be good when the time is right. Poland, undoubtedly, is improving on the period when it lost its best strikers — Miroslav Klose and Lukas Podolski — who were persuaded to represent Germany rather than their birth country.

Klose is retired from national team soccer, which is part of Löw’s dilemma in finding a goal scorer to fill his shoes. To many, it seems that the Germany coach is being too loyal to Götze, the player who came off the bench at the World Cup final to strike the winning goal against Argentina.

Götze, though, is only 5 foot 7, in every sense a “false No.9.” He hasn’t the height, the instinct or the physicality to play as a lone striker.

The team in any case lacks speed on the wings, and even when players do get in position to fire the ball into the goal mouth, they are reluctant to do so with so diminutive a target in the middle.

It is no coincidence that Pep Guardiola, the man who practically invented the “false No.9” tactic at Barcelona, seldom picked Götze during three seasons in charge of Bayern Munich. Guardiola had, of course, a real central striker in Poland’s Robert Lewandowski as the focal point of attack.

And he used, as other coaches including Löw have done, Müller’s remarkable ability to drift from the shadows to score goals. But Müller is the classic “second striker,” a man who makes himself invisible before he exploits time and space when opponents are trying to defend against more obvious central attackers.

Either Löw is biding his time and waiting to reveal his true No.9, or he is a champion waiting for something to happen. In that sense, we might all be on snooze control at these European Championships — and switch furtively to the highlights at the Copa América.


