


If you live in Minneapolis, there’s a 95 percent chance you live within a 10-minute walk to a park.

That bragging right, plus a few others, make Minneapolis’s parks system the best of the 100 biggest cities in the country, beating out its next-door neighbor, St. Paul, for the top spot.

Minneapolis earned this distinction by scoring 86.5 out of 100 on the fifth annual ParkScore, a ranking of urban parks systems published by the Trust for Public Land, a nonprofit organization that works to protect natural land and create parks, often by working with cities to create new parks or improve existing ones.

The score rates cities, not including their larger metropolitan areas, based on several criteria: the percentage of residents who live roughly a half-mile or closer to a park, acreage and median size of the parks, and per capita spending on parks, among other factors.

According to Adrian Benepe, the fund’s director of city park development and the former New York City parks commissioner under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, more than 80 percent of Americans live in cities or in their urban shadows, and having access to parks directly affects a city’s quality of life.

“Essentially, we believe you can’t have a great city without a great parks system,” Mr. Benepe said.

The organization is working to get the nation’s 100 biggest cities to commit to making a 10-minute walk to a park a reality for all residents. So far, 55 have made that pledge or promised better.

He also said that parks help cities become more resilient and sustainable as communities and governments try to lighten their carbon footprints and prepare for climate change: trees can reduce urban heat; grasses can help absorb storm water; biking or walking trails reduce car and transportation traffic; and waterfront parks, especially those that include marshes or wetlands, can help reduce the risk of floods.

Many of the cities with the 10 highest scores seem like no-brainers, given their world-famous parks systems or culture of environmental awareness — Washington, D.C., San Francisco, Portland, Ore., New York City and Boston are all in the top 10.

But there’s also Irvine, Calif., one of the country’s largest planned cities, which made room early on for r many community and neighborhood parks.

Tied for 10th place with Madison, Wis., was Cincinnati, which grew up as an industrial powerhouse in the 19th century and has parks that rival many of those of the older East Coast cities. It has more than 5,000 acres of park land.

Mr. Benepe said that a few trends emerged in this year’s ranking, based on information on parks mostly collected by using a sophisticated mapping technology called G.I.S., or geographic information systems.

More cities are using public-private partnerships to develop parks, he said, such as the High Line in New York City, which Friends of the High Line, a nonprofit organization, maintains and operates for the city, and Campus Martius, a public space in downtown Detroit, which was completed in 2004.

Mr. Benepe also said that spending on parks is slightly higher in cities that have been tracked by the Trust for Public Lands over the last few years. Since last year, New York City added about $12 in spending per person, bringing the total to $185.84 averaged over the last three years. . Washington, D.C., the third highest-scoring parks system, spends the most, at $286.63 per person.

One of the criteria of the ParkScore is how much the cities invest in facilities, like basketball hoops, dog parks or senior or recreation centers.

“There’s a huge surge in dog parks; they’re growing faster than any other type of parks,” Mr. Benepe said.

In the last year, off-leash dog parks in the 100 biggest cities have grown by 4 percent, according to the Trust for Public Land, to a total of 684. Over the last five years, they’ve grown by more than 20 percent.

The bottom 10 cities on the list include Fresno, Calif., Charlotte, N.C., and Mesa, Ariz., with Fort Wayne, Ind.. coming in last place. But Mr. Benepe said that some of those cities lower down on the list are making the biggest effort to improve their parks systems.

Mr. Benepe pointed to Houston (78), which has transformed the shores of its polluted Buffalo Bayou into a 160-acre park, led by the Buffalo Bayou Partnership, along a 2.3-mile stretch of the waterway. It also added a connection — via bicycle paths and trails — to the neighborhoods between two major thoroughfares, Memorial Drive and Allen Parkway.

“What we’re seeing is that there is somewhat of a peacetime arms race: who can have the best, most attractive parks systems,” Mr. Benepe said. “Leaders understand that these are key indicators of quality of life.”


