


When it comes to the N.F.L. draft, the smell of money is stronger than ever.

College football players, who risk injury for no pay, are rushing to be drafted at near-record rates as they try to grab a piece of the N.F.L.’s ever-expanding revenue. And who can blame them? The league pulls in $13 billion annually, so much money that the owners could afford to pay Commissioner Roger Goodell $34 million in 2014. The pool for player salaries has risen so high that next season, rookies will make at least $450,000, putting them within striking distance of the top 1 percent nationwide based on income.

With eye-popping financial possibilities like that, college football players are lining up to get into the N.F.L. This year, 96 underclassmen entered the draft before exhausting their college eligibility, the second-highest total after the 98 players who left early in 2014. Another 11 players finished their degrees but still had eligibility remaining and are entering the draft, which begins Thursday in Chicago.

The number of underclassmen entering the draft has been rising steadily since 1990, the first year the N.F.L. lifted a ban on players with college eligibility remaining, and the calculus for leaving has not changed much. Playing college football any longer than necessary, the logic goes, means risking injury and damaging one’s chances of signing a big N.F.L. contract. By entering the draft early, players start their paying careers earlier and also move one year closer to a second (presumably larger) contract.

Joey Bosa has made that calculation. A defensive end from Ohio State, Bosa is widely expected to be chosen in the top 10 picks of the first round on Thursday. Bosa, a junior who will not turn 21 until July, said he had been talking with his parents and coaches about leaving school since his sophomore year.

His performance last year, his third at Ohio State, was strong enough that sticking around for his senior year would probably not have increased his value in the draft, so in his mind, there was no upside to staying in college.

“Not every 20-year-old has the opportunity to do something they love,” Bosa said in a telephone interview. “Anything can happen. I could go on the field and hurt myself the first play my senior year.”

Even before the draft, Bosa has made the most of his newfound freedom to earn some money off the field, too. He signed a multiyear sponsorship deal with MET-Rx, a sports nutrition company.

Bosa said he understood why some players would want to finish their college degrees, but he said he felt that leaving college was the best way to solidify his future. As a reminder of the risks of playing for no money, he pointed to his younger brother Nick, who is also a defensive end and was one of the top recruits in the country last fall. Nick Bosa tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his knee near the end of his high school career, damaging his chances of starting his college career at Ohio State on time.

Of course, not every underclassman entering the draft is drafted, or scores a seven-figure payday. Last year, 19 percent of the 74 underclassmen who entered the draft were not selected, though seven were taken in the top 10. In most years since 1990, 60 to 80 percent of underclassmen were drafted, with five or fewer taken in the top 10.

In many years, the No. 1 overall pick is likely to be an underclassman, with quarterbacks among the most coveted. Success, though, is not a given. Since 1990, 16 underclassmen have been chosen first over all, starting with Jeff George in 1990. Other quarterbacks taken are a mixed bag of franchise players and abject busts: Drew Bledsoe (1993), Tim Couch (1999), Michael Vick (2001), JaMarcus Russell (2007), Matthew Stafford (2009), Sam Bradford (2010), Andrew Luck (2012) and Jameis Winston (2015).

The trend toward taking quarterbacks first over all would seem to bode well for Carson Wentz of North Dakota State, a senior, as well as Jared Goff of California and Paxton Lynch of Memphis, who are both underclassmen. The Los Angeles Rams and the Philadelphia Eagles, who are both looking for quarterbacks, made bold trades in recent weeks to obtain the first and second picks on Thursday.

“The only way to make this trade is to be comfortable with both of the quarterbacks at the top of the draft,” Howie Roseman, the Eagles’ executive vice president for football operations, said last week at a news conference.

The trend of more underclassmen entering the draft is unlikely to slow. Players entering the draft are better prepared physically and mentally for the N.F.L. because of more advanced college football programs and training facilities. Teams also have more information about college players than ever before, and college players have watched other underclassmen succeed in the N.F.L.

“You have the sophistication of the college game, athletes have benefited from workout regimens that have made them bigger and faster and stronger, and the pro-style offense has been adopted even in high school,” said Leigh Steinberg, the longtime agent who is representing Lynch and other players this year. “In the early days of allowing underclassmen to participate in the draft, it was primarily players at the top of the first round, and the rationale was economic. Today, virtually every player who can comes out at an early stage.”


