


Between dunderheaded base running, futile swings in the batter’s box and an exasperating string of losses, the Yankees had turned increasingly desperate to generate offense.

So on Friday they decided to steal a run.

But this wasn’t any heist. This was rob-the-bank-in-broad-daylight audacious.

Jacoby Ellsbury, after measuring the leisurely windup of the Tampa Bay left-hander Matt Moore, took off toward home on a two-out, full-count pitch that was wide of the strike zone, sparing Brett Gardner the decision of swinging at it and allowing Ellsbury to slide safely headfirst, his hand reaching the near corner of the plate before catcher Curt Casali could lunge forward and tag him.

The daring play, in the fifth inning, not only tied the score, it invigorated the crowd, which came to life just as the Yankees did, rallying for a 6-3 victory on Friday at Yankee Stadium.

Brian McCann’s sixth-inning single scored Carlos Beltran to put the Yankees ahead in the sixth, Ellsbury added a two-run double in the eighth and the bullpen did the rest, with Ivan Nova, Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller shutting down the Rays.

As rare as a Yankees victory has been in recent days — they had lost seven of their previous eight games — Ellsbury’s theft was rarer still.

It was the first straight steal of home by a Yankee since Derek Jeter did it on May 5, 2001. Ellsbury had accomplished the feat once before — as a Red Sox, against the Yankees, on April 26, 2009.

This one, though, was remarkable for its brazenness.

If the pitch had been close to the plate, Gardner would have been faced with a dilemma: take the pitch for a strike, ending the inning would have been over, or take a swing and risk hitting Ellsbury with the ball.

“I don’t know what I would have done if it’s a strike,” Gardner said.

For Ellsbury, who entered the game as a replacement for center fielder Aaron Hicks, who injured his left shoulder diving for a ball, the over-the-top aggressiveness might have had its source in a frustrating start to this season. Ellsbury has made several blunders in the outfield, has found himself benched occasionally against left-handed pitchers and has increasingly drawn the ire of fans who expect more from a player who was awarded a $153 million contract.

“You’ve just got to be 100 percent committed if you’re going to go,” Ellsbury said of his decision to steal home. “If you have any doubt in your head, you’re not going to make it.”

Ellsbury, batting eighth instead of in his customary leadoff spot, had singled to left with two out and nobody on in the fifth. He advanced to second base on Didi Gregorius’s single, and they both moved up on Moore’s balk. After gauging Moore’s windup on the next pitch, a called strike, Ellsbury took off on the next pitch, a full-count fastball to Gardner.

As both Ellsbury and Casali dove for the plate, the umpire Will Little signaled safe. Casali immediately signaled to the Rays’ dugout to challenge the call, but they soon realized that Ellsbury had beaten the tag.

Manager Joe Girardi said he was as surprised as anyone that Ellsbury took off. The Yankees’ bench had tried to get the attention of the third-base coach Joe Espada on the previous pitch, alerting him that Ellsbury might be able to steal home. But once the count got to 3-2, it seemed far too risky.

“Two strikes like that?” said McCann, who broke out of a 1-for-18 slump by hitting a two-run homer and driving in the three runs that were not brought in by Ellsbury. “It caught everybody by surprise. I’m still stunned about what happened. I didn’t think I’d ever see that happen with two strikes and he takes off for home.”

Espada said that on the two pitches Ellsbury was at third base, they had a running dialogue. Espada told Ellsbury he thought he could make it each time.

“I pushed him a little too hard,” Espada said.

Ellsbury said he could not recall many of the details of their dialogue, but he remembered Espada telling him to watch Moore in the windup.

“To me, that means one thing,” Ellsbury said. He added: “I’m always looking to go. I guess you give me the green to take a stab at it and I’m going to go for it as long as I’m confident in going. Every single time I get on third base, I’m looking for something like that.”

Though Ellsbury had three hits against Oakland’s Rich Hill on Thursday, Gardner and right fielder Carlos Beltran have been the Yankees’ two best hitters in a lineup begging for offense. If Hicks’s injury is serious, that will solve the outfield glut. But it also could mean that Alex Rodriguez, who is 4 for his last 37, could get some rest at designated hitter.

“It’s something I have to juggle,” said Girardi, whose team scored more than four runs for the first time since April 9. “It’s not always the best situations when you’re seeing six or seven out of nine left-handers in a short period, but it’s what you’ve got to deal with.”

But those vulnerabilities — like the Yankees’ futility at the plate in this still-young season — were at least forgotten for one night, when thanks to Ellsbury’s daring dash, he was safe at home. And safe at home.


