


BEIRUT, Lebanon — As Syria convulsed from the bloodiest week there in months, the United States and Russia declared on Friday that they had won agreement for a new partial truce in several strategic areas, but that it would not immediately include Aleppo, the divided city where recent attacks killed more than 200 people.

State Department officials insisted that Aleppo would eventually be included and that they would be working with Russia to ensure that the truce’s geographic reach would extend to the city. Fighting in Aleppo over the past week shattered a respite created by the cease-fire that had prevailed for the past two months.

But it was hard to escape the conclusion that Russia, which is supporting the Syrian government, had not agreed to include Aleppo in what the United States called a reaffirmation of the original truce.

Official Russian and Syrian government news media announced that those countries had reached an agreement with the United States, which backs some opposition groups, on a truce covering the coastal province of Latakia and the Damascus suburbs.

They made no mention of Aleppo, where they say their intensifying airstrikes are aimed at terrorists, and where they have signaled in recent weeks that they are planning a major new offensive.

The Russians and Syrians argue that they are mainly fighting the Nusra Front, the affiliate of Al Qaeda in Syria. Opposition groups and their international allies, as well as civil society organizations, say that while the Nusra Front has a small presence in Aleppo, it is a minor force compared to other insurgent groups.

Both Russia and Syria denied that their warplanes were behind the airstrikes that demolished a hospital on the insurgent-held side of town on Wednesday night. Their air forces are the only ones that regularly operate in the area.

The death toll in that attack rose on Friday to more than 60 as rescue workers toiled through a day and night to retrieve bodies from the wreckage of the hospital and an adjacent building.

One small child was found alive after having been buried for 24 hours, according to the Western-supported White Helmets civil defense organization whose volunteers conducted the search.

Syrian state news media reported that insurgent shelling had struck a mosque on the government-held side of the city, killing 15 people.

Both sides have carried out indiscriminate attacks in the renewal of fighting in Aleppo, once Syria’s commercial center. Health workers say most of the dead are civilians.

Residents interviewed on both sides say they yearn for a return to the truce that, while imperfect — with occasional violations by both sides — allowed them to go about daily life with less fear of death or injury from bombings and explosions.


