


Human Animal: The Dutch primatologist Frans de Waal hits the hardcover nonfiction list with his survey of animal cognition, “Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are?,” new at No. 15. It’s his first best seller, after a shelf’s worth of books devoted mainly to primates (including humans). Why expand to other species? As ­­­de Waal told the website of the quarterly magazine Earth Island Journal, he wanted to show just how far science has come in the past 25 years. “There was a time when we were not allowed to talk about higher intelligence in animals,” he said. “Until the 1980s, I would say, we weren’t even allowed to use the term ‘animal cognition.’ Human cognition, yes, human cognition was good, but animals didn’t have cognition. Animals either had instinct or learning, and that’s all they had. . . . We have this long tradition of downplaying what animals do and considering animals dumb and below our level, and we consider ourselves as absolutely unique.” But now, he said, “everything has changed.”

Naturally, any time a scientist suggests humans aren’t uniquely special, some humans take offense. “Life scientists . . . seem zealously bent on disproving human exceptionalism,” Wesley J. Smith wrote last month in a blog post criticizing de Waal on National Review’s website. (Smith is a senior fellow at the Discovery Institute, an organization that promotes intelligent design as an alternative to natural selection.) “Moral agency is one of the unique attributes that make us exceptional. . . . We have consciences, based on moral beliefs. Animals don’t have moral beliefs.”

In fact, de Waal argues, some animals have at least the potential. “We do a lot of studies on empathy in animals,” he told The Christian Science Monitor, “and we found that they are affected by the mood states and emotions of others. This is getting close to human morality, the basis of which is that we empathize and care about others. Chimps are not into reasoning or justification like we are, but they have the core — what the philosopher David Hume called the moral sentiments.”

Just Do It: Nike’s founder, Phil Knight, debuts at No. 3 on the hardcover nonfiction list with a memoir called “Shoe Dog.” The book has made news partly for skipping past the conditions in Nike’s overseas factories — “Change never comes as fast as we want it,” Knight writes — and partly for fretting about a decline in America’s entrepreneurial spirit. But neither of those details made the cut when the trade journal Footwear News picked the book’s five most powerful quotations. Instead, as you might expect from a trade journal, the chosen quotes favor the ­nuts and bolts of Knight’s business decisions and partnerships. They conclude with the day Nike went public in 1980. “The world was the same as it had been the day before, as it had always been,” Knight writes. “Nothing had changed, least of all me. And yet I was worth $178 million.”


