


A round of good-natured Twitter trash talk has erupted among the head of the British royal family and the leaders of the United States and Canada. And the Internet appears to be charmed by the tit-for-tat videos by Queen Elizabeth II, President Obama and Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada. It was all part of an effort to promote the 2016 Invictus Games.

The choreographed challenges began last Friday, when Mr. Obama and his wife, Michelle, tweeted a short video at Prince Harry. It showed them standing with their arms crossed over their chests in front of a line of three uniformed officers, looking as if they had a bone to pick with the royal family.

“Hey, Prince Harry, remember when you told us to ‘bring it at the Invictus Games?’ ” Michelle Obama asked.

“Careful what you wish for!” said the president, as the officers behind him stuck out their tongues or sneered at the camera. One pantomimed a “mic drop” and said, “Boom.”

The prince responded two hours later with a video sent from the official Twitter account of Kensington Palace. It showed him reading with his 90-year-old grandmother, when a “Hail to the Chief” ringtone erupted on his phone.

“Message? Oh, from Michelle. How very amusing,” the prince said before watching the video with his grandmother. Afterward, the queen, a paragon of decorum who has not always been known for letting her hair down, responded with a slight smile: “Boom. Really? Please.”

The prince, blushing, turned to the camera, repeated the “mic drop” and said, “Boom.”

The queen’s foray into social media made a big splash — it was retweeted over 28,000 times and liked by more than 41,000 Twitter users.

But it was not the first time she has had a little fun on camera to promote a sports event. In 2012, she appeared in a six-minute James Bond spoof with the actor Daniel Craig as part of the opening ceremony of the London Olympics.

Not to be left out of the Invictus trash talking, Mr. Trudeau, who has turned into a viral social media star, joined in on the act. He performed a push-up and a “mic drop” with a slew of Canadian competitors in his own Twitter video on Monday.

Some Twitter users rolled their eyes, and provided droll commentary.

The Invictus Games, an international Paralympics-style event for members of the armed forces who were injured or are living with chronic illnesses, both veterans and active duty, were started in 2013 by Prince Harry. The name was drawn from the 19th-century poem “Invictus” by William Ernest Henley, himself an amputee.

The 2016 competition will be held in Orlando, Fla., for four days next week and will bring 500 competitors together in 10 events like archery, power lifting and wheelchair basketball. Fifteen nations will compete, including the United States, a slew of European and Commonwealth countries, and Iraq, Jordan and Afghanistan.

The 2017 Games will be held in Toronto.


