


BROOKLYN CENTER, Minn. — Two Minneapolis police officers will not face federal charges in the fatal shooting of a young black man in November, an episode that roiled the city with days of demonstrations, federal officials said Wednesday, citing evidence that seemed to bolster the officers’ account of what happened.

Most crucially, the evidence suggested that Jamar Clark, 24, “was not, in fact, handcuffed when he was shot,” despite claims by eyewitnesses that he had been, Andrew M. Luger, the United States attorney for Minnesota, said at a news conference. And he pointed to evidence that could support the officers’ claim that Mr. Clark had been grabbing one officer’s gun.

To prove that the officers had violated Mr. Clark’s civil rights, “the government would have had to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the use of force was objectively unreasonable,” and that the officers had acted “with the specific intent to do something that the law forbids,” Mr. Luger said. After a lengthy investigation by his office, the F.B.I. and the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division, he said, prosecutors could not make those claims.

“There are no winners here, and there’s no victory for anyone,” he said. “A young man has died, and it is a tragedy.”

Outside the F.B.I. office where officials announced the decision, a group of protesters, including members of Black Lives Matter, gathered to bitterly contest it.

Nekima Levy-Pounds, the president of the Minneapolis N.A.A.C.P., who was among those protesting the decision, called it wrong but not surprising.

“What we have realized through this system is that none of us can get justice, even when one of us is shot in the head in cold blood in front of dozens of witnesses,” she said. She added that an officer’s unnecessary tackling of Mr. Clark had led to the shooting.

The federal government’s conclusion largely confirms the findings of the Hennepin County Attorney’s Office, which reported on March 30 that Mr. Clark had not been handcuffed when he was shot, and that he had fought with an officer and grabbed his gun. The county attorney also declined to prosecute the officers.

Mr. Clark was one in a long list of black people whose deaths at the hands of the police have drawn outrage in recent years. But unlike some of the episodes that have scarred other cities, the Minneapolis shooting was not clearly captured on any video that has come to light; the best recording of what happened is limited, blurry and inconclusive.

The shooting was followed by days of protests, some marred by clashes with the police. More than a week after the shooting, someone opened fire on a Black Lives Matter encampment near the station, injuring five people.

A coroner’s autopsy found no bruising or other injuries on Mr. Clark’s wrists, as would be expected in a struggle between a handcuffed person and an officer.

Mr. Luger said that federal officials had asked an outside expert medical examiner to look at the evidence, and that the examiner had come to essentially the same conclusions. And Mr. Luger noted that accounts varied widely among dozens of people who saw all or part of the confrontation.

The events leading to Mr. Clark’s death began at a birthday party he attended with RayAnn Hayes, 41, whom officials have called his girlfriend. In the early hours of Nov. 15, a fight broke out at the party. Ms. Hayes sustained an ankle injury, and she called 911.

As paramedics left the building with her, “they saw Clark standing outside crying and ‘acting kind of odd,’ ” the county attorney’s report said. “As they walked past Clark, Hayes said, ‘That’s the guy who did this to me.’ ”

Ms. Hayes and Mr. Clark were clearly intoxicated, the paramedics said, and police backup was called.

After two officers, both of them white, arrived, Mr. Clark resisted their efforts to handcuff him, the county attorney’s report said.

The officers told investigators that one of them had repeatedly yelled that Mr. Clark had his gun, and that Mr. Clark had said, “I’m ready to die.” Officer Dustin Schwarze said that he had dropped his handcuffs, drawn his handgun and told Mr. Clark, “Let go or I’m going to shoot you,” and had then shot him once in the head. Mr. Clark died the next day.


