


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

I first noticed Brett Ratner — not Brett Ratner, the director of music videos and big-budget movies like the “Rush Hour” franchise, but Brett Ratner, the personality — in 2005. I was at a Chelsea gallery watching the artist Sarah Morris’s “Los Angeles,” a 26-minute video that documented, with amused detachment, L.A.’s entertainment-industry players during the week leading up to the 2004 Academy Awards.

Ratner appeared about halfway through: Shot in the back of a town car, he was speaking on his cellphone while simultaneously changing, with the help of what appeared to be a manservant, from street clothes into a dark shirt and pants. The undeniable punctum of the brief scene was the moment at which Ratner, still soundlessly talking a mile a minute on the phone, shucked off his jeans, revealing his bare buttocks and scrotum.

Watching this, I was dismayed but also fascinated: Ratner’s flaunting of the butler’s obsequiousness; the brazen sharing of his fleshy nakedness with the viewer; the implication that his business concerns were so pressing that he couldn’t stop their flow for anything, not even in order to dress himself — the scene was, no question, a gross power move. But the bluster also seemed marked by vulnerability. The frantic over-the-topness Ratner was displaying had an edge of performance anxiety to it. It seemed almost as if he were acting out a fantasy scenario for the viewer: a regular guy in an N.Y.U. sweatshirt turning, Clark Kent-like, into a Hollywood player, the embodiment of a particular kind of masculinity.

Every time Ratner’s name came up over the decade that has passed since Morris’s video — as the man rumored to have been fought over by Jessica Simpson and Lindsay Lohan at an L.A. bar in 2006; as the would-be producer of the 2012 Academy Awards, a position from which he resigned after being pilloried for making homophobic and sexist comments; as, more recently and much less controversially, an executive producer of “The Revenant” — I thought with some fondness of that scene in the limo, and the ways in which Ratner worked overtime to create his own mythology.

It’s something of a given to say that Instagram is where we now build our personal mythologies, the stories we tell ourselves in order to gram. So when a friend began tagging me on Ratner’s Instagram posts, I identified in them the same mythology of Hollywood masculinity that appeared in the video: brimming with braggadocio but also surprisingly touching, almost beautiful in its guilelessness.

Many of Ratner’s posts highlight his adventures while filming: having dinner with Dwayne (the Rock) Johnson in Budapest while directing “Hercules,” or his large camera crew on-set; pictures of family (especially his cute, life-loving Cuban-Jewish grandma, Fanita, who has her own Instagram feed, @princessfanita); and photos of Ratner at parties and events with famous friends — contemporaries like Salma Hayek, Edward Norton and, maybe most frequently, Mariah Carey, who’s now engaged to Ratner’s production partner, James Packer. These posts are slightly swaggery but mostly matter-of-fact; they suggest a fabulous life lived, but don’t feel reverent or especially staged.

Ratner’s feed becomes really compelling, though, when it serves as a moodboard of his idols: film directors, producers and actors from Hollywood’s ’60s and ’70s heyday. The images of these masters of American film (Beatty and Nicholson; Polanski and Robert Evans; Pacino and De Niro) are interspersed with many, many present-day pictures of Ratner himself posing with some of these same legends and others like them. “I live for wise older men” goes the caption of a picture in which Ratner is seen communing with Kirk Douglas. “Mentors are so important for success! I love you #AlvinMalnik!” he writes, under a picture of himself with the Miami businessman and Rat Pack associate. With a photo of himself hugging the director Peter Bogdanovich and the screenwriter Robert Towne: “No one cooler than #BobTowne and #PeterBogdanovich.” And under a post of Francis Ford Coppola chopping mushrooms: “One of my favorite #directors . . . in my kitchen @hilhavenlodge preparing to cook me the best meal of my life!” Ratner’s Instagram adulations are endearing in their nakedness; they’re suggestions that all he wants is to emulate the lives, the careers, the confidence of these men. And if he can’t, he’ll be satisfied to just bask in their presence, to just be followed back.

Women do appear on Ratner’s Instagram, strong personalities, all of them — Fanita, Miley Cyrus, Carey, Courtney Love — but, on the whole, the feed mostly features men hanging out and doing quintessential “man things.” They smoke cigars, drink whiskey (Ratner’s own brand, named for his Beverly Hills house, Hilhaven Lodge), hobnob on sets, travel on private planes. At a time where the dearth of women in Hollywood’s positions of power is increasingly discussed but nowhere near being resolved, there’s an obvious argument to be made: that the masculinist attitude that was par for the course among the generation of ’70s male auteurs Ratner deifies — the type of men whose past trespasses are often excused by saying “it was a different time then” — has contributed to that gender imbalance. It’s easy to see why Ratner would want to model himself on these titans of American cinema — powerful, talented, hard as nails. But that ease may be part of the reason things in the entertainment industry haven’t changed nearly as much as they should have.

Still, there’s something so ingenuous, so little-brotherish, about the way Ratner positions himself vis-à-vis these older men; something so poignant about his fandom, his excitement at sitting at their table, to smoke and drink and talk shop with them; something so honest about his awareness of his own relative goofiness. He’s no Superman, he’s #SuperRat, a self-deprecating play on his surname, and something so exposed in its desire to be included among their ranks. As I scroll through picture after picture, I find myself — maybe against my better judgment? — disarmed of my critical faculties. All I want is for Brett to be included! And really, isn’t that what we all want?

Correction: April 19, 2016 An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of Brett Ratner’s home and whiskey brand. It is Hilhaven Lodge, not Hillhaven.


