


One of the last amateur Olympic sports opened its doors to professionals on Wednesday, but the move seemed to bring mostly criticism.

The measure passed at the congress of the amateur boxing federation, known as AIBA, in Lausanne, Switzerland, with 95 percent of the vote.

“This is a momentous occasion for AIBA, for Olympic boxing and for our sport as a whole and represents another great leap forward in the evolution of boxing,” said the federation’s president, Ching-Kuo Wu.

Despite Wu’s declaration, reaction was strongly negative, including criticism from the Irish professional Carl Frampton, the former British professional Ricky Hatton and the British professional Stephen Smith.

“Pros boxers being allowed to fight in Olympics is ridiculous!” Frampton said on Twitter. “They’re two different sports. It’s like a badminton player playing tennis.”

Hatton took to Twitter to say: “Pro boxers in the olympics. What are AIBA thinking. Goodbye amateur boxing now as far as I’m concerned. Can’t say I’m a fan of this.”

Also on Twitter, Smith said: “Gutted to hear about it being confirmed pro’s can box in the Olympics. Absolutely ruins amateur boxing that in my opinion. Wrong.”

Most of the boxers for the 2016 Rio Games have been chosen, but professionals will be immediately eligible for the final Olympic qualification tournament in Venezuela starting July 3. Olympic boxing is scheduled to begin Aug. 6.

It is not clear how many professionals will rush to compete at the Olympics. Few threw their hats in the ring on Wednesday.

“At the moment, it is difficult to anticipate, but there will be some who want to get qualification,” Wu told The Associated Press.

Billy Joe Saunders, who fought for Britain at the 2008 Olympics before turning pro, seemed intrigued.

“Love to win the Olympic games put the icing on the cake,” he said on Twitter.

This year, the heavyweight Wladimir Klitschko expressed interest in representing Ukraine. A return in Rio would be unlikely, though, because he is scheduled to fight Tyson Fury for a world title on July 9. Klitschko would be 43 by the time of the 2020 Olympics.

It is also unclear how the pros would fare in the Olympic version of the sport, which has many differences from the professional game. Olympic bouts are only three rounds, and fighters must wear headgear.

Jamie Conlan, an Irish professional, said he expected pros to struggle at the Olympics.

“I don’t think I could name a professional World Champion that would live with a world class amateur over 3 rounds of Olympic style boxing!” he wrote on Twitter.

Mike Tyson, who came up just short of qualifying for the 1984 Olympic team before his professional career, told reporters last week of the pending change to the rules, “It’s ridiculous, it’s foolish, and some of the pro fighters are going to get beaten by the amateurs.”

For those who favor the shift, there is the prospect of mouthwatering, if unlikely, gold medal bouts, like Sergey Kovalev of Russia versus Adonis Stevenson of Canada at light-heavyweight or Gennady Golovkin of Kazakhstan against Saúl Álvarez of Mexico at middleweight.

Had the decision been made earlier, some Olympic bouts could have been even more appealing. Would Teófilo Stevenson of Cuba, winner of three straight superheavyweight gold medals from 1972 to 1980, have been able to deal with Muhammad Ali at his peak? Would Joe Louis have battled Max Schmeling at the 1936 Games in Berlin instead of in Yankee Stadium?

The country that might benefit the most from the new rule is the Philippines, which has never won a gold medal in any sport. But hopes that its most famous athlete/legislator/easy-listening singer might end that drought were dashed.

“I have decided to prioritize my legislative duty as I owe it to the people who voted for me,” that boxer, Manny Pacquiao, told Agence France-Presse. “So I believe I don’t have enough time to prepare” for the Games.


