


ST. LOUIS — In a search for reasons the St. Louis Blues were able to break through and win a playoff series for the first time since 2012, it is easy to start at goaltender.

Brian Elliott was among the N.H.L.’s best in the regular season, and although the Blues have a second starting-caliber goalie in Jake Allen, Coach Ken Hitchcock never had reason even to consider a change during the team’s first-round triumph over the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Chicago Blackhawks.

Elliott set the tone with a shutout in overtime in Game 1 and was on top of his game throughout the series. Now Elliott, 31, who was passed over in previous postseasons in favor of Jaroslav Halak, Ryan Miller and Allen, has his first series win.

“I think you soak it in through osmosis,” Elliott said Wednesday. “It’s not the kind of stuff you can write down. It’s those feelings; it’s those rising-to-the-occasions.”

But he is far from the only reason the Blues advanced.

Defenseman Alex Pietrangelo set the tone on the back line and often led the rush, too. He had a goal and five assists and averaged 30 minutes 43 seconds of ice time, among the highest figures in the league.

“You realize the level you need to be at to have success,” Pietrangelo said. “I think you look at guys who have been here through the failures in the past — we didn’t want to go through that again.”

Two rookies, the strapping defenseman Colton Parayko and the speedy Robby Fabbri, proved playoff-ready, too. Parayko scored his second goal of the series in Game 7, and a Fabbri pass set up Troy Brouwer’s series-deciding goal.

“At the beginning of the year, I definitely didn’t envision playing in Game 7 and scoring,” Parayko said. “So that’s a pretty cool moment, and it’s exciting.”

Fabbri had a goal and four assists, and Hitchcock was not afraid to use him in any situation.

Hitchcock, who is fourth on the career regular-season list for wins, said that over the years, the learning curve had gotten much shorter for young players. Parayko described this season as a “whirlwind” but seemed pretty calm keeping the puck safe.

“I’m shocked and surprised at it, but every team seems to have it,” Hitchcock said. “They’ll be just as good or better in the next series because there’s no fear in young players anymore.”

The Blues were still basking in the afterglow two days after ending a frustrating three-year stretch of top-shelf regular seasons followed by first-round exits. After discussing practice plans heading into the second round against the Stars, a series that starts Friday in Dallas, Hitchcock gave the team a second day off to heal from a bruising series.

Hitchcock said that Blackhawks Coach Joel Quenneville had told him to “go win a Cup.”

“When you beat a champion out, you’ve earned the right to try and go for it,” Hitchcock said. “We’re down to eight teams after tonight, nothing but tough games.”

The former Blues mainstay T. J. Oshie — now playing for the Washington Capitals, the top overall seed, after an off-season deal for Brouwer — also relayed congratulations. Oshie said Game 7 might have been the first time he had watched an N.H.L. game on TV from start to finish.

“Extremely happy for them,” Oshie said. “It’s been frustrating, I know, for them. It was for me when we were there, when we felt like we put in so much effort and didn’t get much out of it.”

Now Hitchcock faces the team he won a Stanley Cup for in 1999 and will match wits with Lindy Ruff on the opposite bench. They have coached together on two Olympic teams for Canada.

“We became good friends,” Hitchcock said. “Being roommates with a guy for two and a half weeks, you get to know a lot about a guy.”


