


INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 12 about a visit by Secretary of State John Kerry to a memorial ceremony in Hiroshima, Japan, for the victims of the American atomic bombing 71 years ago — making him the highest-ranking United States administration official to visit the site — misstated the amount of time that elapsed between Jimmy Carter’s tour of the atomic bomb museum there and his departure from the presidency. It was three years and four months, not four years.

NATIONAL

An article on Wednesday about the likelihood that character attacks would dominate a presidential contest between Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump misstated the source of comments taunting Mr. Trump as “Dangerous Donald.” The attack came from allies of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, not from the campaign itself.

•

An article on Tuesday about an invisible film that can be painted on skin to give it the elasticity of youth misstated the affiliation of a member of the research team. Dr. Barbara A. Gilchrest is at Massachusetts General Hospital, not at Harvard Medical School.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Wednesday about the debt problems of Puerto Rico misstated the commonwealth’s unemployment rate. It was 12.2 percent in April, not 45 percent. (Forty-five percent refers to the proportion of Puerto Rico’s population that lives under the poverty line.) In addition, credits for two accompanying pictures were reversed. A picture of a marketplace in Puerto Rico was by Erika P. Rodriguez for The New York Times; a picture of a Washington Metro train was by Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images.

OPINION

An Op-Ed on Friday about Brazil’s polluted water misstated a detail of Olympics history. The equestrian events in the 1956 Olympics were held in Stockholm instead of the host city, Melbourne, Australia; it is not the case that events in a single Games have never been held in two countries.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


