


The house existed, in my mind, as an idea, almost a dream, before I ever discovered the actual place: “Bumpa’s house,” the home of my father’s grandfather. It represented, in the telling of my father and other older relatives, the kind of place you’d get to live in if you worked hard. It was huge, on a hill, with a big yard, and every Christmas it was filled with toys: “Bicycles and skis and basketballs,” my dad, Jack, now 79, recalled. “And a croquet set.”

On Zillow these days, its value is estimated at just over $200,000, which happens to be almost exactly the median price for an existing house in the United States. This seems fitting. For my father’s family, the dreams fulfilled by this house had meant a climb from bare subsistence to the middle. This house was the middle; Worcester, where the house still stands, was the middle. The life that Bumpa and Narny built here was the middle. And that, to them and to their children and grandchildren, was a triumph, the goal of a good life.

Having studied the American economy for years, I’ve often reflected on how much my father’s family perfectly models the middle-class story — how closely the details of their lives illustrate the bigger economic forces around them. The way I read economic history, the middle class was a driving force in the American economy for about a century, starting in the second half of the 1800s. Its growth created a virtuous circle: The more people moved into the middle, the more money they made and spent, and the richer the country became, which made more room for more people to move into the middle too.

But in learning about my family’s economic history, I’ve also come to understand how deeply their story is embedded in the history of a place, of one particular city created by and for the middle class. When I mention Worcester to people from New England, they often give a knowing nod or laugh — this unlovely, down-on-its-luck city of dead industry and collapsing buildings. But Worcester was an engine for betterment until the middle of the 20th century, a magical place that transformed lost and impoverished lives.

A few weeks ago, I called my dad to relate what I had learned about his grandparents, George and Mildred Bestick. He told me he knew almost nothing about them before they got to Worcester, where they had settled by 1917. Bumpa and Narny existed as if they had no history. As a child, all my dad knew was that the Bestick name was Irish and that Narny, born Mildred Bailey, came from an old, proud New England family with Mayflower ancestry. They were respectable, clearly. Just look at the massive house and Bumpa’s three-piece suits and Narny’s quiet devotion to her Baptist church.

Only recently, I learned that this respectability was actually self-reinvention, built on top of origins in poverty and chaos. My great-grandparents’ economic journey was one that’s harder to make today, in part because there are fewer “middle” cities now. Even during the middle-class heyday of the 20th century, they couldn’t have done it without Worcester.

There is no single technical definition of the middle class — or even consensus on what “middle” refers to. Many use it in the context of income distribution, to designate the range in which people live at or near the median income. But I believe that definition misses a crucial, historical role played by what we call the middle class today. In its earlier incarnations, the members of the middle class were situated between a tiny powerful elite and much larger numbers of landless laborers and subsistence farmers who struggled to feed their families. Most people typically did not buy anything manufactured or delivered from afar; their food came from what they or their neighbors grew; they made their own homes and clothes. They operated largely outside of a money economy.

For nearly as far back as we have economic records, we can see evidence of a third, sometimes very small group. These middlemen were crucial: They filled an essential intermediary role, turning raw materials into finished goods. Some were craftspeople, making pottery, textiles, processed foods or other luxuries. Others were traders, transporting raw materials and finished goods over long distances. The middle classes varied by country and era, but they shared certain characteristics. Perhaps the most profound was a unique sort of control over their destinies. In premodern life, the middle people weren’t so poor as to be stuck permanently in misery, but neither were they bound by the social codes and strictures of nobility that tended to accompany wealth. They were often more exposed to market forces; their livelihoods, to a great degree, depended on an ability to spot opportunity and sell the right things to the right people at the right price.

We often attribute the Industrial Revolution to a handful of brilliant inventors who created the steam engine, the power loom and other transformative technologies. But many economic historians point out that these developments required a broader middle class, characterized by education, a feeling of opportunity and a lack of deep commitment to the existing socioeconomic order. The Industrial Revolution could just as easily be called the middle-class revolution. Those intermediaries, who converted raw materials into usable consumer goods, took over the economy. We know that story: mass production, global trade, faster innovation ensues. It’s possible to have an endless chicken-and-egg debate over whether the middle classes created or were created by the Industrial Revolution. But the answer, plainly, is both, and for well over a century we lived in a world defined by the middle class.

By the early 1900s — as the people who would become my family were establishing themselves in Worcester — the virtuous circle had begun to take hold nationwide. Factories were growing quickly, offering long-term, decent-paying jobs to former farmers, day laborers and immigrants. As workers earned more money, they bought more goods, which meant the factories got more orders and needed to hire more people. As factories became more sophisticated, they needed a better-educated work force and, indeed, the public-school revolution began, ensuring that the children of the new factory workers would be better educated and better able to make even more money. By the 1930s, the middle class was not just an aspirational destination; it had become a bedrock of the country.

Worcester wasn’t anybody’s first choice, at least not in my family. The first to arrive were Solomon and Leah Davidson, Jews from Kaunus, Lithuania. Both were born in 1862 and left their homeland sometime in the 1890s as part of the first big wave of Jewish emigrants, fleeing anti-Semitism and poverty. They wandered awhile. They were in England until 1898, but I found no records of what they did there. They appear in New York, then head for Boston. Finally they end up in Worcester, in time for the 1900 federal census, now responsible for seven children. Solomon’s occupation is “pedlar — rags” [sic]. Rhonda McClure, who specializes in immigration papers at the New England Historic Genealogical Society, told me that Solomon Davidson, my great-great-grandfather, was one of the poorest, least-connected immigrants she had ever come across. He arrived in America, heading a family of eight, with $18 to his name, a pittance even then. A mark on his immigration papers suggests that he was taken aside for additional questioning, something McClure says was unusual; immigration officers probably feared he would be a destitute beggar. Once settled in Worcester, he applied for citizenship and presented two witnesses to attest to his decency. One was a liquor salesman, the other a grocer; each said he had met Solomon recently and done business with him — presumably sold him some liquor and groceries or bought some rags — and he hadn’t cheated them. McClure says she’s never seen a naturalization document with such tenuous claims. Applicants usually enlist family members or at least a religious figure to serve as character references for them.

Solomon struggled in Worcester. The 1910 census identifies him as a fruit vendor, a notch — but hardly a leap — up the socioeconomic scale, because fruit requires at least some meager capital to invest. By 1923, he was selling tonics, or sketchy medicines, on the street. Yet the family was somehow able to buy one of Worcester’s three-decker buildings, which must have felt like a miraculous accomplishment for folks who arrived with nothing a few years earlier. And soon enough, his children were thriving. My great-aunt Ethel once described how she and my great-grandfather, Jacob, would pretend to go to sleep and then sneak out the window to go to the dance halls. Solomon’s children began working in late adolescence, but not as street peddlers; his daughters became stenographers and bookkeepers; a son worked in a shoe store. Jacob opened his own tannery. The next generations, the ones that came of age after the 1930s, produced the familiar complement of Jewish immigrant children successes — among them lawyers and accountants and C.E.O.s and a high-level executive at CBS.

Jacob’s eventual wife and my great-grandmother, Annabelle Lewis, was another sort of Worcester immigrant. She grew up in a remote corner of Maine, descended from Yankee sailors. Her father was a saloonkeeper; the census says he couldn’t read or write. What stories I remember about him are brutal: He was a violent drunk, a horrible father. According to family accounts, she fled early and ended up in Worcester, with little education, no money, no prospects. She worked in a dance hall, dancing with men for money. In December 1916, she and Jacob made a hurried trip to Vermont to be married by a justice of the peace. Three months later, my grandfather Stanley was born. One of Jacob’s sisters told me that their father, upon hearing his son married a non-Jew, ripped his clothes and proclaimed him dead to the family. Jacob and Annabelle moved to Rhode Island for a time but returned to Worcester a few years later to open the tannery. They were beginning to repair relationships with the family when Jacob became sick with tuberculosis. He died in 1924, when my grandfather Stanley was 7. A few years later, Stanley met a young girl at school, Helen Bestick. She wrote in her diary, “I met a Jew today.”

Helen’s family had its own story of Worcester’s redemptive powers. Her father, George (the man my dad called Bumpa as a toddler), grew up poor in Braintree, another small industrial city in Massachusetts. Eventually he became an office manager in a razor factory, which, given his background, would have counted as an impressively skilled, sit-down job. At 33, he seemed to be stuck: at home, caring for aging parents; his two siblings had long ago found spouses and moved away. Then he married a 30-year-old widow, Mildred, who had survived a tough life as well. She was born in Plymouth, Mass., where her ancestors, passengers on the Mayflower, had settled centuries before. But by early adulthood, she was with her parents in Braintree, with a failing marriage, a baby and a job as a stitcher in a shoe factory. Before long, her husband and baby both died. Whenever it was she met Bumpa, she would have been considered a spinster with a questionable past, whatever the distinction conferred by her heritage.

Their history makes me love Worcester. These two trapped, poor, broken people somehow met and managed to put all that pain behind and create a new life in what still felt like the fresh, quickly growing frontier of central Massachusetts. Bumpa, following a tip from a minister who had moved to Worcester, seems to have arrived in the city with an office job in hand, at the Heald Machine Company, where he worked until his retirement decades later. A combination of historical luck, a fast-growing economy and his own hard work enabled him to carve out a good life that must have seemed unattainable when he was younger.

My grandparents, Stanley and Helen, had their own hurried wedding in 1936, followed too soon by the birth of a son, my father, Jack. Before long, they had three more children. By then their families were able to help out. Bumpa George got Stanley a job at Heald. It was a great job for a young man with a new family in the midst of the Depression. He did well there and rose to factory foreman. By the time he retired after 54 years at the company, Stanley owned three homes and vacationed in Europe in the summer. Needless to say, few people dealing with pregnancy in high school today could expect to attain such a good life.

The virtuous circle collapsed by the 1980s. Technological innovations changed factory work. (It’s incorrect to say that America doesn’t make anything anymore. U.S. manufacturing has grown steadily for the past several decades. Today’s factories, however, are filled with very few — albeit highly skilled — employees and lots and lots of machines.) The expansion of global trade meant that low-skilled American workers were competing with low-skilled workers abroad. And many of the country’s rules, like union-friendly laws and other protections for workers, were weakened or disappeared.

The forces that would eventually afflict the American middle class came early to Worcester. The development of the Interstate highway system, beginning in the 1950s, and containerized shipping a few years later, meant that factories much farther away could afford to ship to East Coast ports. Manufacturing became more consolidated — Heald Machine, for example, was bought by Cincinnati Milacron, which brought some of its workers (including my grandfather Stanley) to Ohio. There are still factories in Worcester — for example, Norton, one of Worcester’s biggest and oldest plants (which was bought by the French conglomerate Saint-Gobain in 1990). But long gone are the days when Worcester’s plants offered a decent job to just about anybody willing to put in a hard day’s work. New employees looking to join the middle class must have not just a high-school diploma but an associate degree, if not a bachelor’s degree.

For all its decline in the second half of the 20th century, Worcester did enjoy one bit of good fortune: In the 1960s, the University of Massachusetts placed its medical school in the city. The school, which continued to grow, brought several generations’ worth of high-paying medical jobs and a fair number of lower-paying support positions. Similarly, Worcester’s position close to the center of New England has been good for the transportation business. Many of my relatives who stayed in town have worked either in the medical center as nurses or in the transportation field as truck drivers, dispatchers, rail-yard inspectors. These are solid, stable jobs, but they don’t enable the kind of jump-up in socioeconomic status that my family experienced many decades ago.

If you drive around Worcester now, it’s easy to imagine there is no rising middle class, no aspiration at all. In reality, it’s just much harder to tell Worcester’s story simply. A century ago, you could have picked any three-decker and immediately grasped the basic life story of all its tenants: where in the world they came from, which factory they worked in, what their hopes and fears were for their children. Today things are not so clear. Deborah Martin, a professor of geography at Clark University in Worcester, has spent years leading students through the city and researching its social dynamics. She knows a fair bit: where the Ghanaians live, how the Latino immigrants are differentiated by country of origin. But she often finds herself noticing newly renovated three-deckers and wondering, who is that? What are they doing?

Worcester reflects what’s going on throughout the United States. There are a healthy number of higher-paying jobs. The Worcester area has a disproportionately large community of well-paid medical professionals, from nurses and midwives to physicians and microbiologists; it has a huge number of educators for its population, a result of having nearly a dozen colleges in one medium-size city. But it also has more than the average number of lower-skilled jobs at or near the minimum wage — food-service workers, personal-care aides and a host of other medical-care assistants.

John C. Brown is a professor of economics at Clark and a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. He told me that Worcester is right in the middle when it comes to the current circumstances of once-flourishing manufacturing centers in New England. Brown says one quick way to assess a city’s fortunes over time is to look at its population. Many urban areas in Massachusetts experienced a population collapse in the 1970s and 1980s. But Worcester and some others have had slow and steady growth over the past few decades. Worcester, he notes, can’t credit its success to any one industry. It doesn’t have, say, Boston’s robotics or the tourism of Salem and Lowell. Worcester instead benefits from a whole bunch of things: hospitals, universities and a bit of manufacturing still. Nothing screams at recent immigrants or people struggling in other parts of New England to rush to Worcester to fulfill their dreams. The city’s economy is a more complicated tale.

One day recently, I went to see the shuttered Heald Machine factory on the northeast side of town. As I drove past the factory gates, the first shop I noticed, right across the street, had some Arabic writing in the window. I stopped the car and entered a tiny tailor’s shop. I met the proprietor, Ahmed Yusef. He grew up in Mosul, Iraq, where he worked with his father, also a tailor. His father had specialized in custom-made men’s suits. But after the American invasion, Mosul became a front line in the battle between American and Iraqi forces and Al Qaeda. Nobody wanted men’s suits, so Ahmed’s father took a contract making uniforms for the Iraqi Army. This landed him on a hit list, and in 2005 the family fled, first to Syria, then to Egypt, worrying all the while that their temporary visa would not be renewed and that they would be sent back to Iraq. In 2012, the family received word that its refugee application to the United States had been approved, and they were offered a chance to resettle in Arizona. Ahmed, thrilled, called the one person he knew in America, an old client who lived in Worcester. Don’t go to Arizona, he was told. It’s too hot there, and there are no jobs. Move to Worcester, where housing is cheap, and opportunities are plenty.

Ahmed soon found work as a tailor — he’s been at Brooks Brothers for three years now. One day, walking with his parents in Worcester’s Green Hill Park, his mother pointed out a young Iraqi woman. Now they’re married, and they have a newborn daughter and plans for more kids. Ahmed opened his own business, though he still works several shifts a week at Brooks Brothers. He envisions that, one day, he’ll have many children, that some of them will even work with him in the tailor shop.

He told me that he has been to New York and Miami. They were beautiful: “Like a dream,” he said. But he was always happy to get back to Worcester. Those other cities are too expensive, too busy. “Too much,” he said. I said, “You like Worcester.” He said: “No, not like. Love. I love it. I have a future. New York is for dreams. Worcester is for working.”


