


MONTALCINO, Italy — Talk to Ruth Infarinato, an Argentine television host, or her American husband, Chris Daniels, an advertising consultant, and they will say that their Italian heritage, hers from Sicily and his from near Naples, drew them back to Italy. In 2008, the couple purchased and then spent two years restoring an abandoned and dilapidated water mill in the Tuscany region.

What they can’t explain is to which period the former mill belongs — maybe the 13th century, perhaps later, possibly earlier if they had to guess by interpreting the building’s makeshift architecture. What is certain is that they were entranced from the moment they drove down the winding roads and long gravel driveway that leads to the former mill.

“It feels like everything has come full circle,” Ms. Infarinato said. “This was a project that tied us back to Italy and allowed us to do things like grow wine, and basically slow down.”

Unique to the property is the heated lap pool in the basement, with an adjacent hammam and infrared sauna, all clad in soft white travertine stone. The property owners also obtained permission for construction of an outdoor pool in the future. Even with such extravagances, they wanted to stay true to the region. And as they stripped the home down to a shell, they restored its four bedrooms and baths, two studies, gym, kitchen and bar by accentuating most of its finest features.

Now the house is on the market for 5.8 million euros, or $6.5 million, which according to Diana Levins Moore of Tuscany Inside Out, an associate of the Knight Frank real estate consultancy in London, reflects the average asking price for a home of this size and degree of restoration and design embellishment. Ms. Moore, who has been selling Tuscan real estate for more than 25 years, attests that buying and renovating ancient properties in the region can be a costly challenge.

“The most sought after and expensive parts of Tuscany are Chianti and the Val d’Orcia areas,” Ms. Moore said. “Here for a finished house you will probably pay around €3,000 to €6,000 per square meter. And most of your cost is going to be the restoration.” She noted the region’s “incredible craftsmen that specialize in bringing these properties back to life.”

The spaces at the couple’s mill house include a ground-floor reception room with variegated-stone vaulted ceilings that are as grand as the nave of a church. Then there is the kitchen with its double-height ceilings surfaced in gray Brasimone stone. Just off the house to one side is a large annex inside a restored barn. These are the guest quarters and include a kitchen, bathroom, living room, a wood-burning stove and charming reclaimed wood-beamed ceilings. The property’s other outbuilding is a cozy staff cottage with one bedroom, a bathroom, a kitchen and a sitting room that overlooks the garden.

Some of their asking price comes down to the home’s location at the northern end of Tuscany’s Val d’Orcia region. From here the homeowners are a 10-minute drive from the historic town of Montalcino — a prized Brunello wine territory — and within or just over an hour’s drive to Renaissance Tuscan cities like Siena and Florence. The homeowners also took care during their restorations to ensure that the property would be as close to 100 percent organic as possible, insulating its walls with cork, and a geothermic energy system that keeps their electric bills minimal.

The land on which this former water mill-turned-mansion sits is what the homeowners call half of its purchasing value. Margheriti, the local landscape designers who supply the nearby historic gardens of La Foce, created the couple’s terraced gardens of olive trees, cypress, and flowering shrubs and herbs that knit the home into its bosky environment. That includes five hectares, or 12.4 acres, of secluded countryside, and biodynamic vineyards that qualify for Brunello denomination.

“I think of the context of the property, which is hidden in a Tuscan valley next to some of the most beautiful cities and important vineyards in the world,” Mr. Daniels said. “And this somehow seems more important to me than the actual house itself.”


