


PHOENIX — If there is any lingering tightness in Alex Rodriguez’s right hamstring, it did not carry over to his mood on Tuesday as he neared a return from the disabled list.

Asked if he was relieved the Yankees had finally begun to play better without him in the lineup, winning eight of 13 games, Rodriguez laughed.

“I thought someone was going to kick me in the hamstring to make sure I stayed down another week,” said Rodriguez, who is eligible to return on Thursday.

Joking aside, Rodriguez’s absence has not been such a bad thing for the Yankees.

Though the Yankees are more threatening with Rodriguez in the lineup, especially against left-handed pitchers, his nearly everyday presence as the designated hitter comes with hidden costs that have been revealed during his time away.

When Rodriguez plays, it prevents Carlos Beltran from being used as the designated hitter, which forces Manager Joe Girardi into a difficult choice: Rest Beltran and remove one of the best bats from the lineup or risk wearing out his 39-year-old legs later in the season.

In addition, with Beltran getting eight of the 12 starts as the designated hitter in American League parks, Aaron Hicks has had the chance to play every day, instantly improving the Yankees’ outfield defense and also giving him an opportunity to find his swing.

Hicks has recovered from an abysmal start to hit .286 with two home runs and six R.B.I. since Rodriguez injured his hamstring running out a ground ball in Baltimore on May 3. Hicks hit a fly ball that was caught against the center field wall on Monday night by Arizona’s Michael Bourn near the 407-foot sign, a few feet from being a three-run home run.

Meanwhile, Beltran has hit .290 with four home runs and eight R.B.I. as the designated hitter in Rodriguez’s absence. He has played eight games as designated hitter, matching his total from last season.

“I love to see the way the guys are swinging the bat,” Rodriguez said, singling out Hicks. “Also, those guys have been getting at-bats that haven’t been getting at-bats, and hopefully there’s a residual to that later in the year.”

Beltran played down the effect of moving to designated hitter.

“Whatever I do, playing right field or not, I do the same routine,” Beltran said. “I don’t see D.H. as being key. You’re always going to have good stretches and not-so-good ones.”

But last season, Beltran had regular rest early in the season, in part because of a slow start, and he spent two weeks on the disabled list in July. Those periods of rest were seen as an important factor for Beltran’s keeping his legs fresh and being one of the few Yankees who did not tail off at the end of the season.

Beltran was on the bench Tuesday after playing 14 consecutive days. There is no designated hitter during the series with the Diamondbacks because the D.H. is not used in National League parks. The Yankees had hoped to have Rodriguez ready when he is eligible to come off the disabled list, Thursday in Oakland, but Girardi said after a 5-3 loss on Tuesday that was unlikely.

“He’s still got some hurdles to get by, and he’s just not by them yet,” Girardi said. “He really hasn’t had a setback. We were hoping for 15 days, it’s probably going to be a few more days than that.”

Asked about Girardi’s comments, Rodriguez said, “Accurate, accurate.”

Rodriguez took batting practice Tuesday, but he said beforehand that he would need to be able to run the bases, which he did not do.

“Slowing down and starting is the big test, and obviously getting on cleats and making turns,” Rodriguez said. “The next 48 hours will be big.”

One of the many surprises Rodriguez bestowed on the Yankees last season, after returning from his yearlong suspension, was playing 151 games. It was the first time since 2007 that he had not spent time on the disabled list.

Those trips were accompanied by rehabilitation assignments to hone his timing at the plate and find his comfort in the field. But Girardi said that because Rodriguez had been out for only a short time and no longer played in the field, no stint in the minors was necessary before he returned.

While Rodriguez was batting .194 when he was injured, he had been showing signs of finding his swing.

“You know I was,” Rodriguez said with a smile when asked about his swing at the time of his injury. “That’s a trick question.”

When Rodriguez does return, he will continue to be the everyday designated hitter, but Girardi did allow himself some wiggle room.

“Everything in life and in the game of baseball and sports can change,” Girardi said. “It’s not always exactly how you draw it up, but that’s my plan.”

INSIDE PITCH

The Yankees made a flurry of moves on Tuesday as expected, recalling the utility player Rob Refsnyder and pitchers James Pazos and Luis Cessa from Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. To make room, they sent down pitchers Chad Green and Conor Mullee, who made their big-league debuts on Monday, and designated reliever Phil Coke for assignment.


