


WASHINGTON — A bitter dispute over gay rights on Thursday brought down a routine energy and water spending bill in the House after conservative Republicans voted against their own legislation rather than acquiesce to a bipartisan amendment banning discrimination based on sexual orientation.

The bill’s failure, by a vote of 305 to 112, portends another difficult year for spending legislation and raises questions over whether the ambitions of the new House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, will yield any significant results.

As lawmakers headed off for a weeklong Memorial Day recess, Mr. Ryan was left to blame Democrats for the failure of a Republican bill in a chamber with its largest Republican majority since the 1920s.

Mr. Ryan and Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate majority leader, have staked their success on returning order to a recalcitrant Capitol.

But House Republicans made clear Thursday that they were unwilling to take a difficult vote in an election year, and for the second year in a row a cultural fight torpedoed the appropriations process. In 2015, a battle over flying the Confederate flag on federal property paralyzed spending bills on the floor and dashed the promised return to an orderly process for allocating taxpayer money.

”I could not, in good conscience, vote for the appropriations bill with this damaging amendment included,” Representative Diane Black, Republican of Tennessee, said, calling the anti-discrimination amendment a threat to religious liberty.

Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican, acknowledged that the failure of the House bill set up the possibility of another major showdown over spending — or even a government shutdown — in October, when the next fiscal year begins and the election season crescendos.

Regardless, he added, “it’s a terrible way to govern.”

During the revolt that drove out Speaker John A. Boehner last fall, Republicans demanded a more rule-abiding House, where members would be allowed to introduce amendments and there would be votes on appropriations bills. Mr. Ryan, so dedicated to procedure that in January he cut off a key vote to rebuke tardy lawmakers, agreed.

Now, with bipartisan majorities forming around amendments like anti-discrimination legislation for gay men and lesbians, some House Republicans are having second thoughts.

Late Wednesday night, 43 Republicans joined 180 Democrats to approve an amendment to the energy spending bill that would have barred federal contractors from discriminating against workers based on sexual orientation, effectively turning President Obama’s 2014 executive order into legislation.

After the amendment’s passage, several Republicans told Mr. Ryan during a private meeting Thursday that they were not so keen on regular order, as the process of parliamentary rule-following is called, after all, according to members present.

Mr. Ryan said the collapse was to be expected. When he agreed to more amendments, he said, he understood “that some bills might fail, because we’re not going to tightly control the process and predetermine the outcome of everything around here. Well, that’s what happened here today.”

The failure of Mr. Ryan to push through a basic appropriations bill comes as House Republicans concede they are also unable to produce a budget this year — also because of infighting in their ranks — and Mr. Ryan’s admission that major policy proposals being devised in the House will not be turned into actual legislation. These failures raise questions about what precisely Mr. Ryan is going to be able to accomplish as he and his colleagues struggle to gain relevance in the presidential campaign.

Mr. Ryan blamed Democrats for the bill’s demise; only six voted for the spending measure.

“They were looking to sabotage the appropriations process,” he told reporters. “The fact that the author of the amendments that prevailed then turned around and voted against the bill containing his amendment tells us they’re trying to stop the appropriations process in its tracks.”

But members of the minority party are rarely held responsible for passing the majority’s bill, and Democrats said they had numerous reasons to oppose it, notwithstanding the gay rights amendment.

Democrats seemed unable to contain their glee as they turned Mr. Ryan’s promise of an open process — one they often rejected while in power to avoid these very disputes — on his conference.

“House Republicans’ thirst to discriminate against the L.G.B.T. community is so strong that they are willing to vote down their own appropriations bill in order to prevent progress over bigotry,” Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, said in a statement. “In turning against a far-reaching funding bill simply because it affirms protections for L.G.B.T. Americans, Republicans have once again lain bare the depths of their bigotry.”

The spending bill’s failure seemed to take Republican leaders by surprise. The House Appropriations Committee sent out a news release hailing the bill’s passage, then another notice recalling the release.

Representative Hal Rogers of Kentucky, the committee’s chairman, said leaders would again consider putting aside the rule allowing amendments, in order to pass their spending bills.

“We adapt to the circumstances,” he said.

The current debate over gay rights spilled out onto the House floor last week when the chamber was working its way through the annual military policy bill. In another late-night voting session, the House passed a Republican-inserted amendment that would overturn Mr. Obama’s executive order banning discrimination based on sexual orientation.

Democrats responded the next day by introducing a measure to counter that amendment. The Democratic amendment appeared to pass, but Republican leaders held the vote open well past the time limit to allow their members to anonymously switch their votes and defeat it.

So Democrats brought it up again Wednesday.

Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, the New York Democrat who sponsored the amendment, signaled he was prepared to continue attaching it to other bills unless Republicans were willing to vote on a separate bill broadly shielding gay, lesbian and transgender individuals from discrimination.

He insisted Republicans picked the fight over gay rights.

“It’s a little funny to look at the Democrats and say, ‘Why is this happening?’” he said.


