


A founder of the now-disbanded Minuteman border patrol group has been convicted in Arizona of molesting a 5-year-old girl, bringing to an end a case that gained the attention of the nation’s highest court after he tried to cross-examine the young victim.

The defendant, Christopher Simcox, 55, was found guilty Wednesday of molesting the girl, who was a friend of his 6-year-old daughter, between April 21, 2012, and May 23, 2013, during visits to his apartment, the Maricopa County attorney, Bill Montgomery, said in a statement. Mr. Simcox was in the process of divorcing his wife at the time.

The girl told her mother of the abuse, and her mother called law enforcement.

“The defendant preyed upon a young child while she was meant to be in his care,” Mr. Montgomery said. “This young girl had the courage to come forward to stop the abuse and by doing so revealed his predatory behavior. With this verdict, we have been able to seek justice for this victim.”

Mr. Simcox was found guilty of two counts of molestation of a child and one count of furnishing obscene materials to a minor, the statement said. He was also accused of sexual conduct with another child, but was found not guilty of that charge, Mr. Montgomery said.

Mr. Simcox’s trial took an unexpected turn that could have an impact on future case law. Although he is not a lawyer, Mr. Simcox represented himself and sought to question the girls he was accused of molesting.

But prosecutors brought in an expert to address the trauma it would cause the victims, and they took action in lower courts to block Mr. Simcox, eventually filing a petition that is now before the United States Supreme Court.

“Ultimately, the defendant backed down from his insistence on personally carrying out the cross-examination of his victims and allowed his advisory attorney to question the victims,” Mr. Montgomery said. “Even though the issue is now moot in this case, it is still pending before the U.S. Supreme Court because of its legal significance.”

Kerrie Droban, who served as Mr. Simcox’s advisory counsel, said in a telephone interview on Thursday that she had questioned the girls instead, while Mr. Simcox was allowed during the trial to question two children who were witnesses.

Mr. Simcox will be sentenced on July 5. Consecutive mandatory sentences could be tantamount to a life in prison, Ms. Droban said.

Mr. Simcox was a former high-profile advocate for tougher control of borders and undocumented day laborers, joining watch groups and speaking out at public events, like one in Farmingville on Long Island in 2003.

He was a founder of a volunteer armed watch group, Civil Homeland Defense, which was created after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and intercepted undocumented immigrants crossing into Arizona, turning them over to the authorities. Later, he helped form the Minuteman Civil Defense Corps, which stepped into the national spotlight in 2005 with high-profile border patrols.

The Southern Poverty Law Center said Mr. Simcox, a former kindergarten teacher, was among the movement’s most charismatic figures, affecting the likeness of a vigilante with a pistol tucked into the front of his jeans.

In 2012, Mr. Simcox told the center, which was investigating the possible involvement of extremist groups in the killings of Mexicans crossing the Arizona border, that he had left the movement and was living a quiet life tutoring schoolchildren in suburban Phoenix.

When the verdict in his trial was announced on Wednesday, the mother of the then-5-year-old girl dabbed her eyes with tissue, The Arizona Republic reported.

“He was convicted on at least one, and that’s all we need,” she said. “This conviction is for all of the children that he hurt.”

“I don’t have words,” she added. “It’s over. I can go home and tell my daughter.”


