


The playwright sat wearing, and occasionally playing, a red Epiphone guitar that was wirelessly connected to an amp with a light touch of reverb, as scenes from his new show unfolded in a Brooklyn rehearsal room. A music stand in front of him held not music, but his script — though the distinction may be moot. For Stew, the singer/songwriter/bandleader who won a Tony in 2008 for the book of his maiden theatrical effort, “Passing Strange,” the music is always the play, and vice versa.

But in his newest show, “The Total Bent,” which opens Wednesday, May 25, at the Public Theater, the lines between story and song are muddier than ever.

There are singing, dancing and scenes with dialogue, but these ingredients are mixed in a less linear way. In “Passing Strange,” Stew narrated a semi-autobiographical coming-of-age tale and led the onstage band as an ensemble of performers enacted the story in front of him.

“The Total Bent” is something else. The central story, a civil rights-era music-industry fable set in a Deep South recording studio, has a fragmented narrative that owes more to the song cycles Stew has written with Heidi Rodewald (“Making It,” “Wagner, Max! Wagner,” and the James Baldwin-inspired “Notes of a Native Song”) than to musical-theater antecedents. The seven-piece band, most of whose members also deliver stray lines and lyrics, has mingled with the actors to the point that the lines between their roles have blurred. As such, a number of contradictions within the show are inevitable.

“We’re not really doing a musical,” Stew, a Falstaffian figure in kufi cap and loose-fitting shirt, said at a nearby Middle Eastern restaurant after a recent rehearsal. “If what you call a musical is something where every little moment is identified and everything is clear, the hero and the heroine and the arc and all that — I feel like we’re doing something very different.”

But the show’s director, Joanna Settle, disagrees. Stew, she said, is “leaning into work that is part concert, part theater. I think of theater as making live events, and this is really a live event that depends on the third dimension — it’s not immediately transparent on the page.”

Mandy Hackett, the Public Theater’s associate artistic director, has been shepherding the show since its lab staging there in 2012. She was among those who recognized the theatrical potential of the songs and patter Stew delivered with his band, the Negro Problem, often at the Public’s in-house cabaret, Joe’s Pub. Those led directly to what she called the “episodic” layout of “Passing Strange,” where “each scene was its own universe.”

For “The Total Bent,” she said, Stew is “challenging himself to take another step forward as a dramatic writer, to really pull the story through from scene to scene. It’s a much more complicated kind of storytelling.”

New forms can demand new ways of working. To support Stew, who “really needs the musicians with him to get in his creative zone,” as Ms. Hackett put it, the Public has paid for the extra expense and logistics of rehearsals that have included the full band from the first day, a departure from the typically compartmentalized musical-theater approach. Most musicals still rehearse their performers with just a piano (and occasionally a small drum kit), with the actors first meeting the hired band just before technical rehearsals in the theater, in a play-and-sing-through tradition called a sitzprobe.

Rock ’n’ roll isn’t made that way. Most often a band hammers out musical arrangements over a series of rehearsals, layering a fully fleshed-out sound over a skeleton of chords, melody and rhythm provided by the songwriter; instrumental parts, harmonies, even structural elements of songs can be up for grabs. At the rehearsal in Brooklyn for “The Total Bent,” this working method was on full display. Stew simply pointed at the sax and trumpet players to come in on a certain beat; no notes were named, let alone written down. And vocal parts for a climactic number sung by the lead actors Vondie Curtis Hall and Ato Blankson-Wood — who play a father-and-son musical team riven both by the era’s political ferment and the arrival of a blues-besotted white British music producer (David Cale) — were conjured aloud, mouth to ear, on the spot.

The band’s drummer, Marty Beller, who has played regularly with the Negro Problem and They Might Be Giants, confirmed that rehearsals had essentially worked in reverse of standard musical-theater procedure. The band spent a week working out the score in a room together, then invited the actor/singers in, along with Ms. Settle and the choreographer David Neumann — a process Mr. Beller likened to adding new band members. Ms. Rodewald, too, compared the play’s rehearsal process to a jam session, “like we’re all in a garage working on a song.”

Stew sees the band as the show’s essential unit. Referring to two actors who have been with the show since its earliest stages, he said, “I feel like Vondie and David Cale have kind of joined the Negro Problem.”

Music isn’t just the medium — it’s central to “The Total Bent.” The title is taken from Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Unfulfilled Dreams” speech — “God does not judge us by the separate incidents or the separate mistakes that we make, but by the total bent of our lives” — and the inspiration for the play’s epicene pop singer, Marty Roy, is Michael Jackson, both for his otherworldly talent and his uneasy relationships to gender, race and celebrity — not to mention his own dominating father.

“This play started out with a question,” Stew said. “What is the difference between a political activist and an artist? Both involve risk, but for the activist the risk is really just the body; for the artist, the risk is to their inside.”

In one key song, two backup singers confess to Marty that they find the thought of marching for civil rights in the face of riot police less scary than his more outré musical experiments. “Easier to be hosed than exposed,” they sing.

Another pet topic of Stew’s that gets a workout is the intersection of rock and religion, the ostensible battle between God and the devil that’s long been a blues trope. Stew said he “never really got the whole sacred/profane duality. I connected church to rock ’n’ roll so early. There wasn’t like one side or the other.” As one character says in “The Total Bent,” “Blues is just gospel’s last name.”

This is more than simple music criticism; the metaphor is reciprocal. To Stew, the notion of “going into a place completely clean, and coming out all sweaty and filled with the Holy Spirit” aptly describes both a sanctuary and a rock club.

“That makes it impossible for me to criticize believers,” he said, “because I, too, believe in this invisible thing that I can’t point to or explain but I know is there. I can’t point to the chord that made me a better person. It’s not that different.”


