


Two N.B.A. teams, the Cavaliers and the Spurs, have finished off their opening-round playoff series with four-game sweeps. But the Warriors, the superteam that broke the regular-season wins record, have lost a playoff game to the Rockets and so lead by only three games to one while dealing with an injury to their star Stephen Curry.

A sweep can cheer fans, and it often starts the hype machine. But do first-round sweeps over often weak opposition really herald postseason success in the N.B.A.? Not really.

Since the opening round expanded to a best-of-seven series in 2003, there had been 20 first-round sweeps before this season.

The teams that did the sweeping were mostly quite good: 18 of the 20 were seeded higher than their opponents, and the exceptions were fifth seeds beating fourth seeds. Of the 20, 16 were No. 1 or No. 2 seeds. These strong teams fared fairly well in the playoffs: 16 of the 20 won their next series as well.

But their records slip after that. Only nine of the 20 made the N.B.A. finals, and surprisingly only two — the 2013 Heat and the Warriors last year — won the title. Indeed, over this period, it has been as likely for an eventual champion to go to seven games in the first round as to sweep.

In 2014, the top-seeded Spurs needed seven games to outlast Monta Ellis and the Mavericks, then lost only four games the rest of the way to the title. In 2008, Joe Johnson and the eighth-seeded Hawks, who had a losing regular-season record, pushed the Celtics to seven games. Boston needed seven, six and six games in their subsequent series, and won a hard-fought title.

This season’s two sweepers went about it differently. The Cavaliers won games by 5 points and 2 points and by an average of only 8.5, the second-narrowest margin for a first-round sweep since 2003.

In contrast, the Spurs crushed the Grizzlies, winning by an average of 22 points, the most dominant first-round performance under the current format. The record had been held by the Spurs of 2013, who demolished the Lakers by an average of 18.8 points on their way to the finals as a No. 2 seed.

In the 1990s, the first round was a best-of-five series. The team the Warriors are often compared to, Michael Jordan’s Bulls, swept all six first-round series in their six title years. In the first four of those years, the average margin of victory ranged from 16.4 points to 23. In their last two title years, the Bulls swept by an average of only 6 points and 7.7.

The Warriors are spending a lot more time worrying about Curry’s health than about losing a game to the Rockets. Fans should probably also not fret. And the Spurs and the Cavaliers may want to wait a round or two before expanding the trophy case.


