


CHICAGO — Mayor Rahm Emanuel called on Thursday for better training, speedier misconduct investigations and other immediate changes for the troubled Chicago Police Department. His plan came in response to a scathing report published last week that blamed racism and a broken discipline process for the frayed trust between officers and many residents, validating complaints made for years by African-Americans in the city.

But Mr. Emanuel’s plan did not address about 70 percent of the recommendations from the Police Accountability Task Force, which he appointed in December after demonstrators demanded his resignation. He said in a statement on Thursday that city officials would release progress reports as more changes took effect.

Lori Lightfoot, the chairwoman of the task force, said that it was “important that the mayor has taken initiative” to start making changes, but that all of the recommendations were meant to eventually be adopted.

Thursday’s announcement came at a time of continuing turmoil for the Police Department. The Justice Department is reviewing its practices, the City Council confirmed a new police superintendent last week, and violent crime has spiked.

Here are findings by the task force and changes announced by Mr. Emanuel.

TASK FORCE’S FINDING “The community’s lack of trust in C.P.D. is justified. There is substantial evidence that people of color — particularly African-Americans — have had disproportionately negative experiences with the police over an extended period of time.”

Protesters marched repeatedly after the release in November of video showing a white police officer firing 16 shots into a black teenager, Laquan McDonald.

CITY’S PLAN Eddie Johnson, the new police superintendent, has held “bridge meetings” with residents in recent days and has pledged to continue those. The Chicago police have also started using “restorative justice” to connect officers with young people of different cultures to discuss race, bias and other issues. “Trust is at the heart of good policing, safe communities, and is the central challenge facing Chicago today,” Mr. Johnson said in the mayor’s statement. “These reforms are a down payment on restoring that trust.”

TASK FORCE’S FINDING “There have increasingly been situations in which police response to calls involving persons experiencing mental health crises ended with devastating results.”

Philip Coleman, a 38-year-old college graduate, died at a hospital in 2012 after being arrested, shocked by a Taser and dragged from his cell in handcuffs while undergoing what his family has described as a mental health crisis. This month, the City Council approved a $4.95 million settlement in his case.

CITY’S PLAN More officers will have crisis-intervention training to respond to mentally ill people, as the task force recommended. Dispatchers and 911 operators will be trained in properly dispatching officers to scenes where mental illness is suspected.

Alexa James, a licensed clinical social worker who served on the task force, said that she was encouraged by Thursday’s announcement and that “the more tools officers have to support anybody in crisis, the better.” But Ms. James, the executive director of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, said she hoped that the mayor would soon create a response unit, suggested by the task force, that would work with community groups and expand and coordinate the Police Department’s training.

TASK FORCE’S FINDING “Statistics give real credibility to the widespread perception that there is a deeply entrenched code of silence supported not just by individual officers, but by the very institution itself.”

The City Council agreed last year to pay $5.5 million to victims of Jon Burge, a former police commander who tortured suspects and coerced confessions in the 1970s and ’80s. Some men who said they had been wrongfully convicted spent years in prison before the city publicly acknowledged the abuses and agreed to pay reparations.

CITY’S PLAN Mr. Emanuel called for an early intervention system to identify and help problem officers, a hotline for officers to report colleagues who are breaking the rules, and a set of fixed penalties for misconduct.

But the mayor largely steered clear of issues the task force had raised about police union contracts. The task force found that some provisions in those contracts provided too much protection to officers who committed misconduct. Dean Angelo Sr., the president of the union that represents rank-and-file officers, said Thursday that the report was “not fair at all” and that he did not understand why Mr. Emanuel was carrying out task force recommendations while the Justice Department was still investigating. Mr. Angelo said that his members were frustrated and angry with what he considered “finger-pointing,” and that claims that officers were racist were especially unfair.

TASK FORCE’S FINDING Explaining why the Independent Police Review Authority, which investigates police shootings and severe misconduct, should be replaced: “Cases go uninvestigated, the agency lacks resources, and I.P.R.A.’s findings raise troubling concerns about whether it is biased in favor of police officers.”

A former investigator for the police review authority, Lorenzo Davis, said he had been overruled and fired when he wanted to fault officers in some shootings. In one case, he said, he sought to find wrongdoing in the 2013 shooting death of Cedrick Chatman, who was running away from officers and carrying an iPhone box. The police said they had mistaken the box for a gun.

CITY’S PLAN Mr. Emanuel did not immediately call for doing away with the review authority, but city officials indicated willingness to consider “options for structural reform.” Mr. Emanuel endorsed plans to audit past investigations, increase outreach, and work on a system to release video and other evidence after police shootings.

Ms. Lightfoot, the task force’s chairwoman, said she hoped a new agency would eventually be created to take over those investigations. “People are expecting that there are going to be some dramatic changes done and that a new organization is going to be stood up,” she said. “That hasn’t been addressed, but we’re a week into this.”


