


SANTA CLARA, Calif. — Imagine buying tickets to see Beyoncé in concert, only to find out she had contracted laryngitis.

Some fans may have felt the same disappointment Monday night at Levi’s Stadium, where Lionel Messi, whom many consider the best soccer player in the world, was not included in the starting 11 for Argentina in its Copa América match against Chile.

Messi, 28, has been battling a sore back since taking a hard blow in a game on May 27 — he was listed among Argentina’s bench players Monday as the game got underway — and his slow recovery has cast an unfortunate shadow on the tournament.

The game on Monday — a rematch of last year’s Copa America final, which Chile won — was an entertaining one for the announced crowd of 69,451. Controlling play for the most part, Argentina won, 2-1, scoring two second-half goals in quick succession before Chile notched one in stoppage time. But without Messi, it was not quite as mouthwatering as it could have been.

“Messi was a big attraction because we’re not really for either team,” said Anne Kelker of San Jose, who was at the game with her son, Patrick. “So to see a player of that caliber here was a huge thing. When we first bought the tickets, that’s what attracted us to this game.”

Kelker added that she and her son had previously tried to see Messi in an exhibition that Barcelona, Messi’s club team, had played in the area. “But he didn’t come,” she said. “So we were thinking this would be one of the only opportunities locally to see him.”

Messi, a forward of immense dribbling skill, scoring ability and passing vision, has already established his status as one of the best players in the long history of the game. FIFA named him the best player in the world in five of the last seven years.

The experience of seeing him play has become a common item on sports fans’ bucket lists. Even the Chilean midfielder Arturo Vidal, who had every reason to exult in Messi’s absence, said Sunday that he hoped Messi would recover from his injury in time to play the game, not only for the sake of the Argentine team but “for the sake of soccer,” to create a more beautiful game for fans.

Messi’s absence highlighted the fact that the tournament’s star power has been somewhat dimmed over the last few days.

Consider the banner image on the tournament’s official Twitter page, which features eight marquee players. Four of them were expected to miss games for a variety of reasons:

■ James Rodríguez of Colombia hurt his shoulder in the opening game of the tournament and will miss his team’s game Tuesday against Paraguay.

■ Luis Suárez of Uruguay, who is nursing a right hamstring injury, missed his team’s game on Sunday against Mexico. His status was unclear for Uruguay’s next game, on Thursday.

■ Tim Howard, a United States goalkeeper, was relegated to a backup role before the tournament because Coach Jurgen Klinsmann decided Brad Guzan was the better choice.

Then there is Messi, who more than any other player in this tournament — and perhaps all of soccer — is considered worth the price of admission. With his absence from the starting lineup, the price of admission became a little bit harder to swallow for some.

“It’s obviously disappointing if one of the greatest players in the game doesn’t play,” said Scott Fuller, who paid a total of $424 for two tickets to the game. “You’re always taking a chance that a player is injured. That’s true in any league and any sport.”

Fuller, who said he had fallen in love with soccer only in the last few years and had adopted Barcelona as a favorite team, said he was still happy to see the other stars in the game, like Ángel Di María of Argentina and Alexis Sánchez of Chile.

Di María was electric all game, and he opened scoring with a straight scampering run and near-post finish in the 51st minute. Éver Banega, who supplied the pass on that goal, scored his own eight minutes later after an assist from Di María. José Fuenzalida’s goal for Chile, three minutes into stoppage time, was one of the final touches of the game.

Other games in the tournament have not had the drawing power of multiple stars, and swaths of empty seats at some of the early matches have raised questions by sports commentators and on social media about whether tickets were appropriately priced.

The cheapest tickets at the Copa América are being sold for $50 — far more expensive than those sold at the tournament last year in Chile and more than tickets for Euro 2016, the celebrated competition taking place this summer across the Atlantic. Parking around Levi’s Stadium on Monday was running as high as $50.

While neutral fans were disappointed ahead of Monday’s game that they would probably not see Messi play, Argentine fans were wary of what his absence could mean to the team.

Juan and Carlos Lau, brothers of Argentine descent who were born in Venezuela and now live in San Diego, were set to follow Argentina to Seattle for its next game.

“You want to see the best player in the world play the game, and this is the hardest game of the group, so it was hard to believe that they would start without their best weapon,” Juan Lau said before Monday’s game.

Carlos Lau said he did not mind if Messi did not play as long as the team performed well.

Other Argentine fans thought it was important for Messi to have an impact on this tournament, if only to quiet the criticism that he plays better for his club than he does for his country.

“I’m Argentinian, and I don’t like Barcelona, so I see it from a different point of view,” said Bryan Smeail of Los Angeles. “I just want to see him play well and lift the trophy to shut everybody up. I know he’s the greatest player. But a lot of fans — and I’m in included in them — see him not play that good for Argentina and then in a couple of weeks score a hat trick in Spain. It can be heartbreaking.”


