


A grand jury has voted to charge a rapper who was seen on video firing a gun at a Manhattan concert last month in a shooting that left his bodyguard dead and three others injured, the prosecutor handling the case said on Thursday.

An indictment containing the charges against the rapper, Troy Ave, 33, whose real name is Roland Collins, will be filed within two weeks, Christine Keenan, the prosecutor, said during a hearing in criminal court in Manhattan on Thursday. The charges will be made public on June 22, when Mr. Collins is scheduled to be arraigned in State Supreme Court.

The indictment is expected to shed light on how strong a case the district attorney’s office has against Mr. Collins, who was arrested on charges of attempted murder and criminal weapons possession after the May 25 shooting at Irving Plaza, a concert hall near Union Square. He is being held without bail at the Rikers Island jail complex.

About 950 people were at the venue when the shooting started in a V.I.P. area, according to the police. The rapper headlining the concert, T.I., was about to go onstage when the sound of gunshots sent the crowd rushing for the exits. Ronald McPhatter, 33, the bodyguard, was killed.

The shooting sparked a wave of debate across New York City about the glorification of violence in rap music and security at rap events. Live Nation, the concert company that operates the club, postponed several shows after the shooting.

Mr. Collins, who was wounded in the leg during the shooting, did not appear at the hearing on Thursday. His lawyers said their client’s wheelchair could not fit through a door that incarcerated defendants must pass through to reach the courtroom.

After the hearing, Scott E. Leemon, one of Mr. Collins’s lawyers, said nothing had changed in his client’s case.

“He didn’t shoot himself,” Mr. Leemon said. “He didn’t shoot McPhatter. They are victims, and it’s time for the D.A.’s office to start treating them like victims.”

Ms. Keenan said she would file a motion to obtain a cheek swab from Mr. Collins for DNA. She did not say what it would be used for.

Mr. Collins’s mother and several other relatives, dressed in black, attended part of the hearing, sitting quietly on a courtroom bench. They declined to comment afterward.

Mr. Collins was seen in surveillance video from the venue firing a gun into a crowd on the V.I.P. level as terrified concertgoers shielded themselves under a balcony. The police said they found the gun, a Kel-Tec PF-9 semiautomatic pistol, in the minivan that carried Mr. Collins to the hospital. Ballistics tests matched the weapon to six shell casings recovered at the scene, according to the police, but investigators have not ruled out the possibility that there was a second gunman.

From behind bars on Monday, Mr. Collins released a mixtape, “Free Troy Ave.” On the first of 12 tracks, he professes his innocence and gives his version of what happened in the V.I.P. area.

On “Intro (Troy Ave Speaks Freestyle),” Mr. Collins describes taking a gun from a man who tried to “assassinate me” and turning “the tables ’round like a G.” On that track and others, which were recorded from phone calls from jail, he talks about the pain of losing Mr. McPhatter and thanks supporters. He calls the shooting and subsequent ordeal “a minor setback for a major comeback.”

“It ain’t the end of Troy Ave, not at all; this is just the beginning,” he says. “I’m innocent. Unless they charging me with being real from the very beginning, I’m innocent.”

His statements on the mixtape raised questions about whether the lyrics could be admitted as evidence in court. Critics argue that rap lyrics are artistic expressions protected under the First Amendment, but rulings have established that lyrics can be used against defendants under special circumstances.

Mr. Collins’s lawyers did not comment on the mixtape.

John B. Stella, another of Mr. Collins’s lawyers, said his client established a $10,000 scholarship in Mr. McPhatter’s honor after the shooting for athletes at New Utrecht High School, where the two had graduated.

Mr. McPhatter’s funeral on Saturday in Brooklyn was attended by dozens of relatives dressed in white; elected officials, including Eric L. Adams, the borough president; antiviolence activists; and the rapper Lil Mama. Mr. McPhatter was remembered for his smile, his protective instincts and his athletic prowess.


