


For his bookshop and website One Grand Books, the editor Aaron Hicklin asked people to name the 10 books they’d take with them if they were marooned on a desert island. The next in the series is the actor James Franco, who shares his list exclusively with T. (One Grand Books will host a literary salon in New York on June 8.)

“Blood Meridian,” Cormac McCarthy

This is the western to end all westerns. Its rich tableaux of the borderlands mixed with unrelenting violence creates an inimitable portrait of our country’s history.

“The Long Home,” William Gay

Gay is an unabashed disciple of Cormac McCarthy, and this is the first book by him, a reclusive man who had old Tennessee pumping in his veins. Youth versus experience, love versus hate, this is a distinctly Southern tale of a honkey tonk, murder, young lovers and retribution.

“Jesus’ Son,” Denis Johnson

A slim book of interconnected stories following a hapless drug addict. Humorous, dark and moving, with prose that surprises with its drug-fueled imagery.

“The Sellout,” Paul Beatty

This book killed me. Funny, poignant, outrageous and deep as hell. Beatty talks about all the hard stuff of race with great skill and humor.

“As I Lay Dying,” William Faulkner

On the surface it’s the simple story of a family going to bury their mother; underneath it is a roiling tale of desperation, love and struggle.

“The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao,” Junot Díaz

Everyone knows Junot Díaz is the man. This book is hilarious and heartbreaking in equal measure; pop cultural and political. Just a great read.

“Paulina & Fran,” Rachel B. Glaser

Art school, lovers, comedy. I recently read this book and fell in love with its characters and prose. It’s quirky and right on about trying to be creative today.

“What We Talk About When We Talk About Love,” Raymond Carver

The master of short minimalist fiction, Carver destroys the heart with economic prose like no other.

“In the Western Night: Collected Poems,” Frank Bidart

A student of Robert Lowell, his poems breathe fire. He is both nakedly vulnerable and violently terrifying. My hero.

“Donkey Gospel,” Tony Hoagland

A self-proclaimed postmodern confessionalist poet, Hoagland’s poems gather and distribute so much energy it’s like he’s a boxer — or a wrestler — rather than a writer.


