


PISCATAWAY, N.J. — To discuss the wage-discrimination debate unfolding at the top level of soccer in the United States, allow me to introduce Cheyenne, Abigail and Amaya.

These three girls — two 11-year-olds and a 10-year-old from the Jersey Shore — put on their soccer jerseys, hopped into a minivan and traveled about an hour with their moms on Sunday afternoon to watch a women’s professional soccer game, Sky Blue F.C.’s home opener here against the Washington Spirit.

Smart girls. Not even in middle school yet, they realize that equality shouldn’t be just for the elite but for everyone, including athletes in the 10-team National Women’s Soccer League.

Most of the 200 or so players in the league, you see, don’t draw a salary from the United States women’s national team, which is why you didn’t hear much chatter about them when Carli Lloyd, Hope Solo, Becky Sauerbrunn, Alex Morgan and Megan Rapinoe filed a wage-discrimination complaint against U.S. Soccer last month.

Yet you should have. Both issues are important.

“Some of the players in the N.W.S.L. get paid so little that they have to have jobs on the side to support their families, and that’s not right,” said Cheyenne Payne, who turned 11 on Monday and who recited so many details about women’s soccer that I’d swear she studied for my interview.

Abigail Cole said it was “just wrong” that she had to watch N.W.S.L. games streamed on YouTube because the games are rarely televised. Amaya Dalton said it was “just unfair” that pay for the best men and women was so different.

How different? U.S. Soccer pays about $54,000 per national player, on top of national team pay, to compete in the N.W.S.L.; the other N.W.S.L. players earn salaries that range from $7,200 to $39,700 for a season that runs from April to October.

Where does that leave a player like Raquel Rodriguez? A Sky Blue midfielder, Rodriguez was the college player of the year at Penn State last season and represented her native Costa Rica in last summer’s World Cup. She said her country’s federation doesn’t pay her, and has yet to fork over the $2,000 bonus she and her teammates were supposed to get from reaching the World Cup. With her federation’s former president embroiled in the FIFA financial scandal, she acknowledged she may never see that money.

“For the U.S. national team players, getting just a $2,000 bonus would be an insult,” Rodriguez said. “But for players like me who don’t make money playing soccer for their country, that $2,000 is a huge help.”

Her teammate Ashley Nick, an American who isn’t on the national team, supplements her salary with modeling and babysitting jobs, and she said other players work in coffee shops to make ends meet. Nick is not a stranger to pro sports: Four of her cousins (Casey, Clay, Jake and Kevin Matthews) play or have played in the N.F.L.

“If we’re going to eat at Chipotle together, they’re going to pay for the extra guacamole, if you get my drift,” Nick said. “But we’re just hustling because we have to. We realize that it’s very much the pioneer days of women’s soccer.”

The pioneer days are advancing slowly. The N.W.S.L., just starting its fourth season, is the third league of its kind in the United States. The previous two leagues folded after three seasons. The main difference now is that U.S. Soccer and the Canadian Soccer Association are helping to bankroll the N.W.S.L. as it tries to gain a foothold. In addition to paying the salaries of their national team players, U.S. Soccer and the C.S.A. cover the league office’s costs, a contribution U.S. Soccer pegged recently at about $10 million over the first three seasons.

But there is far to go. Attendance in the N.W.S.L.’s first season, in 2013, averaged 4,271 a game. Last year — even with most of the league’s stars absent because of World Cup duty — it rose to 5,046. And while the Portland Thorns have set the bar for fan support and the expansion Orlando Pride broke the league’s single-game record Saturday with an announced 23,403 fans in attendance for their first home game, the N.W.S.L.’s future — its mere existence — isn’t a sure thing.

So yes, it’s good to raise awareness about equal pay for equal work in international soccer. But words alone won’t help close the yawning gap between men and women. The stars and the second-stringers of the N.W.S.L. welcome your support on social media. But what they could really use is your support at the ticket booth and in the stadium shop.

Better support from fans would help make the league viable for the long haul, and that might allow it to wean itself from U.S. Soccer’s subsidies. And if U.S. Soccer ever stops bankrolling the league, there will be no justification to have different pay structures for its men’s and women’s national teams.

“The lifeblood of football worldwide is club football and professional leagues,” said Moya Dodd, a member of FIFA’s executive committee. “And for the women’s game to grow, these women’s leagues need to develop. It absolutely matters.”

So if you really want to help the cause of the women’s players, try helping the larger cause, too. Crack open your wallet and go to an N.W.S.L. game. Any team. Any game. Just go.

There’s often plenty of room. Though its home games are played only about 40 miles outside New York City, Sky Blue has been last in attendance since the league began. The team, which plays in Rutgers University’s soccer stadium and lost to the Spirit, 2-1, in the home opener, had only 2,571 fans in the stands on Sunday.

“A lot of people don’t even know this league exists,” Sky Blue forward Natasha Kai said. “So something’s got to change. We just want to play.”

Ali Krieger, a defender for the Spirit and the World Cup-winning national team, suggested that the league ramp up its marketing efforts. Put fliers on bus shelters, she said, or in coffee shops, or yell from the rooftops. Another option is for N.W.S.L. owners to join forces with M.L.S. teams, as the clubs in Portland, Houston and Orlando have, and sell soccer as a package deal.

But it’s up to the public to make the real difference, to do something more than vent on Twitter and Facebook in support of the cause of equal pay. Cheyenne Payne wants to be a professional soccer player one day, and she is going to need a league to do that.

“The world,” she said Sunday, “just needs to wake up.”


