


He sipped from a bottle of iced tea, taking his position near a corner in the L-shaped Duane Reade. From there, he could see the cold medicine in Aisle 7A, the deodorants in Aisle 3, security videos on a screen above Aisle 5 and, most important, near the entrance, the beer cooler.

The thieves love their beer.

“Modelo, Heineken, Budweiser,” said the man, Derek Exum, 47, a security guard in plain clothes, waiting like a hunter in a stand. “The 12-pack or the 24-pack.”

This is not a typical Duane Reade, the New York-based chain that began more than 50 years ago with a single store between the two downtown streets that make its name. This is the Duane Reade embedded in the Port Authority Bus Terminal near Times Square, and it is plagued by a steady assault of shoplifters and snatch-and-dash crooks who linger at the terminal, inside and out.

Mr. Exum said he had stopped more than 70 shoplifters since his employer, S.E.B. Security, placed him there three months ago. He said they were mostly catch-and-release cases in which he confronted the thief, presented him with a trespassing notice, snapped a mug shot with a cellphone camera and sent him away.

To dispel any doubt, Mr. Exum opened his phone to dozens of photos of sullen men whom he had stopped.

In a city that prides itself on record-low crime levels, the Duane Reade is a reminder of the stubbornly old-school grittiness of the bus terminal, a hub for addicts and the homeless, some down on their luck, some bleary-eyed and nodding, others ranting. The terminal can seem frozen in time, as if it were inside a snow bubble marked “New York City, 1974.”

The store is in many ways an easy target. Besides the street entrance on Eighth Avenue, there are two separate entryways that open to the terminal itself. Grabbing something and running out would not seem to be difficult. It is the job of the guards — there are generally three on the floor in the afternoons, with only one of them in uniform — to stop the thieves.

“They run countersurveillance; they watch us,” said Rudy Alcide, 41, also a guard at the store. “Sometimes they’ll send someone to get caught, and while we’re over getting his information, the others come in stealing.”

Another guard, Christopher Taylor, 45, in plain clothes and avoiding eye contact with a reporter so as not to blow his cover, described his rounds. “Shaving aisle, medicine aisle, Aisle 7, Aisle 6, those are the hot spots,” he said, speaking softly.

“Beer, body wash, cosmetics, food,” said Michael James, 29, another guard.

“Condoms, detergent,” Mr. Exum added.

And energy drinks. Whenever the door to the cooler containing energy drinks is opened, a loud alarm shrieks, alerting the guards. This is what it has come to here: Every person who reaches for the energy drinks is assumed to be a thief and worth a closer look.

Few of the shoplifters face criminal charges. There have been 18 arrests this year, compared with 11 in the same time period last year, Deputy Chief Raymond Bryan of the Port Authority Police Department said. He acknowledged that most shoplifters caught — and released — by the Duane Reade guards were not reported to the police and that the guards performed their own investigations.

“The loss-prevention guys do at times leave the store to follow the guys who have stolen property,” Chief Bryan said. “Sometimes they notify P.A.P.D., and sometimes they don’t.”

Mr. Exum said he had ventured to the terminal’s upper floors in search of stolen goods and found men drinking beer in the warren of hallways between buses. Beer theft is a big enough problem that the police asked the management to move the cooler, located near a door, farther into the store.

The store declined, Chief Bryan said, and now all the thieves had to do was “stick their arm in the store and remove the item from the cooler.” He said the store’s response to the request was that it wanted “to remain uniform and alike with the rest of the stores in Manhattan.”

Phil Caruso, a spokesman for Walgreens, which owns Duane Reade, declined to comment on how crime there compared with other stores. “While we do not disclose information on criminal activity in our stores,” Mr. Caruso said, “the safety of our customers and employees is a top concern.”

On Wednesday afternoon, as Mr. Exum described beer theft for a reporter in the store, a tall, disheveled man shuffled past him and pulled a large can of Heineken from the cooler. The man walked toward the cashiers, then pivoted and headed for the door.

He did not make it very far: Mr. Exum hurried over and stopped him, took the beer and let him go with a warning. He put the can back in the cooler.

Mr. Exum said he worked a circuit of Duane Reade stores in the course of a week, and dressed with care. “I’ll dress bummy,” he said. “I’ll wear a shirt that’s got paint on it or something. I won’t get a haircut.”

Some days are dull, but not here. “This is my favorite store,” he said.

His son, Derek Exum Jr., 27, works there, too. “I had somebody take two Bud cases and set them by the door, and another guy took the beer,” he said. He showed a photo in his phone of dozens of 5-Hour Energy drinks he said someone had tried to steal recently.

Theodore Russell, 40, also a guard there, caught a thief on Thursday afternoon stealing 11 sticks of deodorant — Old Spice and Right Guard. He snatched the man’s bag with the loot as the man ran away. Inside, Mr. Russell said, he found 15 sandwiches from a 7-Eleven.

“Just a regular dude,” he said of the thief.

Jean Dorelus, 35, a guard working on Thursday afternoon, held an unopened bottle of orange juice as part of his disguise as a shopper. He glanced toward the front of the store, but was reluctant to stray from the rear.

“I have to keep my eyes on the beer,” he said.


