


Forbidden love, jealousy and betrayal are some of the most common components of operatic librettos. A much more prosaic list of ingredients went into the making of this new chamber work, on show at Here in SoHo through Sunday: Baking soda, vinegar, 70 percent rubbing alcohol.

“Science Fair: An Opera With Experiments” is an entertaining, sometimes poetic and unapologetically didactic concoction made up of song, science lectures and demonstrations. The work was conceived by the mezzo-soprano Hai-Ting Chinn, who developed the libretto using texts by physicists, astronomers and neurologists, and invited four composers — Matthew Schickele, Renée Favand-See, Stefan Weisman and Conrad Cummings — to write the music. In a handsome production directed by Lisa Rothe, with the precise and lucid Erika Switzer at the piano, Ms. Chinn creates volcanic eruptions, mixes glow-in-the-dark liquids and extracts DNA from a strawberry.

Wrapped in gray tulle, Ms. Chinn embodies a nascent solar system, bunching up fistfuls of her shawl while singing of particles that “collide, collect and gather” before revealing a skirt made of concentric hoops studded with planets. (The elegant costumes are her creation.) The accessible but never ingratiating music echoes the sense of wonder and wit that infuses Ms. Chinn’s performance, with spacious chords and swirling arpeggios underpinning her dark-hued mezzo.

In her texts Ms. Chinn finds passions worthy of opera in unexpected places, whether in the size-blind proton-electron attraction or within a single detergent molecule, torn between its hydrophilic head (“in love with water”) and a hydrophobic tail “that quakes in fear at H2O.” CORINNA DA FONSECA-WOLLHEIM

On paper, the program the pianist Jeremy Denk presented on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall may have looked “slightly unusual” or “possibly insane,” as he told the audience before starting. The first half offered two dance suites: one by Bach, the other a sort of “iPod shuffle,” as Mr. Denk put it.

He began with a rhapsodic, fresh account of Bach’s English Suite No. 3 in G minor. Then he played a wildly imaginative grouping of 20th-century pieces inspired by, satirizing or paying homage to ragtime.

This journey began with a tender account of “Sunflower Slow Drag” by Scott Hayden and Scott Joplin, then segued into Stravinsky’s flinty, discombobulating “Piano-Rag Music.” William Byrd’s “The Passinge Mesures: The Nynthe Pavian,” written more than 400 years ago and, Mr. Denk suggested, a precursor to rag, is a series of increasingly elaborate variations on a sprightly melody and came across as a spiraling rhythmic fantasy in Mr. Denk’s compelling performance. From Hindemith’s percussive Ragtime (from the Suite “1922”), Mr. Denk turned to William Bolcom’s wistful “Graceful Ghost Rag,” then to Conlon Nancarrow’s audacious Canon No. 1, ending with the jazz musician Donald Lambert’s 1941 take on the “Pilgrim’s Chorus” from Wagner’s “Tannhäuser,” which, with due respect, turns this stirring music into a stride-bass, jazzy romp.

After intermission, Mr. Denk gave an elegant account of Schubert’s sublime late Sonata in B flat (D.960), teasing out the music’s dancing character, especially in the fleet scherzo. ANTHONY TOMMASINI

Since his debut with the Emerson String Quartet in 2013, when he replaced the cellist David Finckel, Paul Watkins has proved a valuable addition to that eminent ensemble. On Sunday at Alice Tully Hall, it was his gorgeous tone and elegant phrasing in the Adagio of Beethoven’s String Quartet in F (Op. 18, No.1) that provided some of the most alluring moments in an otherwise mostly unmemorable afternoon.

Mr. Watkins played his soaring operatic lines in the Adagio — the sketches for which Beethoven inscribed with the words “les derniers soupirs” (“the last sighs”) — with burnished, glowing tone. The ensemble infused the opening movement with fiery propulsion and detailed nuance.

The program was the group’s second of three concerts at Alice Tully Hall this spring juxtaposing Haydn’s Opus 76 quartets with Beethoven’s Opus 18 works, exploring the stylistic similarities between them. (The final show is on May 12.)

The Emerson players opened with Haydn’s String Quartet in D (Op. 76, No. 2), nicknamed “Fifths” because of the motif of descending fifths woven through the opening movement. The violinists Eugene Drucker and Philip Setzer share duties as first violinist; Mr. Setzer led during the “Fifths” and switched to the second chair for Beethoven’s String Quartet in A (Op. 18, No. 5), which came next.

The few pitch inconsistencies on the first half of the program were less bothersome than the indifferent playing. But the concert concluded on a lively note with a gracious reading of Haydn’s String Quartet in D (Op. 76, No. 5). VIVIEN SCHWEITZER


