


With every bit of good fortune the Yankees have received recently, the tincture of optimism evaporated as quickly as it had arrived.

After the Yankees placed Alex Rodriguez on the disabled list Wednesday with a strained right hamstring, C. C. Sabathia — somewhat surprisingly — picked up the team, resembling his former All-Star self and stifling the Baltimore Orioles for seven scoreless innings in a 7-0 win.

It was, in a time of despair, a glimmer of hope.

Fatefully, on Friday, Sabathia joined Rodriguez on the disabled list with a strained left groin. Then, after the first inning of the Yankees game against the Boston Red Sox at Yankee Stadium, Jacoby Ellsbury exited after grabbing his hip.

But amid the mounting injuries, Aaron Hicks made a winner of the Yankees by leading off the seventh inning with a home run, his first of the season. Andrew Miller escaped a bases-loaded jam in the ninth inning, sealing a 3-2 win and ending a tumultuous day on a positive note.

“My heart’s still racing,” Miller said.

The afternoon began less fruitfully. Sabathia did not speak to reporters in the clubhouse Friday, but Manager Joe Girardi lamented that Sabathia had probably had his best outing in the past couple of years against the Orioles.

It will be intriguing to see how the Yankees handle their growing list of injuries while they try to climb out of last place in the American League East. Cracks are already spider-webbing through their roster after they entered the season hoping that an aging core that included Sabathia and Rodriguez could guide them to the postseason.

Sabathia turns 36 on July 21. Six days later, Rodriguez will be 41. They are injured, and they are expensive.

Rodriguez is signed through the 2017 season, when he will make $21 million. Sabathia, too, could remain on the Yankees’ books until the end of next season — he has a vesting option for $25 million, depending on the health of his left shoulder and on whether it causes an extended or a season-ending trip to the disabled list this year.

While the Yankees have long recognized the restrictions those salaries would have on any retooling of their club, their concern could grow if veteran players became more injury-prone as they played out their contracts.

Girardi said Sabathia first felt pain in the fourth inning of Wednesday’s game, but he did not notify the team about it until after he had finished pitching. Sabathia wanted to take a day to rest, and the team on Friday suggested a magnetic resonance imaging test.

“Lo and behold he’s got a groin strain,” Girardi said.

Sabathia missed three weeks during the 2012 season with a similar injury. Girardi said he would feel “fortunate” if Sabathia returned as quickly this time.

Girardi was also unsure about how long Rodriguez’s injury would keep him out of action. After a review by the team’s physician, Dr. Christopher Ahmad, Girardi said that Rodriguez, who was placed on the 15-day disabled list this week, had a “1-plus” strain. Grade 1 strains are typically mild or pulled muscles; Grade 2 indicates a partial muscle tear.

“That’s my hope, he’s back in 15 days, but we’ll have to see how he heals,” Girardi said of Rodriguez.

The Yankees will also watch Ellsbury’s progression. Girardi described Ellsbury as having a “little strain on a hip muscle” and classified him as day to day.

After David Ortiz hit a two-run homer in the first inning off Michael Pineda, Ellsbury led off the Yankees’ half with a walk. He stole second and later third after a pitch by Rick Porcello got past catcher Christian Vazquez. Deciding he could not score on the play, Ellsbury forcefully stopped his momentum rounding third base, and then grabbed his right hip and leaned over.

Ellsbury gingerly went home after Brian McCann hit a two-out double.

As the Yankees were battling the Red Sox and dealing with injuries, they received a small lift when Aroldis Chapman’s 30-game suspension under baseball’s new domestic-violence policy was reduced by one game. Chapman will be eligible to pitch Monday.

Before the game, Girardi, after discussing so many ailments to his team, became excited when Chapman’s name was mentioned. “I think it can be a lift for us and I’m looking forward to him getting here,” Girardi said.

On Friday though, his current closer thrived under duress. The Red Sox loaded the bases with one out in the ninth. Ortiz had a 3-1 advantage on Miller, but a slider was called for strike two. Ortiz became furious, and Red Sox Manager John Farrell quickly came out of the dugout to protect Ortiz and was subsequently ejected for arguing. Farrell later said Ortiz would have needed a hockey stick to hit the pitch.

Miller finished off Ortiz, who then was also ejected for continuing to argue the call. Ortiz stormed back onto the field causing a delay, but Miller struck out Hanley Ramirez to end the game.

Finally, a break had gone the Yankees way.

“They got an infield hit, a blooper, what else do they want to go their way?” Miller said. “They can’t have it all.”


