


BAKU, Azerbaijan — Before the inaugural European Grand Prix here on Sunday, most of the Formula One teams and drivers expected a race of attrition, with accidents and a potentially frightening show of chaos and sudden reversals of fortune on the narrow, fast circuit through the city streets.

What they ended up with was a calm and controlled walk through the park by Nico Rosberg of Mercedes, who led from start to finish, followed in second position by Sebastian Vettel of Ferrari. Sergio Perez of the Force India team finished third, for the second time in three races. Only four of the 22 cars failed to finish the race because of technical breakdowns.

The race did indeed produce excitement, but it came in the form of an unexpected controversy about the season’s new ban on radio communications between teams and their drivers: Two of the drivers most likely to finish on the podium failed to do so because they were bogged down for several laps as they struggled to figure out for themselves which buttons to press on their steering wheels to get the right settings.

Lewis Hamilton of the Mercedes team spent 12 laps at a complete loss on how to set his car’s computer to function correctly for maximum power. That very likely cost him a second place finish, though he rose to finish fifth after starting in 10th position.

The other victim of the new rules was Kimi Raikkonen, also of Ferrari, who lost his third position to Perez in the final lap of the race after struggling with an engine setting that his team was not allowed to coach him about.

For Rosberg, the race was just one more feather in his cap. The victory, the 19th in his career and the fifth this season, came after he scored pole position, drove the fastest lap and also had to deal with the same type of technical problem that Hamilton struggled with.

“Everything went clean from the beginning to the end,” Rosberg said. “In the car, I had a special feeling out there and felt I could do everything I wanted.”

Hamilton provided spectators with some excitement in an otherwise docile race. After starting from 10th position because of a crash during qualifying, he had risen to fifth when he began struggling with the car’s technology. Whether his sudden problems provided better entertainment than a continued steady climb through the field would have is at the crux of the controversy.

The radio messages between the British driver and his engineer, Peter Bonnington, constituted a form of entertainment in themselves.

“The problem appears to be with the current mode that you are in,” Bonnington said to Hamilton.

“I don’t know what that means,” said Hamilton. “This is ridiculous, guys, I’m looking at my friggin’ dash every five seconds trying to find a switch that’s in a wrong position. I haven’t changed anything or done anything that’s wrong.”

Bonnington agreed that he had done nothing wrong.

“I might not finish this race, because I’m going to try to change everything,” Hamilton said.

“We don’t advise that,” Bonnington said.

The ban on communications means that the engineer can no longer tell the driver how to drive the car, and that includes instructions on the correct engine settings.

“Can I make suggestions, and you say if it’s O.K. or not?” Hamilton asked.

“No, that’s not allowed,” Bonnington said. “Let’s just keep heads down and focus on the job.”

That was on Lap 35, just after Rosberg set the fastest lap and led Vettel by 15.1 seconds. By Lap 42, Hamilton suddenly had full power back, and he set the fastest lap at that point in the race. But by then, he was 41.5 behind Rosberg and 13.9 seconds behind Perez in a Force India with only nine laps remaining. It was too late to fight for the podium, so Hamilton turned the engine down to preserve it for the next race.

“I had no idea,” Hamilton said after the race. “It was like 16 different engine positions and within those there are like 20 positions, and I had no idea what problem I had, it was just low power.”

“It was a shame I couldn’t race,” he added. “If I had been able to resolve that, maybe I would have been part of the show.”

Still, Niki Lauda and Toto Wolff, two of the Mercedes team directors, said after the race that Rosberg had also had the same problem, and he found the solution immediately.

“It was just a matter of getting out of it with the right combination of switches,” said Rosberg, who studied engineering and is good with technology.

With less than 10 laps remaining in the race and with Perez just 2.2 seconds behind him, Raikkonen also had a series of entertaining communications with his engineer at Ferrari while he was in third position. Perez passed him on the last lap.

As Wolff, the Mercedes team director, pointed out, the rules outlawing technical instructions from the team to the driver were created for entertainment value.

“The reason we have those regulations is we want more unpredictability,” said Wolff. “So now we have that.”


