


SYOSSET, N.Y. — With a chance to take a commanding lead against the Florida Panthers in their opening-round playoff series, the Islanders are relying on a dynamic top line centered by their captain, John Tavares.

The recently formed unit of Tavares, Kyle Okposo and Frans Nielsen has proved to be a dominant force against the Panthers heading into Wednesday’s Game 4 at Barclays Center. The Islanders lead the best-of-seven series, two games to one.

Coach Jack Capuano created the line late in the season, moving Nielsen to the left wing from center, with Okposo on the right wing. The fresh formation has energized Tavares, who has played with a series of linemates since General Manager Garth Snow traded Tavares’s close friend and steady left wing Matt Moulson in October 2013.

Tavares has led the Islanders in scoring in six of the seven seasons since the franchise selected him first over all in 2009.

“It’s been great,” Tavares said, assessing the overhauled line. “They are world-class players, not just offensively but in all areas of the game.”

Tavares, who had 33 goals and 70 points this season, has two goals and four assists against the Panthers, while Okposo has a goal and four assists, and Nielsen has chipped in two goals and an assist.

In Game 3 Sunday, Florida took a 2-0 lead, and a third Panthers goal was negated by an offside call after a coach’s challenge by Capuano. In the second period, Okposo and Tavares helped set up defenseman Ryan Pulock’s power-play goal to get the Islanders on the board. Nielsen, using a slick backhand on the power play, scored a goal late in the period to tie the game at 3-3 off assists by Tavares and Okposo.

The Islanders turned the momentum shift in their favor, ultimately winning in overtime on a goal by defenseman Thomas Hickey.

They now have a chance to go up by 3-1 in a postseason series for the first time since 1993, which was also the last time they advanced past the opening round. The Islanders won two series that spring.

Nielsen, 31, is the longest-tenured member of the team and has provided a steady kind of leadership by example. He shifted to wing on the new line without missing a beat.

“I’m adjusting well,” he said.

Capuano was confident throughout the season with Nielsen centering Okposo and Nikolay Kulemin, but he said he thought that separating the unit would give the team a scoring lift.

“The Nielsen-Okposo-Kulemin line was terrific for us all year, so it was tough for me, for us, to break those up,” Capuano said. “We needed some goal scoring, and we just kind of loaded up the one line.”

Okposo, who endured a seven-game series against the Washington Capitals last spring and a grueling six-game loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins in 2013, said that he and his current linemates had an unspoken bond that translated smoothly on the ice. They had already played together on the power play.

“There’s a lot of trust between the three of us knowing that we’re going to make plays,” said Okposo, second on the team during the regular season with 64 points. “It’s pretty apparent we have a lot of chemistry with each other.”

Okposo and Nielsen will be unrestricted free agents this summer. Like Tavares, they have been Islanders their entire careers. Skating together may have additional symbolic meaning for a group striving for a signature playoff moment.

A question for the Islanders against the Panthers is what they can generate from their remaining lines. The gritty line of Casey Cizikas, Cal Clutterbuck and Matt Martin brings such high energy to every shift that Capuano started them in Game 3.

Capuano now has Kulemin skating with Brock Nelson and Josh Bailey, and the rookie Alan Quine centering Ryan Strome and Shane Prince, an Islander since the Feb. 29 trade deadline.

Capuano pointedly mentioned Nelson, Bailey and Strome in a late-season challenge to his team to play better. The coach hopes observing the Tavares line at work will help all of his less experienced skaters.

“Our younger players can see what those guys are doing in key situations, how they manage the puck,” Capuano said.

Okposo said instant synchronicity with Tavares and Nielsen did not surprise him. Seven years together means they have probably seen just about everything as Islanders — except a playoff series victory.

“There’s no surprises anymore when it comes to the three of us,” said Okposo, 28, a 2006 first-round pick. “Those two guys are doing a great job. They’ve adjusted well. It’s all about trusting each other.”


