


Fluctuations inside a huge tank of radioactive waste raised concerns on the Hanford Nuclear Reservation, and workers prepared Monday to pump out the area of the leak. A federal contractor said the amount of waste that has been leaking between the two walls of the underground tank for several years grew substantially over the weekend. None of the waste appears to have escaped into the environment, the contractor, Washington River Protection Solutions, said. But workers were trying Monday to determine why the waste that leaked between the tank walls rose by about eight inches on Sunday, then dropped by half an inch. Hanford, near Richland, for decades made plutonium for nuclear weapons, including the atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki, Japan. Workers are preparing to pump the waste back inside the tank. It is Hanford’s oldest double-shell tank and since March was being emptied of its 750,000 gallons of radioactive waste because of the leak. Less than 100 gallons of waste was estimated to have leaked into the gap between the walls in recent years, drying in three separate patches. But Hanford officials said that on Sunday an alarm sounded after the waste level rose. (AP)

A bill that would have required students in public schools and universities to use bathrooms and locker rooms that match their sex at birth has failed after a sponsor pulled the measure Monday until next year. The move came after intense opposition from businesses and gay, lesbian and transgender rights’ organizations that called the measure discriminatory and amid questions of whether the state would lose more than $1 billion in federal education funds. The proposal is part of a wave of such legislation across the country. Supporters maintained they were trying only to protect privacy. (AP)

The Nevada attorney general on Monday charged a former prison guard trainee with manslaughter in the shooting death of a handcuffed inmate in 2015. The guard, Raynaldo-John Ramos, is accused of firing shotgun blasts that killed Carlos Perez Jr. while he and another inmate brawled in a hallway at High Desert State Prison outside Las Vegas. Two other guards, who have resigned, were not charged. A lawyer for Mr. Perez’s family says the guards staged a “gladiator-like scenario” to let two handcuffed inmates fight before Mr. Ramos shot them. The second prisoner was wounded. Mr. Ramos was fired. (AP)


