


Ever since I started making it several years ago, I’ve been loyal to one granola recipe that I picked up from a Brooklyn company called Early Bird.

Made with olive oil, maple syrup and a good hit of sea salt, it is perfectly balanced between savory and sweet, nutty and seedy, with a gentle dose of fragrant spice to round things out.

Sometimes, I’d change up the nuts, dried fruit and spices, but I always maintained the basic ratios because, as granolas go, this one had everything I wanted as a topping for my yogurt and fruit.

It did not, however, have everything my husband wanted as a cereal in his bowl. For him, the granola was missing an important element found in certain packaged brands: thick, nubby clusters.

Clusters provide textural contrast to the chewy crispness of oats, bulking out the mix and adding a different kind of crunch — an airier, less dense one.

The question was, could I find a homemade version that pleased us both?

This turned out to be no easy task.

Most homemade-cluster granola recipes rely on egg whites to glue the oats, nuts and seeds together. This works, but the texture veers toward sticky and brittle rather than crisp and light.

Other kinds of gluelike matter didn’t succeed either: More honey made it cloying, date syrup made it taste like oatmeal cookie crumbs, peanut butter overpowered all the other ingredients, and applesauce just made it weird.

In the end, the solution was not glue, but paste.

That is, grinding some of the oats and coconut into flour, then adding liquid to make a paste that coats the whole oats and nuts and helps them cling to one another. It’s not a cemented bond, more like a tentative coupling that shatters and crumbles when it meets a tooth. Which was just what I wanted.

In terms of the liquid, water worked. But since it didn’t add any flavor, I experimented with the likes of apple cider, orange juice, kombucha and coconut water before finally settling on coconut milk for its very gentle sweetness. Almond milk also works, in which case you could add a drop of almond extract to the mix.

Either way, you’ll end up with a clustery granola with a deep coconut-spice flavor and a light, crunchy and delightfully clumpy texture. Cover some with milk, sprinkle some on granola or just eat it out of hand.

Recipes: Coconut Almond Cluster Granola | More Granolas


