


By rights, on a bright Friday afternoon in late spring, Sumeja Tulic had every reason to relish walking the streets of New York, a city she moved to nine months ago from London for graduate school. “When the weather is good, it’s very hard to find a reason to be depressed or melancholic or dissatisfied with the city,” Ms. Tulic said.

Yet her time in New York has coincided with a season of ceaseless ugliness in politics and serial acts of terrorism around the world. “One day you laugh, and then you’re really angry,” said Ms. Tulic, a Bosnian-Libyan and a Muslim.

As she walked toward the subway station in TriBeCa on Friday, she hoped for a fair, fresh wind.

“I was saying, ‘Please, God, just something nice — I want to see something nice,’” she said. “Enough of this craziness.”

At the City Hall station for the R train, she settled onto a bench. It was just after 2 p.m. Only a few people were at the station. The space was quiet, the lack of noise and bustle a substrate for the events about to unfold. A man leaned against a pillar, the way anyone might, waiting for the train that would go uptown in Manhattan and later turn east for Queens. The stillness was interrupted with an announcement. “They said the next train was two stations away,” Ms. Tulic said. Another long moment, then out of the corner of her eye, she glimpsed the man at the pillar collapsing forward, but the movement did not register as much as the sound.

“The echo of him falling was just horrible,” she said. Others on the platform also heard it.

“A large thump,” said Miriam Gonzalez, a lawyer who was going to Queens.

“I thought someone carrying a heavy duffle bag dropped it on the platform,” said Rachelle Peterson, a researcher. “This man waiting for the train called out, ‘What was that sound?’ He ran over, peered over the edge, and immediately jumped onto the tracks.”

The man who had fallen was not moving. “The guy was out cold,” said Brenda Soriano, who was on her way home to the Bronx from her job at a college. “One of the gentlemen was trying to wake him up, and he just couldn’t.”

In what seemed like an instant, two more men jumped down to help.

“I don’t know where these men got the wit and the quickness,” Ms. Tulic said. “The man who fell was about six foot tall, a heavy man by default. He was kind of jammed in the tracks.”

Ms. Tulic, a human rights worker now studying in the graduate journalism school at the City University of New York, pulled out her cellphone and recorded the events.

“It was nerve-racking to know that the train was coming,” Ms. Tulic said. “Will it stop? Will they succeed to pull him out?”

Some people ran to the end of the platform to be ready to signal to the train operator. Ms. Gonzalez dashed to what used to be known as the token booth. Workers in the station sent an alert to trains in the area, but power to the track was not shut off, a transit official said.

On the tracks, the unconscious man was propped to a sitting position by the three men, who then lifted him from below to others who hoisted from above and rolled him onto the platform. Then the rescuers were themselves rescued, hauled back to safety by helping hands. It seemed that as soon as they were all clear, the R train pulled in, slowly, Ms. Peterson said. “People getting off the train walked around this unconscious man on the platform,” she said.

He was not, however, alone. Among others, two of the men who had jumped onto the platform were holding his hand. “They were saying, ‘Buddy, you’re going to be fine,’” Ms. Tulic said. “This was an additional layer of goodness.”

Paramedics arrived and the man was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center with serious but not life-threatening injuries, officials said.

Ms. Tulic provided her video to Gothamist, and it has been seen more than two million times. One of the men who went onto the tracks, David Tirado, told Rebecca Fishbein of Gothamist that he had visited with the stricken man, who had no recollection of being in the subway or that a congress of strangers had gathered to save him.

“That is the greatest thing,” Ms. Tulic said. “The infrastructure in this city of millions is the people themselves providing, being there for others. Without even knowing the person, who he is, no matter what denomination he subscribes to. It was beautiful to see.”


