


The Tennis Integrity Unit, the anticorruption body that has come under increased scrutiny this year for perceived ineffectiveness and obfuscation, shed a sliver of light on its work Friday by publishing statistics about suspicious betting patterns over the first three months of the year.

The unit reported that it had received alerts from betting companies concerning 48 matches, which represents 0.2 percent of the 24,110 matches played in the first quarter of the year.

Of the 48 matches, one was at the Australian Open; one was at a WTA Tour event; 12 were at ATP Challenger events; 24 were at the lowest level I.T.F. men’s events, known as Futures; and 10 were at I.T.F. women’s events. No alerts were generated on the ATP World Tour or team competitions, including the Hopman Cup, the Davis Cup or Fed Cup.

The report did not name specific matches or the players involved.

The integrity unit also said that the 48 matches were a significant increase from the 31 matches flagged for the same period last year; a total of 246 match alerts were received in 2015.

The unit, which has been criticized for lacking transparency, said Friday’s report reflected a commitment to providing quarterly updates on anticorruption efforts. But not all were satisfied.

Stefano Berlincioni, a betting expert who has tracked suspicious odds patterns on the lowest level of professional tennis, said the numbers published by the integrity unit reflect only a fraction of the suspicious patterns he has detected at I.T.F. events.

“According to T.I.U., we could have had only one fixed match every three days at I.T.F. level, when, in fact, it happens basically every day and often more than once per day,” Berlincioni said.

The integrity unit noted in its briefing that no industry standard of indicators for match alerts had been established.

The burden of proof needed for the unit to discipline players involved in suspicious matches has rarely been met, although Friday’s report included summaries on three previously announced cases against players.

The integrity unit reiterated Friday that an alert is not evidence of match fixing.

“There are many reasons other than corrupt activity that can explain unusual patterns, such as: incorrect odds-setting; player fitness; fatigue and form; playing conditions; personal circumstances,” the T.I.U. said.

The effectiveness of anticorruption efforts in tennis faced renewed scrutiny before January’s Australian Open, when a joint report by the BBC and Buzzfeed had accused the integrity unit of failing to properly investigate suspicious matches. During the tournament, The New York Times reported that a mixed doubles match had drawn suspicion for heavy, lopsided betting.

Near the end of the tournament, the integrity unit and other stakeholders announced the creation of an independent panel to review the anticorruption program. Tennis officials were subsequently brought before a British parliamentary committee to answer questions on their efforts.

On Friday, the integrity unit announced that the new panel, led by the London-based lawyer Adam Lewis, had begun preliminary meetings. Beth Wilkinson, a Washington-based litigator who has represented Major League Baseball and the N.F.L., and Marc Henzelin, a top Swiss lawyer, were added to it.


