


Maria Sharapova has been cleared of intentionally cheating by an International Tennis Federation tribunal, but she and her advisers have hardly emerged unscathed.

For a tennis champion long viewed as detail-oriented, from the cut of her tennis outfits to the breadth of her business portfolio, there was a whole lot of bumbling going on behind the scenes in one crucial area.

The system that she and her agent, Max Eisenbud, used to track changes in antidoping regulations was not much of a system at all. It was dependent on Sharapova opening (or not) and reading (or not) the right email. It was dependent, if testimony is to be believed, on Eisenbud — an able contract negotiator but no medical expert — taking his annual beach vacation so he could sit down and sift through the new antidoping particulars.

Sharapova, the self-styled global brand, was far from world class in this sector, and the last line in the I.T.F. decision is a swift kick to the chops: “She is the sole author of her own misfortune.”

It is a pithy, Dickensian line. It is also misleading in light of the gaffes made by other authors during meldonium’s precipitous journey onto the banned list.

Meldonium would very likely not be on that list yet if the World Anti-Doping Agency had taken the time and care it should have to determine how long meldonium can remain in an athlete’s system and to further analyze its true performance-enhancing effects.

Others could have done more or better, too, including Eisenbud, whose explanations to the I.T.F. panel left it thoroughly unconvinced and hurt Sharapova’s cause.

But the antidoping rules are clear: Ultimate responsibility lies with the athlete, not the entourage. Delegate at your peril, and now Sharapova — a 29-year-old with five Grand Slam singles titles — has been barred for two years by the I.T.F. panel.

“Unfairly harsh,” she maintains, and her appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, or CAS, should be heard sometime in July, with a final and binding ruling soon to follow.

Whatever the court decides, an important message has been delivered. Nobody is above the law in a sport too long suspected of protecting its superstars through weak antidoping efforts and soft I.T.F. rulings. Much has changed in the last few years in both tone and approach, which is for the best.

Sharapova got out in front of the news in March by announcing her provisional suspension and acknowledging her mistake. She risked a four-year suspension if she had intentionally used a banned substance. The I.T.F. panel ruled that out, accepting the argument that she never would have used it before every match at the Australian Open in January if she knew it had been banned.

She now faced a suspension of one to two years. To get that one-year penalty, her legal team’s goal, she needed to prove that she had “no significant fault or negligence.” But there are plenty of rest stops on the road between the abbreviated and the full two-year suspension. Some legal experts consulted on Thursday liked her chances of reducing it on appeal.

Paul Greene, a sports lawyer, has represented athletes in similar cases. One of his clients, the Bulgarian tennis player Dimitar Kutrovsky, had an I.T.F. suspension of two years reduced to 15 months on appeal in 2012 in a case that also hinged on proof of significant fault.

“Maria admitted she has at least some fault here, so a reduction down to 12 months is almost certain not to happen,” Greene said. “The question is whether a CAS panel will look at the other factors surrounding her positive and say that her degree of fault was not at the highest end of the range — and reduce to somewhere where her admitted fault can be factored in, like the 15- to 20-month range.”

With a two-year penalty, the I.T.F. panel concluded she was at the highest level of fault. It focused not only on the bumbling, but on her decision not to declare meldonium, or its brand name Mildronate, on her doping control forms. The panel also made it clear that it believed she had used meldonium of late not for medical reasons but for performance enhancement, citing her lack of consultation with doctors on the matter in recent years.

Sharapova has denied this, but even if she had been seeking performance enhancement (and it certainly looks that way from her usage patterns on match day), meldonium was not banned for nearly all the time she was using it, just as caffeine pills are not banned today.

So though we may not like or respect that athletes push what is legal to the absolute limit, that does not mean they should get a harsher sentence for it, particularly when the I.T.F. panel ruled she did not cheat intentionally.

Sharapova’s failure to declare Mildronate or meldonium on doping control forms is a more complex matter and could affect the length of her suspension. But at least she was consistent, never declaring it on forms from 2006 to 2016, according to her lawyer, John Haggerty.

“The tribunal went out of their way to punish Maria, because they believed she was hiding her use of Mildronate by not disclosing it on the antidoping forms,” Haggerty said.

But he said that during that same 10-year period she also had not declared two other medicines — Magnerot and Riboxin — her doctor had recommended.

“What in the world did she have to hide, as all three of those medicines were perfectly legal to take and the other two remain legal to this day?” Haggerty said.

Greene, who has examined the I.T.F. panel’s decision on Sharapova, sees several factors that could help her on appeal: the hundreds of other athletes who tested positive for meldonium in early 2016; her long history of taking the drug before it was banned; and her many years of being a clean athlete with a history of checking with the W.T.A. on the legality of medicines she was considering for use (there was no such double-check on meldonium, however).

Greene also cited the I.T.F.’s communication strategy for changes to the WADA prohibited list.

“The wallet cards and website posts aside, which honestly no one reads or looks at on tour, the I.T.F. never did an in-person training or warned athletes about the addition to the prohibited list,” Greene said.

The I.T.F. panel ruled there had been sufficient notice, and in an interview during the French Open, the I.T.F. president, David Haggerty, said the same while acknowledging that “I’m sure we can do more” in the future.

There is no guarantee the court will reduce Sharapova’s suspension even if it has done so in other appeals involving prominent players, including Marin Cilic. Her case, by all accounts, is unusual.

If she serves a two-year suspension, she will not be eligible to return to the tour until late January 2018, too late for the Australian Open. She would be 30 years old and would have to start from scratch with no ranking, although she would surely not lack for wild cards even after a drug suspension.

Based on precedent, she would not be too old to be a factor. Flavia Pennetta won last year’s United States Open at age 33. Serena Williams remains No. 1 at 34. But neither Pennetta nor Williams ever missed two full years of competition.

The odds look reasonable that Sharapova won’t have to, either. Clearly at fault, she deserves her suspension, but what she does not deserve is to be made an example of. In any case, the ball is no longer in her court.


