


KANDAHAR, Afghanistan — A civilian cargo plane carrying supplies for NATO troops in the southern Afghan province of Helmand crashed this week, killing seven crew members, officials said on Thursday.

Separately, in the southern province of Zabul, an attack by two Taliban infiltrators left at least eight policemen dead, officials said.

The plane, which crashed on Wednesday, was run by the Azerbaijani company Silk Way Airlines. The news media in Azerbaijan, citing government officials, said that seven crew members, all Central Asians or Eastern Europeans, were killed and that two survivors were taken to a hospital in Kandahar Province.

“Yesterday, a cargo plane from Azerbaijan was trying to land at Dwyer Base at Garmsir district,” where foreign troops are based, said Taimoor Shah, the police chief of Garmsir. “On the runway, the plane crashed and was in flames. We saw the thick black smoke rising.”

Although the American-led NATO mission in Afghanistan has shifted to a small advisory role, an increase in violence in the south has drawn back a large number of NATO personnel to help plan a defense. Insurgents have overrun districts in Helmand Province and are increasingly cutting off the capital of Oruzgan Province, Tirin Kot, which appears to be teetering under the pressure.

The insurgents have also threatened the main highway connecting the national capital, Kabul, to the south, with fighting closing it to traffic in Oruzgan.

Hundreds of coalition soldiers have remained at Camp Dwyer, Afghan officials say, even as the NATO military mission has closed bases across the country or transferred them to Afghan forces. The presence of NATO troops at the camp has increased in recent months, said Mr. Shah, who put their number at about 800.

The attack in Zabul occurred late Wednesday at a police post on the main highway connecting Kabul to the southern hub of Kandahar Province, according to Assadullah Kakar, a member of the Zabul provincial council.

Mr. Kakar said that two policemen who had recently joined the force without a thorough vetting killed eight colleagues at the post near the provincial capital, Qalat.

“The two police probably poisoned them first and then violently killed them before managing to escape with weapons,” he said. “It seems they were shot and then stabbed in the neck, and the bodies are beyond recognition.”


