


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. I presume you’re all set for Memorial Day? If not, check out this strong collection of recipes appropriate for holiday feasting and make a plan.

But don’t just plan, today, for tomorrow. Plan for tomorrow’s tomorrow and the ones that follow, and shop accordingly. You don’t need to be prepper prepared. But wouldn’t it be nice, just this once, not to run out of half-and-half on Wednesday morning? Not to mention, if you know you’re going to be cooking burgers and brats tomorrow, it could be nice to lay in some vegetarian feed tonight – maybe Yotam Ottolenghi’s recipe for saffron-spiked baked rice, with a cucumber-mâche salad on the side?

Then on Monday: grilling. For Tuesday, you could make David Tanis’s recipe for wok-fried asparagus with walnuts. Asparagus bought today will work, I promise.

On Wednesday, though, how about picking up a fat farmed trout on the way home, and making Tamar Adler’s recipe for it? She cooks it in a fireplace. You could do so on a pan set over your grill, or simply on the stove. The fish pairs nicely with rice and, should you want to add a riot of flavors to your meal, a tomato and pomegranate salad.

Thursday? Go simple. Alex Witchel got us the recipe for the fettuccine Alfredo they used to serve at Elaine’s on the Upper East Side. Consume it with more wine than you usually drink and a slow reading of Frank Conroy’s “Stop-Time.”

Slide a chicken into beer brine before you go to bed, and on Friday night, heading into the weekend, you can make this terrific recipe for beer-brined roast chicken that we picked up from Adrienne Cheatham of Red Rooster Harlem in New York.

We’re living well here. But if these recipes don’t intrigue, more and different ones can be found on Cooking. (Perhaps you’d prefer some stir-fried tofu with red chard?) Save the ones you like. Then cook them!

Now, have you watched the video for this new song from Garbage, “Empty,” which as Jezebel pointed out last week sounds just like old Garbage songs and that’s great? Y’oughta. Shirley Manson’s 49 and still on top of her game.

Have you seen this smart-funny-helpful new entertaining book from the irrepressible Holly Peterson, called “Smoke & Fire: Recipes and Menus for Entertaining Outdoors”? It’s an invaluable guide to Hamptons-style partying, and her hot dog knowledge is strong.

And do make some time soon to start reading Nathaniel Philbrick’s latest tale, “Valiant Ambition,” about George Washington, Benedict Arnold and the importance and perils of loyalty. Enjoy your holiday tomorrow. If you run into problems with the site or apps, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.


