


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Why don’t you start it with R. M. Schneiderman’s retelling of the tale of Marcus Luttrell, a member of the SEALs of “Lone Survivor” fame, in Newsweek? It won’t get you running into the kitchen to cook (that’s what my latest column in The Times Magazine about Anna Jones’s superlative recipe for a warm kale, tomato and coconut salad is for), but it will sure get you thinking about heroism, and its sometimes terrible costs.

Then you can go to the store like everyone else and shop for a week of terrific cooking. Get kale and cherry tomatoes and dried coconut shavings and make the Jones recipe tonight. It’s simple, but maybe not the very first time you do it, and so a slow Sunday preparation today will pay dividends later, when it becomes a go-to midweek meal.

On Monday night, maybe you could try your hand at this great old Melissa Clark recipe for pasta with fried lemons and chile flakes. “I’m obsessed with this recipe,” a Cooking user named Remy posted in one of the notes attached to it. Us, too!

We are not sick of tacos on Tuesdays yet, and perhaps won’t ever be. Have you tried David Tanis’s recipe for sizzling pork tacos yet? Give that a shot.

On Wednesday, you can cook some chicken. We’re feeling a powerful urge to eat a big platter of butter chicken, and to accompany it with steamed basmati rice and a bowl of mango chutney. (Here’s a recipe for that chutney if you want to go big with it. But we’re not mad at the Patak’s that they sell at the market.)

For Thursday, then, we’re thinking you could just bake some potatoes — and smother them with crab meat, jalapeño and mint.

And then on Friday night, to celebrate the opening of the season for wild salmon in Alaska this week, why don’t you try David Tanis’s recipe for gently sautéed wild king salmon with a savory whipped-cream sauce? Oh, man.

Take a look at Cooking for other ideas for what to cook in coming days, and shop accordingly. We’re here if you run into problems: cookingcare@nytimes.com.

Now, have you been watching Aasif Mandvi’s “Halal in the Family”? Get started today.


