


Ruth Rogers, the vivacious restaurateur who traded Woodstock for London almost 50 years ago, is stationed in the shiny, open-plan kitchen of her Georgian terrace home. Sunshine streams into the double-height living space, where no fewer than eight sash windows look out onto a palatial Chelsea Square. Today, the celebrated chef and proprietor of what is surely the city’s most cherished Italian dining room, the River Café, is wearing a knitted dress in shocking pink (the favorite hue of her husband, the architect Richard Rogers). On the far wall, a smudgy Cy Twombly canvas hangs above a row of ceramics. The unglazed vessels look very Edmund de Waal, but in fact are the creation of Rogers’s mother-in-law, Dada, who first taught her to cook. “Edmund de Waal admired them when he came to dinner,” says Rogers of the ceramicist’s handiwork, as she scales a ladder to reach a vertiginous kitchen cupboard. The whisk she procures proves essential in the day’s delicious agenda: the preparation of white and green asparagus served with a sparkly take on a traditional Bagna Cauda (meaning “hot bath”) sauce. Here, the red wine that typically makes up this centuries-old northern Italian recipe, featuring garlic and anchovies, is swapped for Prosecco (the full recipe for which is detailed below).

“We’re very seasonal at The River Café,” Rogers says of the springtime dish, which kicks off the four-course banquet she will prepare at next week’s Edible Schoolyard NYC’s spring benefit, alongside chefs like Daniel Boulud and Michael Anthony. The dinner, chaired by David Chang, will support the heartwarming nonprofit program that teaches children the joy of growing, cooking and sharing food through hands-on experience. “We chose this for the Edible Schoolyard Benefit because it’s light and clean. It’s important to respect a vegetable well enough not to destroy the flavor with a sauce,” Rogers says, as she pours Prosecco freely into the pan. “The asparagus should be allowed to be the star of the dish.”

For cooks, first-of-the-season asparagus heralds the arrival of spring in the kitchen. But the beneficiaries of Edible Schoolyard NYC view the vegetable in rather more sinister terms: “They call them ‘zombie fingers’ because that’s what they look like when they break through the earth,” explains ESNYC’s executive director Kate Brashares of the children, who are fascinated by the seed-to-table alchemy of the program’s vegetable gardens — and also, worms. Certainly Rogers’s unfussy and seasonal style, which has its roots in domestic Italian cooking, chimes with the Edible ethos: Don’t expect to order a tomato salad year-round at the River Café, where the Michelin-starred menu is about fresh ingredients, simply yet seamlessly prepared. “We see what’s in the fridge, and what’s been ordered that day, then sit down and write the menu,” says Rogers of her close-knit team. “That’s what keeps us excited. I grew up in America where it’s all about choice — but what’s the point of having 20 types of tomato in winter if they all taste of nothing?”

When Rogers first opened the River Café, together with the late Rose Gray in 1987, it served as the staff canteen for her husband’s (since relocated) architectural practice. “At the time you could either eat well somewhere terrifying where the sommelier made you feel stupid, or go to a local place and have a great time but eat badly,” she says. “We wanted to create a fun, lively and approachable place that reflected the way we lived.” The River Café’s informality, which spills over into the democratic kitchen where the waiters arrive early to help prep the food, invigorated the London culinary scene, even introducing new ingredients such as cavolo nero to the British market. Next year this beloved institution, where lunch frequently lingers into late afternoon on the Thames-side terrace, celebrates its 30th anniversary. Though Rogers still keenly feels the loss of her longtime friend and collaborator Rose Gray, she has no intention of stopping anytime soon and is currently searching for a second site after one earmarked in Mayfair met with resistance from locals (who can’t have ever sampled her cooking): “The greatest tribute to Rose is for The River Café to be thriving,” she says, turning her attention back to the plated asparagus, before brightly volunteering a typically uncomplicated taste test: “If there’s no resistance when you put the fork in, they’re done.”

Yield: 4-6 servings

1 bottle good quality Prosecco 8 cloves garlic, cut in half lengthways 2 bunches green asparagus 2 bunches white asparagus 12 salted anchovy fillets (preferably Ortiz) 14 tablespoons unsalted Italian butter, cubed, room temperature Crushed black pepper Extra-virgin olive oil

Salt

1. Pour the whole bottle of Prosecco into a saucepan with all of the garlic cloves. Reduce on a moderate-high heat until the liquid has reduced and the garlic is soft. It should reduce to roughly just under a glass.

2. While the Prosecco is reducing, prepare the asparagus by snapping the stalks at their natural breaking point, discarding the lower part. Peel the stalks of the white asparagus. (You don’t need to peel the green asparagus.)

3. When the Prosecco has reduced, remove from the heat and stir in the anchovy fillets. They will dissolve with the heat of the liquid. You can use a potato masher to help break up the anchovies.

4. Using a whisk, add the butter little by little, whisking vigorously to make an emulsified sauce. Remove from the heat and finish the sauce with a pinch of black pepper and a dash of the olive oil.

5. Plunge the white asparagus into rapidly boiling, salted water first. Allow them to cook for 4-5 minutes before placing the green asparagus into the same water, and cook for another 4 minutes.

6. Use a knife to test the asparagus stalks — there shouldn’t be any resistance. Once they are tender, drain them well and dry on kitchen towel. Season with salt, pepper and olive oil. Arrange them on a plate and pour the sauce over liberally.


