


In the room that would be the scene of Lisa George’s divorce in 2012, Ms. George, now 59, was seated on the same side of the table as her about-to-be-ex-husband. Each of their divorce lawyers slid into seats across from them.

Between the lawyers sat Carol Hughes, a divorce coach in Orange County, Calif. Dr. Hughes placed two collages on small easels on the table. One was pasted with photos and words from the couple’s daughter, 25 at the time. The second was of their son, who was 28.

In the middle of the negotiations, “even in the heat of disagreement, there was an immediate realization that our kids were part of this,” Ms. George said. “It was the best possible reminder to stay grounded.”

The divorce rate among couples 50 and older has soared. The number of individuals who are adults when their parents divorce is climbing with it. Yet the vast majority of recent research, and subsequent counseling, for divorcing couples is focused on young children.

But for adult children of divorce, specific therapy or even divorce coaches like Dr. Hughes are difficult to find.

When Krista Mischo’s parents divorced after 45 years of marriage, she sought comfort from others in her situation. “I went to a divorce care group, but it was a meeting for adults going through divorces,” said Mrs. Mischo, who lives in Wisconsin and was 43 at the time. “The only group for children of divorce I could find was for young children.”

In 2012, she decided to create a group of her own, and began writing a blog, Time for Serenity (acodtimeforserenity.blogspot.com).

In a short time, she said, the blog had attracted more than 20,000 readers around the world. Mrs. Mischo, who stopped writing the blog after two years, said, “I think I really exhausted every possible topic I could think of, and therapeutically I have worked through almost every aspect of this, and I don’t want this to define me.”

Her need to connect resonated with others in the same situation.

“Readers used the word ‘devastated,’” she said. “The wind is knocked out of you.”

The effect on adult children is undocumented, said Susan L. Brown, a sociology professor at Bowling Green State University, whose 2012 study with I-Fen Lin, “The Gray Divorce Revolution,” established that the divorce rate among people 50 and older had doubled in the previous 20 years.

“I don’t know how it will play out,” Dr. Brown said of her findings. “For most people getting a gray divorce, the children are adult age.” But, she said, research “actually applies to a past generation. Where is the research that will help this generation?”

Jenny Kutner, 24, of Manhattan, a senior staff writer for the online news site mic.com, is still negotiating her way through her parents’ 2013 divorce. Soon after it was final, Ms. Kutner’s father told her and her college-age sister that they needed to call him every day. For about a month, they did.

“My father told me I wasn’t sad enough about it,” Ms. Kutner said. “He would say, ‘I just got divorced.’ And I would say to him: ‘My parents just got divorced. I don’t know what to tell you.’”

Then her mother wanted to share details of her dates. Ms. Kutner had had enough.

“I have said so many times over the past year that I felt as though I had two 50-something-year-old children,” Ms. Kutner said. “And I have totally resented it.”

Both parents want the children to understand their pain and confusion. That’s not O.K., therapists say. Parent up, they say.

“In our work, we’re seeing the trauma to adult children whose parents are going through divorce,” Dr. Hughes said. “The parents say, ‘The children are adults now, they’ll be fine,’ but they aren’t fine. Often, the children can be pulled into the divorce process.”

Adult children are already trying to figure out the logistics of their parents’ divorce: where to spend holidays and birthdays, if they need to visit more often to support the more emotionally struggling parent. Getting dragged into teary midnight phone calls or contentious conversations about whose fault the divorce was makes a difficult situation unbearable.

Worse, many adult children begin to question whether they want children of their own, or if they have the ability to maintain a healthy relationship.

“I really have no interest in the idea of getting married,” Ms. Kutner said. “If my parents could end up not staying together, to me it really indicates that we live too long, and I have found a lot of peace in that. Some people really do outgrow each other, and the relationship is as long as it is and that might not be a lifetime.”

Most therapists treat adult children of divorce the way they treat those who are grieving from any other loss, or who are depressed or anxious. Without a wealth of recent research on gray divorce and its impact, gathering information is left to the therapists.

Dr. Hughes has created her own questionnaires for her clients, “generic questions I have developed from knowing the developmental stages the adult children are in,” she said.

Dr. Hughes recommends certain behavioral modifications for divorcing parents. She knows, for example, that many of them break the news by telephone.

That is what happened to Ms. George when her parents divorced when she was 36. As Dr. Hughes coached Ms. George through her own divorce, she told her that children of any age want to hear the news in person, and with their siblings.

“She told us neither parent should deliver the entire message, and that they need to hear that this isn’t the result of anything they had or hadn’t done,” Ms. George said. “At any age, they need to hear that.”

So Ms. George and her husband waited until the whole family was together at Thanksgiving and until others were out of the room. Then they spoke to their children. Afterward, both children contacted Dr. Hughes for further conversations about the divorce.

Such help wasn’t available nine years ago, when Mrs. Mischo’s parents divorced.

Her mother was 66 at the time, her father 71. “My parents’ divorce definitely affected my own marriage,” Mrs. Mischo said. “You live, eat, breathe and sleep with what’s going on. Their marriage had always seemed intact and very committed. I had to rethink everything.”

Those thoughts include adult children’s questioning of their own perceptions. “Adult children begin to question the reality of their own lives growing up,” Dr. Hughes said. “Some parents will say, ‘I wanted to divorce your mom or dad when you were little, but we had you kids.’ The adult child asks, ‘Was it all a facade?’”

Dr. Hughes is part of a small but growing field of therapists working with lawyers to encourage divorcing parents to consider the needs of adult children. Her practice, part of Collaborative Divorce Solutions of Orange County, “is very active on this topic,” she said. “I think we’re in denial as a nation as to how adult children are affected by divorce.”

As sad as she is about her divorce, Ms. George said she had no regrets about the process. She first heard of divorce coaching when she stopped at a tag sale in her Newport Beach, Calif., neighborhood and, chronically teary-eyed from the difficulties of the divorce, came away with a business card for a divorce coach. Eventually, she met Dr. Hughes.

“I wanted for my kids to have a better sense of this process for themselves as young adults as they are making their own coupling decisions, and a place where they could feel safe with someone to talk to,” Ms. George said. “I didn’t have anyone to talk to regarding my parents’ divorce. I wanted someone there for them, and that was Carol.”


