


At its best, punk rock relies on an admixture of velocity, attitude and volume — which is exactly what made last night’s Deaf Club event a smash success. The show, held at the Knockdown Center in Maspeth, Queens, a former door factory turned interdisciplinary arts space, was curated by the Los Angeles-based artist Alison O’Daniel who, herself, is hard of hearing. The event was a live extension of O’Daniel’s “The Tuba Thieves” (currently a part of her “Room Tone” exhibition) — a film that explores the events surrounding an unlikely series of tuba thefts in Los Angeles schools.

One portion, however, also recreates a performance in the Deaf Club, a now-defunct social club for San Francisco’s deaf community that hosted punk shows in 1979. As the story goes, Robert Hanrahan, the manager for the punk band the Offs, was walking by it, saw a sign reading “The Deaf Club” and thought it was a cool, unexpected name for a concert venue. After realizing his mistake, he asked if his band could play — a message he originally wrote on a napkin. “I’m not a punk historian,” said O’Daniel. “My interest comes more from the deaf community. It’s the meeting of two totally disenfranchised communities — it’s really beautiful.” Eventually, bands including Dead Kennedys and Pink Section would record albums at the venue, forever sanctifying it in punk lore. (A core irony of the story, and also fittingly punk, was that the shows eventually came to a halt because of noise complaints.)

But the goal of last night’s event wasn’t an attempt to dispel hearing people’s outmoded assumption that the deaf world doesn’t (or can’t) appreciate music — though that notion seemed ready to explode along with the tower of amps — but rather, to create an environment where people of all ages and backgrounds could revel in the power of punk and performance art. Among the performers, many of whom helped with the making of O’Daniel’s film, were three bands and four American Sign Language storytellers, each of whom approached the night with their own interpretation of the Deaf Club theme. Wall, a Brooklyn four-piece, brought No Wave clamor and cutting politics to the stage, while Future Punx arrived with fog machines and New Wave synths in tow. Also appearing was a band with a name unpublishable in this publication — which only serves to solidify its street cred. (The frontman, Paddy Mulloy, played an M.C. in O’Daniel’s film.)

Between the sets, performers told stories of identity — comedic anecdotes, personal hardships and the deaf world’s relationship with music. Maleni Chaitoo drew a through line between the alienation of punk in the ’70s and the underserved Deaf community, while Opal Gordon, who closed out the show, traced black history through the lens of music, using a combination of A.S.L. and interpretive dance to spin a tale that moved from the slave trade, to the her own story of embracing pop music as a deaf, African-American woman. “It’s not true that deaf people can’t enjoy music,” said Gordon. “Music is strong, they can feel the vibrations. Punk is perfect because it’s loud, it’s heavy, it’s in-your-face.”


