


“It’s not a pastiche of the 1970s,” says Chloe Lonsdale, the founder of the nostalgia-infused women’s denim line M.i.h Jeans, which this week marks its 10th anniversary with a just-opened pop-up shop in London’s Soho. “We could have sourced shag-pile rugs and gone all Austin Powers — but that’s not what we’re about. Denim grounds us and keeps us more real.” The space has a light and airy feel that’s true to the way the brand balances old with new: The 1950s wicker hanging chairs in the window are offset by a contemporary Tobi-Ishi table by B&B Italia.

The store’s residency on Upper James Street runs through the end of May, and Lonsdale has overseen everything with a forensic eye for detail — right down to the harvested cow parsley installed by Mayfair’s TukTuk Flower Studio on the shop’s facade that also fills the rainbow-hued ceramics by Mexican artist Milena Muzquiz. “They make me smile,” she says of the vessels, which sit alongside wooden bowls filled with limited-run sew-on patches to jazz up your jeans (the “I Love Avocado” patch is already a social media hit) that can be applied at the Patch Bar. Visitors can also bring in jeans of any brand to custom-crop in the store.

It’s clear that Lonsdale sees the space as a testing ground for M.i.h’s evolving retail blueprint. This past year, she has worked with the young London design duo Matteo Fogale and Laetitia de Allegri on planning the look and feel of future stores. “The way denim is sold is stuck in its ways,” says Lonsdale, whose father ran Jean Machine, Britain’s first major importer of American denim. “We’re rooted not in the States but in West London and that eclectic, vintage Portobello Road spirit. However much there’s a 1970s denim girl in all of us, we all want to feel cool now. That’s why we present denim as part of a complete look.” Lonsdale trades the typically dark, industrial shop model — where jeans are usually stacked floor-to-ceiling — for something altogether lighter, freer, more finessed. Playful, geometric motifs are replicated in mirrors and Venetian plaster displays. Elegant brass rails, made in part from recycled resin yogurt pots, have a speckled patina that looks just like marble. Lonsdale is so gratified by the sustainable material’s luxurious finish that she’s having a cabinet-maker replicate them for the kitchen of her new Portobello pied-à-terre. (T also brings you into her 400-year-old boathouse in West Sussex.)

Much like the M.i.h denim that inspires such a devoted following among industry insiders, Lonsdale’s taste leans toward the hardworking and unshowy. Today she is wearing silver No.6 clogs, a blue T-shirt and the high-rise Tapanga flare that’s part of the Cult Denim Project. To celebrate its 10-year anniversary, 10 of the brand’s best-selling, most unique pieces have been reissued to sell in-store (and on Net-a-Porter). There’s the chambray frill-collar dress that is modeled after one that belonged to Lonsdale’s mother, the boiler suit once worn by Charlize Theron and a heavyweight shirt that she swears she’s worn over dresses to friend’s weddings (her own father famously wore double denim to hers). So how does it feel to see her long-held retail vision realized, albeit temporarily? “I can never wait until the next thing,” she admits, glancing at the Hermès Cape Cod watch that was an anniversary gift from her husband, Johan Quintus (who is also M.i.h’s COO). “I’m like, ‘When can we open a permanent shop?’”


