


Among celebrated spring foods like ramps, nettles, green garlic, asparagus, sorrel and rhubarb, the poor dandelion is too often forgotten.

It’s a pity. Tender dandelion leaves make a sensational salad, while larger leaves are marvelous sautéed, stir-fried, wilted or stewed with garlic and olive oil.

In theory, dandelions should appeal to a wide audience: the health-conscious eater, the forager and even the Francophile. (One person could conceivably fit all these definitions.) In the past, the dandelion was well known as a folk medicine cure-all. Used in soups or tinctures or made into wine, dandelion was long thought to be a blood cleanser, good for the liver and the kidneys and rejuvenating as a spring tonic.

Modern science shows that the dandelion is generally good for you, as well as high in vitamins A and C. I’m not a nutritionist, but even the briefest research on the topic suggests we should all be eating more of this healthful green. (Maybe it could become the new kale.)

If you love foraging, dandelions are easy prey because they grow wild pretty much everywhere. Pick them before they begin to flower, while the leaves are still relatively tender. And of course, you need to know that they have not been treated with weed killer or other toxic chemicals.

Should you prefer to forage the urban way, fresh-picked dandelion greens of both cultivated and wild varieties are showing up at farmers’ markets now. Supermarkets usually stock a very long-leaved variety; those are fine, but trim them ruthlessly, using just the top eight inches of the leaves for salad. Like some chicories, dandelion has a pleasant slight bitterness, more so with the wild than the cultivated type.

This recipe is modeled after a classic Parisian salad with lardons, beets and eggs, but the garlicky, mustardy vinaigrette has fresh ginger and lime juice, too, to stand up to dandelions’ earthy flavor. It still tastes very French, especially with the goat cheese toasts.

And so much tastier than a green superfood smoothie, n’est-ce pas?

Recipe: Dandelion Salad With Beets, Bacon and Goat Cheese Toasts


