


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Dana Goodyear had a fascinating brief in The New Yorker last week on the opening of “a more affordable spinoff of the grocer often referred to as Whole Paycheck,” in Los Angeles. (The store carries the unwieldy name 365 by Whole Foods Market, and there are 18 more to come.) For those who will shop today – at suburban gigantamarts, at rural farmstands and coastal fishmongers, at crowded specialty grocers, at actual Whole Foods, at farmers’ markets – it offers a fascinating glimpse at one possible future of food shopping. In Ms. Goodyear’s words: “unambitious, self-satisfied, unimpeachable; swipe left if something causes discomfort.” Yikes!

But do shop. We have a lot of cooking to do this week.

Maybe this evening you could try Pierre Franey’s recipe for lamb chili with lentils? And then my recipe for caramelized citrus and yogurt for dessert?

On Monday, we’d like to make David Tanis’s new recipe for an Indian-spiced carrot soup with lime. It’s good hot and good cold, so if you share our desire, you can make it today and have virtually nothing left to do tomorrow save serving it alongside a chilled bottle of wine.

Tuesday night should be a good one – if the fishmonger is still open when we emerge stunned and blinking from our commute – for Nigella Lawson’s recipe for pan-roasted fish with toasted almonds. Nigella uses cod. But really any meaty white-fleshed fish will do. I bet it would be fantastic with grouper.

For Wednesday, we’ll try to battle the midweek blues with a plate of pork chops in pipian sauce, a dish that goes beautifully with rice and beans. Soundtrack: the banda singer Valentín Elizalde, “A Mis Enemigos.”

On Thursday, we’ll follow the teachings of Mark Bittman and slow-cook some mushrooms in accordance with his recipe for pasta with slow-cooked portobellos. The resulting dish is almost ridiculous in its density of flavors, and should bring cheer to most anyone who makes it.

And then on Friday we’ll return to our occasional habit of cooking chicken on Friday nights, and make a recipe we’ve been turning out to raves since Bobby Flay was making it on the line of his late restaurant Bolo, back at the start of the century: pan-roasted chicken with mint sauce. Oh, my.

Many more recipes to cook this week can be found on Cooking. (If you find recipes on some other site, don’t forget that you can save them into your Cooking recipe box with ease. Here’s how.) Pick out a bunch, then cook them! And if you run into trouble, ask for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

But before you do? Here’s a reading from the book of Travis McGee, “The Deep Blue Good-By,” by John D. MacDonald, 1964.

I do not function too well on emotional motivations. I am wary of them. And I am wary of a lot of other things, such as plastic credit cards, payroll deductions, insurance programs, retirement benefits, savings accounts, Green Stamps, time clocks, newspapers, mortgages, sermons, miracle fabrics, deodorants, check lists, time payments, political parties, lending libraries, television, actresses, junior chambers of commerce, pageants, progress, and manifest destiny.

I am wary of the whole dreary deadening structured mess we have built into such a glittering top-heavy structure that there is nothing left to see but the glitter, and the brute routines of maintaining it.

I am also wary of all earnestness.

Me, too! Have a great week.


