


Updated, July 11: The Memorial Day Manhattanhenge was something of a disappointment, but there’s another opportunity this week on Monday and Tuesday nights.

If you’re in New York City this Memorial Day weekend you’ll have the chance to watch the sun kiss the city streets as it sets.

This beloved event, known as Manhattanhenge, occurs when the setting sun aligns perfectly with the numbered streets that run east and west on Manhattan’s city grid, bathing traffic and skyscrapers in its warm red light.

Manhattanhenge is a two-day event that happens twice a year on opposite sides of the summer solstice. You can catch this year’s displays about 8:12 p.m. this Sunday and Monday, and again on July 11 and 12.

The sun takes two forms on Manhattanhenge. It can appear as a bright half-disk illuminating the city (Sunday and July 12) or as a shining full orb (Monday and July 11). The differences depend on the position along the horizon at which it sets.

The spectacular alignment of the sunsets are sheer accident, according to Jackie Faherty, an astrophysicist at the American Museum of Natural History. It is the result of how the city’s cross streets were built two centuries ago.

“In the 1800s when they made these 90-degree angles they created a bull’s-eye for the sun to hit,” she said. “Manhattanhenge are the days of the year when the sun hits the bull’s-eye.”

But New York City isn’t the only place with a solar target on its streets.

“Cityhenges” exist all over the place, according to Shane Larson, an astronomer at the Adler Planetarium in Chicago, home of Chicagohenge. There’s also Bostonhenge, Phillyhenge, Torontothenge and Montrealhenge, among others.

“If your streets are anywhere close to east or west, my default statement is you’re going to have a ‘henge,’” he said. “You just need to find out when.”

His advice for figuring out your cityhenge is to first reach out to the staff at your local planetarium and ask if they have any insight on when the sun might align with the grid. He added that there are astronomy and photography apps that show you that paths of sunrises and sunsets.

Each of these solar spectacles, from Manhattanhenge to Madridhenge, gets its name from Stonehenge, the 5,000-year-old monument in England that was built to align with the sun’s position during the winter and summer solstices, possibly as a way to worship the sun. Today, by framing it within the constructs of our modern, urban civilization, we too celebrate the sun with our “henges.”


