


Despite his genial persona, David Schwimmer is drawn to characters who are struggling, broken, flawed and in pain. But the main guy in “Bankerot,” the Danish show that inspired AMC’s “Feed the Beast,” Mr. Schwimmer’s new series, was so drunk and despairing that even he had to draw the line.

“I have to say, my heart really went out to him,” he said, laughing. “But it was our job to try to create” a compelling character “out of a man in this place of absolute sorrow and a lack of enthusiasm for life.”

In “Feed the Beast,” Mr. Schwimmer plays Tommy, a grieving sommelier raising a son who has gone silent since witnessing his mother’s death in a hit-and-run. Jim Sturgess is his lifelong friend Dion, a coked-up ex-con chef who thinks that the best thing for them all would be to open a restaurant in their native Bronx. Even though he burned down their last one and owes a huge debt to the mob.

It’s been quite a year for Mr. Schwimmer, 49, with a well-received portrayal of Robert Kardashian in FX’s “The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story” and this, his first role as a series regular in more than a decade. Now living in the East Village with his wife, the British artist Zoë Buckman, and their 5-year-old daughter, Cleo, the man forever known as Ross on “Friends” talked about the art of the pour and the enduring appeal of a certain series. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.

You’ve resisted signing on as a series regular since “Friends” ended in 2004. So why this one?

When I look at making such a big commitment, I look for a couple of things: Is the character someone that I really love and feel like I’ll be challenged by playing? Is the showrunner someone I can see being married to for six or seven years? Is he going to be my partner in crime? And I felt that right from the first meeting with Clyde Phillips. But the fact that it shoots locally made the decision much easier, because I don’t want to be away from my daughter.

Did you train to play a sommelier?

My first call was to my buddy Josh Nadel, who oversees all the wine and beverage for Andrew Carmellini’s restaurants. I said, “You’ve got to give me a crash course.” So we’d do tastings and talk about the different regions. And I’d videotape him opening bottles and pouring with that gentle turn of the wrist, so there’s no spill while you’re presenting the label the entire time. I’d thought I had a little knowledge about wine. Now I realize I know nothing.

Is that real wine on the set?

The wine is different combinations of grape and cranberry juice. There was only one scene where I requested a real bottle, because they were going to use an extreme close-up of the pour. I bought it myself, because I wanted those wine freaks out there to be happy when they watched. I had to taste it, so we had to be careful. I had a lot of dialogue, and I didn’t want to be buzzed.

Any summer plans?

I’m taking my daughter to Chicago, because my [Lookingglass Theater Company] has a summer program for kids. So we’re going to do a father-daughter theater camp for two weeks.

“Friends” is hugely popular on Netflix with millennials. Are you surprised?

I’m amazed by it. And it makes me wonder, will “Friends” have legs when my daughter is of age? What is it about the show? Is it that sense of nostalgia: “Wow, that’s what the ’90s were like”? Could it also be that it’s a show before texting and social media became prevalent, so the idea that six people could sit on a couch and talk is just so foreign an idea to young adults? These days they’re all together sitting on a couch, but they’re looking at their devices instead of each other.


