


WOODSTOCK, England — There is something very familiar about gatherings of beautiful women in the last days of a British spring, barelegged, shivering and undone by pouring rain. But even locals in the picturesque Cotswolds town of Charlbury did not know where to look when an Orient Express train commandeered by Christian Dior steamed in just after half past four on Tuesday, depositing several hundred couture-clad editors, bloggers, clients and Hollywood stars into the puddles on the platform.

The purpose of their arrival: the presentation of the Dior 2017 Cruise show at Blenheim Palace, the spectacular stately home and birthplace of Winston Churchill in nearby Woodstock. It was a return of sorts for the French luxury powerhouse. In 1954, Christian Dior himself had staged a show of 100 dresses in its gilded halls, with Princess Margaret as his guest of honor. And after the designer’s death in 1957, his successor, Yves Saint Laurent, brought the Dior collection back to Blenheim in 1958.

Almost 60 years later, blacked-out Mercedes automobiles snaked through Blenheim’s fields of frolicking lambs, a red-coated artillery band played from the pillars encasing the vast gravel driveway (admittedly its tune, the “Star Wars” theme, was less historic), and a small army of soaked, white-gloved waiters offered Champagne to guests as the heavens opened above.

“It all feels rather familiar, doesn’t it,” sighed the English actress Kate Beckinsale as she waited for her front row seat in a slightly damp black-and-white full-skirted Dior gown with cutaway slices at the waist, adding that she had decamped to the sunnier climes of Los Angeles in 2002. “But I never feel like I am truly home until I have been soaked to the skin at a party.”

As dusk fell, the grand saloons and staterooms were filled with celebrities — the singer the Weeknd, whose model girlfriend, Bella Hadid, would later walk in the show; the actresses Elizabeth Olsen, Emma Roberts and Kate Mara; Bianca Jagger, the human rights activist, who was dressed head to toe in white — and a sense of expectation. Dior has been without a creative director since the departure of Raf Simons last fall, leaving an in-house creative team led by Lucie Meier and Serge Ruffieux in charge of the collections. There has been no word yet on a replacement, and at the opening of Dior’s revamped four-floor boutique on London’s Bond Street that morning, Sidney Toledano, chief executive of Dior Couture, called the search “a work in progress.”

For the collection, the show notes cited inspiration from the wardrobes and wanderlust of post-World War II high society, and said that Ms. Meier and Mr. Ruffieux wanted clothes to emulate “a conversation between France and England, a dialogue between the past and present, and creative exchanges between the two countries.”

On a hand-painted runway depicting a quintessential fox hunting scene, their vision found form in a mishmash of prints, textures and finishes, all anchored to Dior’s aesthetic heritage. There was tweed, of course, plus camel car coats and crisp white shirts, and billowing silk skirts and tea dresses with exotic Asian and African prints. Also 19th century hunting scenes and countryside florals recast on sculpted, tightly waisted Bar jackets or knitted into jacquard, layered slip dresses and flared trousers in rich dévoré velvets or clashing prints, and terrific bejeweled evening bags, scarves and chunky black and gold platforms, either with straps or Victorian-style laces.

The endless brightly colored silk scarves in the models’ hair, on necks and around wrists may have been tied just a little too tight, but at the post-show tea, amid macaron pyramids, oversized cupcakes, lobster sandwiches and cake lollipops, there were plenty willing to indulge in the fairy tale.

“The gowns are so beautiful, the mists so atmospheric,” said Ms. Roberts, who sat with Ms. Mara recounting the previous evening’s events at the Lady Dior, the brand’s pop-up English pub in London’s Mayfair area, complete with pints and karaoke. “It is like we are in some kind of romantic novel.”

Call it “The Cruise Chronicles.” As far as fashion goes, it’s a lace bodice-ripper.


