


Strike up a conversation first. Start with a neutral topic, like the weather, says Edward Geiselman, an emeritus professor of psychology at the University of California, Los Angeles. Disarm your interlocutor by being friendly, even collegial. “Toby Keith wrote that country song, ‘I Wanna Talk About Me,’ ” Geiselman says. “Keep that in mind: People like to talk about themselves.” Offer drink or food. Once, while working a case with the Los Angeles Police Department, the interviewee asked for a Filet-O-Fish. Geiselman bought her one, and she relaxed, slipping into chattiness as she ate. “That sandwich changed everything,” he says.

Geiselman is a chief architect of the “cognitive interview,” an interrogation protocol used by the police internationally. The aim is to get interviewees to divulge a full narrative. By asking them to recount fine-grain particulars, you maximize the amount of mental energy they are expending on their story, thereby ratcheting up what psychologists call their “cognitive load.” As they try to reconstruct the circumstances leading up to the event in question, you can employ so-called extenders: “Really?” “Tell me more about that.” Many police departments use a more confession-oriented method with a distinctly parental tone (“I know you did it; now tell me why”). But researchers have begun asking if that approach leads to false confessions. A cognitive interviewer takes a different, more journalistic approach, gathering as much information as possible.

Do this by posing open-ended, or what Geiselman calls “expansion,” queries. A truthful person usually answers a follow-up question with additional details. A liar tends to stick with the same, bare-bones answers. But don’t give too much credence to body language. Studies have repeatedly shown that nonverbal behavior (averted eyes, folded arms, lip biting, fidgeting) does not reliably indicate deception.

Instead, request the unexpected. Geiselman recommends asking someone to illustrate events with a pencil and paper or to retell the story starting at the end. A liar’s account will begin to break down. Spending the mental processing power needed to keep a story straight, he says, “essentially puts them at the edge of their ability to function cognitively.”


