


A simple ad for Old Navy stores has turned into a snapshot of the extremes of race relations in the United States, fueling both an outburst of bigotry and a powerful reaction against it.

Last Friday, Old Navy posted the ad to Twitter, promoting a sale with a photo of an attractive, happy interracial family in an embrace. Within hours, a backlash was apparent, with hashtags like #BoycottOldNavy and #WhiteGenocide, and messages like “Stop promoting race mixing, you degenerates,” and “I don’t shop at stores that are anti-White and promote race mixing.”

In the days since, there has been a backlash to the backlash, with hundreds of people voicing their rejection of the prejudiced messages in the most personal way possible, posting photos of their own interracial families, often with the hashtag #LoveWins.

With a snapshot of her own parents holding her as a baby, the journalist Soledad O’Brien wrote on Twitter, “My parents marriage was illegal in 1958.” Jack McCain, the son of Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, posted a picture of himself with his wife, Renee Swift McCain, who is black, and directed harsh words toward anyone who was offended by it.

Debbie Felix, a company spokeswoman, said, “We are a brand with a proud history of championing diversity and inclusion. At Old Navy, everyone is welcome.” Beyond those remarks, the company declined to comment on the Twitter storm.

This was far from the first advertisement for Old Navy, or any number of other businesses, to show an interracial relationship. Nor was it the first time some people had responded with venom to such images.

Isaiah Wilson, a lawyer in Omaha, said that he was not exactly surprised by the white separatist views, but that they dredged up memories from two decades ago when he and his wife, Bridgett Wilson, began dating, and “we did get a lot of dirty looks or comments.” Mr. Wilson, 39, is black, and his wife is white; he responded to the Old Navy ad with photos of the couple and their two children.

“We’re just a family trying to raise loving, intelligent kids and trying to pay the bills,” he said. “Why is just the sight of us together so offensive to some people?”

Leeann Cornett, 50, who is white, said she posted a photo of herself with her husband, Brian Cornett, who is black, and their daughter, both as a personal statement, and to counter what she sees as excessive ugliness in social media.

“You often see people getting on a bandwagon to trash and demean,” said Ms. Cornett, a middle schoolteacher in Colorado Springs. “It’s much more appealing to me to stand behind something that I see as positive and show solidarity. I’m glad to see a lot of people feel the same way.”


