


CLEVELAND — The Mets arrived here with no series victories, a slumbering offense and a rookie starter, Steven Matz, with a 37.80 earned run average. They left with two wins in three games, a new No. 3 hitter and the dazzling version of Matz on display.

Matz followed his worst major league start with his best on Sunday, spinning curves, sliders and changeups just the way Manager Terry Collins wanted. Matz struck out nine, a career high, over seven sparkling innings to beat the Cleveland Indians, 6-0, with help from two doubles by Michael Conforto.

Collins inserted Conforto into the No. 3 spot in the lineup on Friday, hoping to jolt an offense that hit .194 in the season’s first eight games. It worked. Conforto went 5 for 12 in the series, with three doubles and a homer, and Collins said he would remain the No. 3 hitter against right-handed pitchers.

“Anytime you’re in the heart of the lineup, where you can do some damage and drive in some runs, it’s exciting,” Conforto said. “I’ve never had any nervousness about it. It’s felt natural.”

Conforto, a first-round pick in 2014, arrived in the majors last summer with the disciplined plate approach the Mets emphasize throughout the organization. He is hitting .313 with a .421 on-base percentage as the Mets head for Philadelphia and Atlanta, where they will face only right-handed starters.

“I thought when we went on the road, we were going to start playing a little bit better, swinging the bats a little bit better, and we have,” Collins said. “We’ve just got to continue. We’re going in our division now, and that’s what made the difference for us last year — how we played in our division.”

The Mets’ surge in the National League East late last season received a boost from Matz, who finished strong and earned a spot in the postseason rotation. But he started this season with a ghastly performance against Miami: seven runs in fewer than two innings, and a reluctance to use his off-speed pitches.

After the first inning Sunday, the pitching coach Dan Warthen stressed the need for Matz to mix in those pitches with his fastballs. Matz — who was back on a regular routine after a long wait before his season debut — said he had felt fine in both starts but believed in himself more this time.

“Just going after hitters and not trying to nitpick,” he said, explaining the difference. “Just trusting that I can miss with a pitch and they’ll still be able to get themselves out.”

Matz pitched with a lead all game after the Mets blitzed Corey Kluber for three runs in the first inning, with Conforto and Lucas Duda driving in the runs.

The Mets added three more in the second, though the sun was mostly responsible.

With two outs and nobody on in the second, Indians center fielder Rajai Davis retreated for Curtis Granderson’s fly ball and held his glove high above his head. Davis’s sunglasses did not help, and neither did his glove. The ball fell to the warning track as Granderson hustled for a triple.

Asdrubal Cabrera followed with a bunt single, perfectly placed on the grass between the mound and the third-base line, as Granderson scampered home. Another Conforto double, just inside the first-base line, made it 5-0, before Davis lost another ball in the sun that went for a run-scoring double by Yoenis Cespedes.

The Mets, who had scored only 20 runs in their first eight games, scored 17 in three games here. Matz did not really need the outburst, stifling a Cleveland lineup that had rocked Matt Harvey in the middle innings Saturday.

Just one runner made it to third off Matz, who retired 12 of his final 13 hitters — and managed to allow no catchable fly balls into the center-field glare.

“We were able to keep their hitters off balance; that’s what we’re trying to do every day,” catcher Kevin Plawecki said.

“When you’ve got a guy like him that had all four pitches working and was able to spot up like he did today, it makes for a really fun day,” Plawecki said of Matz.

INSIDE PITCH

The infant son of starter Jacob deGrom is improving, deGrom told Terry Collins. “They’re hoping that they can take the baby home tomorrow, which would be a huge step forward,” Collins said. DeGrom, who is on family medical emergency leave, threw a bullpen session on Sunday and will throw a simulated game Tuesday as he builds up his pitch count after having strained a back muscle in his first start. ... Catcher Travis d’Arnaud, who bruised his left elbow when he was hit by a pitch on Saturday, could miss the opener of the Mets’ series in Philadelphia on Monday. “I might give him one more day, just to make sure,” Collins said. “He said he feels a lot better, but he was pretty sore last night.” ... The Mets will face the Phillies’ Vince Velasquez on Tuesday. Velasquez, who fired six shutout innings with nine strikeouts at Citi Field on April 9, followed up by striking out 16 San Diego Padres in a three-hit shutout last week.


