


For a number of Times readers, receiving a cancer diagnosis was just the beginning of a long sojourn through the world of new cancer treatments. Some readers found great success with advanced therapies, while others struggled to see whether the treatments offered better results than conventional ones.

What follows is a selection of responses we received from readers sharing their stories of navigating the new frontier of oncology. They have been edited and condensed.

What is your experience with a new cancer treatment? Keep the conversation going by sharing your thoughts here.

An Exceptional Response to a New Therapy

I was diagnosed with non-small-cell lung cancer in April 2005. I was 45 and had never smoked, and the youngest of my three children was only 7. The lower lobe of my left lung was removed, followed by four rounds of adjuvant chemotherapy. However, my cancer returned almost immediately. By the summer of 2008, I had more than two dozen tumors throughout both lungs and was told there was nothing more to do and that I had three to five months left to live. My youngest child and I both began counseling to help us prepare for my death. However the biopsy used to confirm metastatic spread revealed a newly identified driver for lung cancer, a gene called ALK. In October 2008, I became the fourth person in the world with non-small-cell lung cancer to take an experimental therapy called crizotinib. I hoped it would extend my life for several months, but instead I had an almost complete response — not a cure, but a respite. Since then, I have returned to chemotherapy briefly and enrolled in two more Phase 1 clinical trials for ALK inhibitors. My cancer is currently stable, and in several weeks I shall watch my youngest child graduate from high school, and in the fall, he will enroll at M.I.T. where he will study human biology with an emphasis on cancer research. We are truly living the dream (I’m alive!) made possible only by advances in cancer research. Linnea Olson, 56, Lowell, Mass.

Individualized Medicine Can Be Lonely

I didn’t expect there to be a point in my treatment for Hodgkin’s lymphoma when my doctor would say: “It’s really up to you. If there was a correct way, I’d decide, but we just don’t know, and it’s not ethical for me to make that decision for you.” I was offered a choice to skip radiation, based on a PET scan that showed my cancer had responded quickly to chemotherapy. Using a PET scan to gauge response to treatment, and from there predict individual outcomes, is a new idea. While I was pleased to be offered the best science available, I didn’t expect that being at the forefront of personalized medicine would feel so scary and uncertain. I trusted my oncologist completely, but here he was telling me that we faced a choice without a clear answer. Skipping radiation would increase chances that my cancer recurred, but radiation would increase my risk for secondary cancers considerably; my short-term survival rate might be better with radiation, but my long-term prognosis was possibly better without it. I have two toddlers. If my cancer recurred, I might die before they were old enough to remember me, but if I had radiation, I might mortgage everyone’s future quality of life. Individualized medicine is lonely. If everybody is a case study of one, then the precedent set by others becomes much less reassuring, and while I admired my doctor for admitting the ethical dilemmas inherent in the decision and allowing me the choice, it was a decision I did not feel at all qualified to make. It sounds so good, objectively — “treatment just for you!” — but my experience of it was terrifying, even with excellent doctors who spent hours of extra time talking through all the variables with me. Hannah Kaplan, 34, Minneapolis

From a Tragic Car Accident to a Full Life

On the morning of June 26, 2015, I was on the way to pick up supplies for a wedding I was catering. I was feeling a bit off, but ignored it, thinking I had low blood sugar. A voice popped into my head, however, saying, “If you don’t pull over right now, you are going to die!” As I started to slow down, I experienced a brain seizure, blacked out and ended up in a ditch with a broken back and a totaled car. The police said I should have been killed. A hospital scan revealed I had Stage 4 metastasized melanoma that had traveled from a lymph node in my arm to my brain, causing the seizure. I had no idea I was sick. After much testing, I was put on a trial of two new untested immunotherapy drugs. In three months, scans showed that all of my brain tumors were gone and my lymph nodes were back to normal. On Oct. 1, the F.D.A. approved one of the two immunotherapy drugs they tested on me. Today, my CT and brain M.R.I.s continue to show no evidence of cancer. My back is healed, and I’ve returned to living a full life. Linda McCulloch, 58, Sonoma, Calif.

Immunotherapy Can Be Hit or Miss

I have a relatively rare form of esophageal cancer that I have been fighting for three years. I’m presently undergoing intense immunotherapy after having numerous rounds of chemotherapy, radiation and a major surgery to fight my disease. Like many others, I have great hope that immunotherapy will be more effective than more conventional cancer treatments used over the years, but there’s no doubt that for certain cancers, even immunotherapy is still hit and miss. While new and novel cancer-fighting therapies are beginning to show real effectiveness in treating patients, many doctors who have fought the war on cancer over the years have a lot to learn about the efficacy of new cancer therapies. My own surgeon, one of the leading doctors in his field, as well as the top oncologist he works with, sent me home to die following the surgery he performed on me almost two years ago. They gave me five months to live. They both felt that further chemotherapy or immunotherapy treatments would buy me no more than a few more weeks of life. I’m glad I didn’t listen too carefully to their wisdom. Otherwise, I wouldn’t be here, still in the fight, willing to do whatever it takes to stay alive and support my family as long and as best I can. John Heubusch, 57, Calabasas, Calif.

Active and Thriving

I have Stage 4 renal-cell carcinoma. The cancer metastasized to my other kidney and pancreas and was discovered in November 2014, in a follow-up M.R.I. after I had a mass removed in 2011. My options were not good: Surgery, the go-to approach for renal cell carcinoma, which does not respond to either chemotherapy or radiation, was not advised. I am relatively young, and the devastation of removing my pancreas along with multiple other digestive organs would result in a terrible quality of life. My urology surgeon and oncologist hooked me up with a clinical trial for the Genentech drug Atezolizumab. The drug is a monoclonal antibody that shuts down the cancer-defense system. I was initially told the average survival on the trial was 11 months. That was 14 months ago. My side effects are minimal, the cancer is reduced in size and is now stable and I am active and thriving. The team of renal oncology at U.C.S.F. and Kaiser worked together, and everyone is amazed by how well the immunotherapy has worked. I thought I was to die in 2014. Instead, in the last 18 months, I have completely changed my life with mindfulness practice, yoga, acupuncture, and Qi Gong. I fell in love, made new friends and spent wonderful moments with old friends and family. I am planning to travel to Barcelona in October and may live to see my daughter graduate from Stanford next June. I am still here, still alive and in awe of the life I’m living. Sally Barros, 54, Oakland, Calif.

A Researcher Becomes the Patient

My laboratory at a major cancer center has spent many of the last 24 years studying DNA replication and DNA damage-response pathways that require BRCA proteins, which suppress tumors, as well as PARP (polyADP ribose polymerase) proteins. Ten years ago, I wrote a book chapter in which I predicted (based on preclinical studies) that PARP-inhibiting drugs would one day provide effective treatment of BRCA-positive breast and ovarian cancer. A few short months ago, a drug called olaparib became the first PARP inhibitor approved for treatment of ovarian or breast cancer. Three years ago, I was diagnosed with an aggressive prostate adenocarcinoma caused by a rare BRCA2 mutation, which was most likely inherited from my mother, who died of breast cancer when she was in her 40s. Radiation treatment and treatment with a number of anti-cancer drugs at the cancer center where I work has failed to stop the growth or metastasis of this tumor for more than a few months. My oncologists know very little about BRCA-positive prostate cancer, which is also rare, and had not heard of olaparib. This has occasionally resulted in an unusual and somewhat disorienting experience. Unlike most patients who sit in exam rooms and furiously scribble information relayed by their oncologists, my oncologists are sometimes scribbling information I relay to them, such as how to spell “olaparib”! After arranging mostly on my own for treatment with olaparib as an experimental drug almost one year ago, tumor progression has been halted, and recent bone scans indicate that my bone metastases are melting away. The success of my treatment reflects, in part, the extraordinary promise of personalized medicine that targets specific cancer-causing mutations, although the role I’ve played in my treatment perhaps takes personalized medicine to the extreme. William C. Burhans, 64, Buffalo


