


He became known as the Ninja Burglar, an elusive figure who stoked fears in some of Staten Island’s most affluent neighborhoods by sneaking into homes, usually with his entire body covered, except for his eyes. He would grab jewelry, money and the occasional designer handbag, the authorities said, often while residents were still at home.

In that spree, around 2007, about 20 homes were broken into. Years went by, and there was no arrest. On Wednesday, however, the authorities said they had found the man who was responsible not only for that string of burglaries, but also for scores of others on Staten Island, elsewhere in New York, and in New Jersey and Connecticut.

The suspect, Robert Costanzo, a convicted rapist, has been charged on Staten Island with three counts of second-degree burglary, prosecutors said, but he has admitted to investigators that he was responsible for more than 100 burglaries in which, the authorities say, he stole more than $4 million worth of property.

“We got our guy,” Michael E. McMahon, the Staten Island district attorney, told reporters on Wednesday. Residents of the neighborhoods targeted by Mr. Costanzo, he added, could “rest assured knowing that the Ninja Burglar case has finally been solved and that his reign of terror is officially over.”

Officials said that Mr. Costanzo, a resident of the Tompkinsville section of Staten Island, had reached a plea agreement with the authorities in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, and as part of that he was expected to plead guilty in a court appearance on Thursday. Mr. Costanzo, 46, also pleaded guilty to charges in Connecticut this week stemming from a 2014 burglary in Farmington. The authorities declined to discuss how much time he was expected to serve under the agreement.

His lawyer did not return messages seeking comment.

Investigators in New York City were led to Mr. Costanzo after talking to a detective from Saratoga Springs, N.Y., who was looking into a similar burglary pattern and considered Mr. Costanzo to be the prime suspect. Investigators noticed striking similarities between the two strings of cases.

In February, Mr. Costanzo began negotiating an agreement with the authorities in three states. He has been charged on Staten Island for burglaries in 2011, 2013 and 2015. Officials said he had been active from 2005 until last year, but the statute of limitations had expired in many of the cases.

Over two days this month, officials said, Mr. Constanzo gave a statement recorded on video in which he described how he operated.

The authorities said Mr. Costanzo, who has been a registered sex offender since a rape conviction in 1992, went to work after nightfall. He would dress in black, cover his face, and use a ladder to climb up to balconies and head for master bedrooms. He would look for cash, jewelry and watches; sometimes, if he saw a safe, he would come back. And half the time, the authorities said, he entered while residents were home.

He pursued these crimes, the authorities said, while living what appeared to be a relatively normal life, sharing a modest home with his family. He tended to work alone, the authorities said, pawning most of what he stole.

In talking with investigators, Mr. McMahon said, it appeared Mr. Costanzo took pride in being known as a ninja. The burglar had received the moniker from local newspapers because of how he dressed and, in at least one instance, because a witness saw the burglar had nunchucks.

In 2007 and 2008, as the burglar targeted wealthy Staten Island enclaves like Todt Hill, Grymes Hill and Grasmere, residents were alarmed by the string of crimes and their brazen nature. Some neighborhoods hired private security to supplement police patrols.

Mr. Costanzo’s arrest has brought relief.

John M. Carlo, 73, remembered his wife, Mary Ann, screaming, “The ninja! The ninja!” when the burglar broke into their home. Then, the burglar ran past him and fled the house, taking jewelry with him.

“She came face to face with him,” Mr. Carlo said of his wife, who died several years ago. “This has been on my mind for years.”


