


Since Jeurys Famila took over as the Mets’ closer last season, there have been few times when he has not looked indomitable after running through the bullpen gate at Citi Field.

But for the second time in three games, Mets Manager Terry Collins called on Familia in a nonsave situation Sunday night, and he faltered.

Familia was 16 for 16 in save opportunities this season, among the best in the major leagues. But after blowing a four-run lead on Friday, Familia allowed two runs after the Mets had tied the game in the eighth on Sunday, and the Mets fell by 4-2 to the Los Angeles Dodgers at Citi Field.

Kike Hernandez led off the ninth with a single. Familia retired Chase Utley but walked the next two batters. Adrian Gonzalez then drove in two runs with a single.

“This is very uncharacteristic of him since he’s taken over the closing job,” Collins said.

Before Familia’s downfall, the Mets had just grabbed back the momentum after being subdued by Dodgers starter Clayton Kershaw for more than seven innings.

After exiting the game with two outs in the eighth and a 2-1 lead, Kershaw watched from the dugout, his mouth agape, as Curtis Granderson hit a triple that right fielder Yasiel Puig crashed into the wall trying to catch. Kevin Plawecki, who had led off the inning with a single, came home to tie the game.

Kershaw had pitched masterfully, whittling away at the Mets’ hopes for a victory with each dominating strikeout. But Dodgers Manager Dave Roberts pulled Kershaw after his 114th pitch, a hard line drive by pinch-hitter Michael Conforto. Roberts brought in reliever Adam Liberatore to get the final out of the eighth.

On Friday, Familia was saved by Granderson’s game-ending home run in the ninth, just as the Dodgers’ offense picked up Kershaw on Sunday.

“It’s a little tough for me, but at the same time I understand I’m not perfect,” Familia said.

The Mets’ loss occurred in front of the third straight capacity crowd at Citi Field, where fans again directed their anger at Utley.

Throughout the night on the main scoreboard, Utley’s head shot showed him with a knowing grin, the right side of his lip lifted ever so slightly. The image quite likely only stoked the crowd, who hurled boos and derogatory names at Utley throughout the night. Utley remains an object of scorn in Citi Field for the takeout slide that led to a broken leg for shortstop Ruben Tejada in last year’a playoffs.

Utley hit two home runs on Saturday and had nine R.B.I. in the first two games of the series. He was again a disruptive force Sunday, scoring the first run of the game, in the third inning.

Perhaps more indignation should have been directed toward Kershaw, who is 7-0, with a 1.29 E.R.A. in 11 regular-season starts against the Mets.

After allowing a leadoff double to Granderson, Kershaw retired the next 11 batters without a ball in play leaving the infield. Six of the outs came by strikeout, including two against Yoenis Cespedes, the National League leader in home runs.

In the fourth, Kershaw sat Cespedes down with a curveball so deceiving that it seemed to hiccup in the air, throwing off Cespedes’s timing.

The Dodgers were momentarily jolted in the top of the fifth, when Kershaw grounded out to second. Instead of running toward first base, he tucked his neck into his left shoulder and walked off the field with the assistance of training staff.

He returned in the bottom half and finished with 10 strikeouts in seven and two-thirds innings. Despite not getting the win, Kershaw recorded his 100th strikeout on Sunday, against only five walks this season, the fewest for any pitcher reaching the century mark in strikeouts, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.


