


LEXINGTON, Ky. — While the path to the Kentucky Derby has wound through Florida, New York, California and other places, some hopefuls have found a quiet little stopover down the road from Churchill Downs at Keeneland.

No matter what happens in the 142nd Kentucky Derby on May 7, some trainers have found a comfort zone for preparation at the track, which is small and picturesque.

Keeneland has stabled four of 20 Derby qualifiers for various periods this month and even more filly hopefuls for the Oaks on May 6. The Blue Grass Stakes produced a possible Derby contender, the winner Brody’s Cause, who has another Grade I victory along with a third in last fall’s Breeders’ Cup Juvenile here.

A peaceful setting including lush, rolling meadows might explain the trainer Dale Romans’s love of the track.

“It’s laid out for horses,” said Romans, who quickly moved Brody’s Cause and Cherry Wine, who finished third in the Blue Grass, to Churchill. “It’s big and nice, almost like a park environment. I think the horses enjoy being there.”

Many have returned this spring.

Keeneland welcomed 45 horses who competed in the Breeders’ Cup last October, including four winners who raced during the spring meet, which concludes Friday.

The Blue Grass runner-up My Man Sam also trained at Keeneland before moving to Churchill a couple of weeks ago.

One notable Breeders’ Cup champion at Keeneland has been the Juvenile winner Nyquist, who has trained here since winning the Florida Derby on April 2. Nyquist, an unbeaten colt, drew a sizable pre-race crowd for Friday’s final workout in company with the Grade I winner Ralis, as the two horses had the main track to themselves.

The trainer Doug O’Neill also has an Oaks hopeful, Land Over Sea, here and has been pleased with all of his horses’ workouts and temperament. He credits being at Keeneland for providing a friendly training atmosphere and allowing him to schedule midday workouts as opposed to the usual early-morning runs.

“It’s calming to know that you and the other horse are the only two on the track,” a pleased O’Neill said after Nyquist ran a mile in 1 minute 41 seconds.

Bad weather has not been a deterrent thanks to a training track with a synthetic surface. The main track switched to dirt nearly two years ago. The view is pretty good, too.

“It’s the best of both worlds here,” O’Neill added. “If every racetrack had enough real estate to add a synthetic track as a training track, it’s really gold. It has a big barn area, a full barn area, yet it’s spread out. It’s a place where horses are happy.”

Though Nyquist did not race at Keeneland, O’Neill praised track officials for making him and his horses welcome and comfortable during their extended visit. That hospitality did not surprise him or Romans, who added that horsemen had always received “first-class treatment” there.

Whether Nyquist’s comfort level helps him earn the garland of roses in eight days remains to be seen. O’Neill certainly believes being here trumped the logistics of trying to ship the horse back to his California base.

W. B. Rogers Beasley, Keeneland’s vice president for racing, said creating that option was part of the plan. The goal was bringing the track in line with the industry in hopes of attracting top-flight competitors, trainers and events such as the Breeders’ Cup.

Keeneland’s plan came to fruition with the track’s first Breeders’ Cup and paid off with the presence of the Triple Crown champion American Pharoah, who capped his stellar career by dominating the Breeders’ Cup Classic. The subsequent return of past competitors and Derby contenders suggests that good feelings remain.

“Having all those horses come and run here, especially for a lot of people from California who would not come in very often, I think it was a big boost for us,” Beasley said. “That tells you several things: how much they liked racing here and how much they liked the services.”

Beasley is hopeful that horsemen will spread the word and help lure others to Keeneland in prepping for the first jewel in racing’s Triple Crown. For now, it is just a matter of whether training here produces the track’s first Derby champion since Animal Kingdom in 2011.

Romans feels good about the prospects for Brody’s Cause.

“It’s by far the best choice I’ve had there,” he said. “I like prepping at Keeneland and doing all my work in Kentucky.”


