


Curt Schilling, a baseball analyst for ESPN whose outspoken social media presence has led to his suspension from the network before, is defending himself again after making comments on Facebook about transgender people.

According to Outsports, a website focused on the intersection of sports and L.G.B.T. issues, Schilling shared an image that appeared to be a response to a recent North Carolina law that bars transgender people from using bathrooms and locker rooms that do not correspond with the gender on their birth certificates.

“A man is a man no matter what they call themselves,” Schilling, a former Major League Baseball star, wrote in a comment on the photo, according to a screen capture gathered by Outsports. “I don’t care what they are, who they sleep with, men’s room was designed for the penis, women’s not so much. Now you need laws telling us differently? Pathetic.”

In a statement late Tuesday, ESPN said: “We are taking this matter very seriously and are in the process of reviewing it.”

Also on Tuesday night, Schilling wrote an 841-word response on his blog that shooed away those “dying to be offended so you can create some sort of faux cause to rally behind,” though he did not defend the content of the Facebook post.

“This latest brew ha ha is beyond hilarious,” he wrote of the brouhaha. “I didn’t post that ugly looking picture. I made a comment about the basic functionality of mens and womens restrooms, period.”

It was not clear if Schilling was denying that he had shared the photo or was referring to the fact that the image was originally posted by someone else. Schilling focused more on criticizing those who were offended as the story spread on Tuesday.

“There are things I have deeply held beliefs in, things I have that are core to who I am, things I am passionate about,” he wrote. “If you ask me about them it’s likely I’ll give you a passionate answer, whether you like that answer or not is completely up to you. I am not going to give you answers to make sure you like what I say, let the rest of the insecure world do that.”

He added: “I don’t represent anyone but myself here, on Facebook, on Twitter, anywhere.”

But ESPN has not seen it that way in the past. In August, the network suspended him after he shared a Twitter post that compared extremist Muslims to Nazi-era Germans. The network called the tweet “completely unacceptable” and said it “in no way represents our company’s perspective.”

He deleted the post and apologized on Twitter, writing: “I understand and accept my suspension. 100% my fault. Bad choices have bad consequences and this was a bad decision in every way on my part.”

That ban was extended through the baseball postseason after Schilling wrote an angry letter to a writer from the website Awful Announcing about its coverage. ESPN said his actions “have not been consistent with his contractual obligations nor have they been professionally handled; they have not reflected well on the company.”

Schilling’s co-workers include Christina Kahrl, an ESPN baseball writer and editor who is a transgender woman. In 2014, she wrote a critical examination of an article that outed a transgender woman on the website Grantland, an ESPN-owned property.

Before his broadcasting career, Schilling pitched for 20 years in the majors, perhaps best known for his “bloody sock” performance in the American League Championship Series for the Boston Red Sox during their World Series run in 2004.


