


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Glenn Kramon, a former assistant managing editor at The Times, demystifies the Pulitzer nomination process.

We’re thrilled for our two Pulitzer winners and eight finalists, but we’re already thinking about next year. I have overseen The Times’s Pulitzer entries for more than a decade, and my team and I are already working the newsroom — asking our journalists for recommendations for the 2017 Pulitzers, and for other prestigious contests like the George Polk Awards and Gerald Loeb Awards.

The Pulitzer Prizes allow us three nominees in each of 14 categories, from Public Service and Investigative Reporting to Commentary and Editorial Writing to Photography.

How do we choose them?

1) First and foremost we ask: How much impact did this work have?

Our two winners this year are fine examples: Alissa Rubin’s horrifying account of a young Afghan woman beaten to death and burned by a mob, and Daniel Etter’s photograph of an Iraqi migrant weeping as he emerged with his children from a treacherous open-water crossing; both went viral online and called world attention to huge problems.

That said, as happens every year, some of our projects with the most impact did not win a Pulitzer. For example, Jessica Silver-Greenberg, Michael Corkery and Robert Gebeloff wrote a series, still in progress, on the arbitration clauses added to millions of consumer and employee contracts that favor businesses. After the articles appeared, lawmakers proposed measures to stop forcing Americans into arbitration, and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg quoted the first article in the series in a dissent to a court ruling.

Ian Urbina, in a series called “The Outlaw Ocean,” went to sea to reveal wretched conditions on fishing ships: workers who were beaten, lost fingers to cuts or infections and were fed amphetamines so they could work punishing hours — all to catch food for America’s pets. Ian’s reporting led to the passage of two new United States laws to protect workers and spurred class action suits against a half-dozen major pet food and seafood companies. The series also prompted crackdowns in other countries and a promise by Secretary of State John Kerry to focus on labor abuses on fishing boats.

Alan Schwarz’s years of work on the dangers of sports concussions, which has helped change the sport of football, never won a Pulitzer. Keith Bradsher’s work on the safety and environmental dangers of sport utility vehicles and pickups, which helped inspire a redesign of millions of vehicles on the road today, didn’t either.

All four of the above works won George Polk Awards, which are to the Pulitzers what the Golden Globes are to the Oscars.

2) We also look for a compelling story about our journalists for the nominating letter that accompanies each entry.

For example, the Iraqi migrant weeping in Daniel Etter’s photo said in an interview later that he was crying because he was thinking, “Why did I put my family through this?” The man then gestured to Daniel and added: “You should ask Daniel. Because when he saw us, he was crying, too.” We mentioned that in our letter.

And Alissa Rubin barely survived a helicopter crash that occurred as she was returning from a mountain in Iraq where refugees were trapped. In the hospital Alissa said, “You know, I am going back.” And she did, to Afghanistan, to risk her life again to tell amazing stories about the mistreatment of women there. We emphasized that in our letter.

3) Finally, innovative online work matters more each year.

In Alissa’s case, videographers Adam B. Ellick and John Woo, working with an assistant in Kabul, solicited and meticulously combined cellphone videos of the attack on the woman, for an unnerving “user-generated” report that we included in the entry.

Each autumn I sit down with the executive editor, Dean Baquet, and his team to add and subtract from the list and discuss the best angles for the nominating letters, which summarize the work, its impact and the talents of the journalists.

Then our production team — including a coordinator, Adam Kepler; a designer, Leah Phillips; and two editors, Fred Andrews and Merrill Perlman — spin what we think are elegant entries, which are submitted online in late January. Further into winter, the Pulitzer jurors select three finalists for each category.

Last week the Pulitzer board chose the winners.

We’ve done better in recent history. In the past 15 years, The Times has won 37 Pulitzers, as many as it won in the first 55 years of this contest, which celebrates its centennial this year.

Some might ask: Why make such a big deal of Pulitzers? Readers care. Advertisers care. Shareholders care. Our colleagues on the business side care. Members of the Ochs-Sulzberger family, who have controlled The Times for 120 years, care. Pulitzer Prizes are a proxy for work that enlightens and improves society. And no one cares more about that than Dean Baquet. I often receive after-midnight texts from him with ideas for the kind of work that ends up being nominated for Pulitzers.

Pulitzers are how we distinguish ourselves, how we try to prove to you our commitment to important (and often expensive) journalism. And how we justify charging you, our sacred readers, for a Times subscription.


