


This article is part of our spring gallery guide.

THIS is a heady moment for Omer Fast. His short videos have long been a mainstay on the international art circuit, featured in the Venice Biennale and multiple Whitney Biennials, as well as in solo shows at institutions from the Moderna Museet in Stockholm to the Cleveland Museum of Art. The coming theatrical release of his first feature-length film, “Remainder,” an adaptation of Tom McCarthy’s 2005 novel, promises to catapult him beyond the rarefied terrain of the gallery-hopping set. After screenings at the BFI London and Berlin film festivals, as well as at the New Directors/New Films festival in New York, the Hollywood trade journal Variety christened Mr. Fast one of its “Ten Euros To Watch.”

Speaking by telephone from his home in Berlin, Mr. Fast, 43, who was born in Israel and graduated from American art schools, seemed more wary than excited by the buzz: “I’m not really interested in crossing over into an art house or a mainstream” viewership.

Rather than seeing “Remainder” as a break with his past efforts, Mr. Fast regards the film — about a man brain-damaged by a freakish accident who tries to reassemble his memory amid mysterious circumstances — as an extension of the formal experimentation running through his more recent shorts. These include the three now on view at the James Cohan Gallery in Chelsea: “5000 Feet Is the Best” (2011), “Continuity” (2012) and “Spring” (2016). Crisply composed and starkly cool in their visual palette, the shorts draw their strength as much from their pictorialism as from their conceptual rigor. It’s easy to imagine stills from any of them being blown up and framed on a gallery wall.

Mr. Fast said the biggest challenge in creating a 90-minute movie was how to structure time itself. “None of my work follows a linear notion of a whodunit, but rather reflects what a disrupted relationship to the outside world might be like,” he added. Repeating scenes and varying them to reveal new details have become staples of his aesthetic — for practical reasons as much as for creative ones. Because his videos are usually shown on an endless loop in galleries, “that led to the cyclical structures which play with temporality and causality, so people can come in at any point and get submerged in the storytelling,” he said.

“They might have different conclusions about what they’ve seen than somebody who came in 10 minutes earlier, or later,” he added, “but I like that.”

His producers on “Remainder” were less enthusiastic about such an elliptical approach in a cinema setting, leading to some tense discussions over Mr. Fast’s script. “It’s a luxury to have a bigger budget and a longer time to immerse oneself in a story, to create a little world,” he said. “So I won’t say, ‘Never again.’ But doing the work I do in an art context means I don’t have to argue with anybody over whether my protagonist is sympathetic enough. I get these little art budgets without any strings attached. That’s extremely seductive.”

He continued, “It’s a beautiful system that allows you to be able to work like that” — the phone was suddenly filled with the sound of a child giddily laughing and kitchen pots clattering — “especially at this point in the middle of my life.”


