


Muskrats are equally at home in freshwater ponds or brackish bays, swimming their way through at least four of New York City’s five boroughs. Though I have never seen one in Manhattan, I’d be surprised if a muskrat hadn’t shown up in Inwood or perhaps even Central Park.

Muskrats are frequently mistaken for beavers, and although both are rodents, they are not closely related. They share a preference for wetland habitats and their swimming styles are similar, but muskrats are considerably smaller. When a muskrat climbs out of the water to reveal its tapering, almost hairless tail, the confusion devolves into yet another mistaken identity. Stories about enormous “water rats” abound wherever the lives of the city’s humans and its muskrats intersect.

Muskrats (Ondatra zibethicus) are actually more closely related to voles and lemmings than to either beavers or the Norway rats that haunt the alleys and subways of New York. They feed primarily on wetland vegetation, such as cattails and water lilies, and are also enthusiastic nibblers of newly emerging stems of phragmites, the tall plumed grasses that often invade the city’s wetlands. Muskrats will also feed on small fish, snails and the occasional bird egg.

In turn, they are the targets of many predators. Minks, though smaller than muskrats, prey upon even healthy adults, harassing them tirelessly until they are weakened enough to kill. Red foxes and snapping turtles hunt for muskrats in ponds and woodland edges. But within the city, busy roadways are undoubtedly the greatest threats to inexperienced young animals.

The muskrat’s fur is not as luxuriant as that of the beaver or the otter, but it is warm and waterproof, and tales of local trappers harvesting muskrat pelts — even into the 1970s — are still told in the outer reaches of Queens and Staten Island. Nowadays, muskrats are generally left to forage unbothered.

Wetlands in Staten Island, Queens and southern Brooklyn are likely places to search for this gentle urban mammal. The animals are primarily active at dawn or dusk, but in spring they can be observed foraging in broad daylight. Check the edges of phragmites or cattail marshes or where other favored foods are growing. Locally, the animals are fond of fallen mulberries, and the bright orange hips produced by beach roses later in summer.

Look for muskrat signs when the animals themselves are not obvious. Muskrats often carve shallow canals that mark entrances to undercut banks and burrows. These canals become more evident as water levels drop in summer and are frequently interwoven with delicate footprints and the tail-drag marks that make muskrat tracks unmistakable.

Muskrats can raise as many as three large broods a year. And whether or not their prodigious reproductive rate was the inspiration for the 1970s hit song “Muskrat Love,” it is a pretty good guarantee that the animals will remain part of the New York City landscape for the foreseeable future.


