


CANNES, France — A day after his latest film, “Café Society,” opened the Cannes Film Festival to respectful reviews, Woody Allen said he had no comment on a column in The Hollywood Reporter, posted on Wednesday by his estranged son, Ronan Farrow, accusing him of abuse and criticizing the news media for not taking the claims more seriously.

“My comment is that I’ve said everything that I have to say about that silly situation in The New York Times,” Mr. Allen said at a press lunch on Thursday, seeming unflappable and unsurprised by the questions. He was referring to a 2014 Op-Ed article in which he denied accusations by his adoptive daughter, Dylan Farrow, that he had abused her when she was a child. Mr. Farrow is Dylan’s brother and Mr. Allen’s son from his relationship with Mia Farrow.

“I’ve said all I can say about it,” Mr. Allen added. “I have so moved on that I never think about it. I work, I do my movies and hope that people like them.”

At the festival’s opening ceremony on Wednesday, Mr. Allen, 80, was also the target of a joke by the evening’s M.C., the French comedian Laurent Lafitte, that shocked some in the audience.

“You’ve shot so many of your films here in Europe, and yet in the United States, you haven’t even been convicted of rape,” Mr. Lafitte said, addressing Mr. Allen and apparently referring to the director Roman Polanski, who left the United States in 1978 after pleading guilty to having sex with a minor. He served some jail time but fled before final sentencing.

(Mr. Lafitte appears in “Elle,” Paul Verhoeven’s latest feature, which is in competition here this year and stars Isabelle Huppert as a woman who takes matters into her own hands after being raped.)

At a dinner after the ceremony on Wednesday, some American film industry professionals said they had been taken aback by the joke.

Asked about it at the press lunch on Thursday, Mr. Allen told a group of journalists, “It would take a lot to offend me,” The Guardian reported.

“Café Society,” set in the 1930s between Hollywood and New York, and starring Kristen Stewart, Jesse Eisenberg, Steve Carell, Corey Stoll and Blake Lively, has received mixed but generally positive reviews. Some critics have called it one of Mr. Allen’s better recent films, with strong performances by the leads, but others have found its love triangle plot a bit tired.


