


GAZA CITY — On the big screen, a Palestinian was trying to audition for a singing contest over the Internet, because he was unable to leave the Gaza Strip. But the shoddy connection kept freezing, and the plucky hero eventually disappeared into a hazy cloud of belching smoke, as the generator he was using broke down.

Life imitates art in Gaza as anywhere else. The volume on the film veered madly between screeching and whispers. The hall was stifling for lack of air-conditioning in a place were power is restricted and never reliable.

The movie, ”The Idol” — based on the real-life “Arab Idol” winner, Mohammed Assaf — showed a Hamas gunman refusing to let the singer travel because his music is “un-Islamic.” And the organizers of the film festival where it was being screened had not even invited Mr. Assaf to attend for fear Hamas, the militant Islamist party that rules Gaza, would not allow it.

Hamas officials had insisted on censoring the festival’s offerings, editing out profanity, kissing and women in short skirts. And, on opening night, they ordered that the lights in the hall be left on to prevent any hanky-panky in the seats.

“You work in the margins, and this is what is possible for you,” sighed Khalil Mozayen, the director of the event, Gaza’s Red Carpet Human Rights Film Festival, whose motto is “We Want to Breathe.”

The five-day festival, which started Thursday night, coincides with Cannes, but there was little resemblance beyond the red carpet laid over the steps of Gaza’s Rashad Shawa Cultural Center.

This is Gaza’s second film festival, and like many second acts, it was tough to pull off.

Last year, Mr. Mozayen staged an emotional debut festival in the Shejaiya neighborhood of Gaza City that was smashed during the devastating 2014 summer war between Israel and Gaza militants. He unfurled the red carpet between the ruins, and ordinary Palestinians walked upon it, attracting a frenzy of international news media attention.

That event was championed by Hamas, despite the group’s general suspicion of Western-style cultural events, because it drew attention to the plight of postwar Gaza.

This year, Mr. Mozayen ventured into more delicate territory: a cry for neighboring Israel and Egypt to allow Palestinians to move more freely across the strip’s tightly controlled borders, and for Hamas to loosen its restrictions on personal freedoms, including watching movies.

He immediately encountered obstacles on the path (or red carpet, if you will).

The 30 films being shown include features, shorts and documentaries made by Palestinians as well as people from the Middle East, Europe and the United States.

Mr. Mozayen constantly avoided movies with racy themes, including “Degrade,” by Gaza’s best-known filmmakers, brothers known as Arab and Tarzan, who live abroad. (The film, about a woman’s hair salon in Gaza, was widely panned when it premiered at Cannes last year.)

He even pre-emptively cut kissing scenes out of his own movie, “Sara” — a rare feature film made in Gaza, about a film crew trying to make a movie about the killing of a woman.

Other offerings included “Theeb,” a 2014 Academy Award-nominated movie from Jordan, and “3000 Nights,” a 2015 feature by Mai Masri, a Palestinian-American director.

Atef Askoul, the Culture Ministry official who approved the films after some adjustments, said that Gazans “love watching American films,” but “we are an Islamic society.”

“My wife and my daughter and my sister will watch these films,” he explained, “and we cannot allow to show shots that are bad.”

Location was another sticking point. Mr. Mozayen’s team wanted to stage the festival in Gaza’s port. Mr. Askoul said no — there would be too many opportunities for men and women to mix illicitly in the dark outside, and it would be too difficult to control the crowd.

So Mr. Mozayen suggested one of Gaza’s old cinema houses, which are now all closed. Most of them were burned down or shut down in the 1980s by Islamists who saw movies as Western and frivolous, especially given the raging intifada, or Palestinian uprising.

Mr. Askoul approved of the cinema idea. But the owners of the shuttered open-air Amer Cinema were not speaking to each other and refused to allow any events there, Mr. Mozayen said.

At the Amer Cinema, piles of decades-old film reels sit in a dusty heap. An old beer bottle on the floor is a reminder of days long gone, even before the Hamas takeover of Gaza in 2007, when residents could drink alcohol openly. A spray-painted advertisement for the 1982 Hindi movie “Disco Dancer” was still visible on a faded blue-painted wall.

Mr. Mozayen glumly settled on the cultural center, a meeting place for Gaza’s elites — though he hardly saw it as a suitable setting for a people’s film festival.

Instead, with the red carpet cascading down the stairs at the center, the event took on some trappings of a faraway society event.

Neatly dressed men and women in full makeup and head scarves took selfies. Two little girls handed carnations to guests. Two camera drones hovered above.

Journalists stalked the carpet, photographing and interviewing Palestinians and a handful of foreign aid workers who live in Gaza.

A private security guard stopped a 12-year-old girl who was selling balloons at the door. She peered inside, partially blocking entry with her cluster of colorful globes.

Sabah Hamad, 30, left with her friends at 9:30 p.m., when the film had barely begun because of an hourlong delay. “We cannot stay out late, because we are girls,” she said with a shrug, referring to Gaza’s conservatism.

“The last time I went to the cinema in Gaza was in 1976,” said one of the guests, Ahmad Gherbawi, 60, a professor at a university in Saudi Arabia. He said he has been stuck in Gaza for two years because of border closings by Egypt.

“We were in love with Bruce Lee,” Mr. Gherbawi said. Decades ago, he said, “Gaza was beautiful and free.”

“Now it is dark,” he added, filled with “new restrictions.”

Not so, insisted Walid Abu Jayyab, an actor in a series about Palestinian fighters on Hamas’s al-Aqsa television. He came to watch “The Idol” but was unmoved. Instead, he said, “I wish we could have a ‘Resistance Cinema’ that enhances the culture of resistance against the enemy.”

At the end of “The Idol,” the character based on Mr. Assaf manages to sneak into Egypt, helped at the last minute by the Hamas gunman — who hugs him, and wishes him well.

That prompted cheers in the stifling hall. Mr. Mozayen, the festival director, managed to get some of the house lights turned off, earning even more applause.


