


For his bookshop and website One Grand Books, the editor Aaron Hicklin asked people to name the 10 books they’d take with them if they were marooned on a desert island. The next in the series is Michael Cunningham, author of “The Hours,” who shares his list exclusively with T.

“Half of a Yellow Sun,” Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

It’s a powerful, moving and beautiful novel. It is not in any way about the life I live, or the world I know.

“Invisible Cities,” Italo Calvino

“Invisible Cities” defies every single rule that’s generally applied to fiction. Every single one. It would be silly not to have a book like that on the island with me.

“Glass, Irony & God,” Anne Carson

For the scope and inventiveness of it, and of course, for its profound intelligence. For the reminder that as far as books are concerned, the only limits are the ones we set for ourselves.

“White Noise,” Don DeLillo

Don DeLillo is my sentence god. His sentences are more nuanced and forceful and beautiful than any sentences I know. If, upon departing for this hypothetical island, I were to be told I had to shed some weight, I could (though I’d be sorry to) just take a single DeLillo sentence with me, and read it over and over again.

“Train Dreams,” Denis Johnson

Because, as far as I’m concerned, it’s one of the greatest books written in at least the last 50 years.

“Faithful and Virtuous Night: Poems,” Louise Gluck

I’d need poetry. I’d need at least 100 books of poetry. I’m taking Gluck’s most recent collection because it’s the poetry collection I’ve read most recently. And, of course, because Gluck is a great poet. But really, if I got started on the poets I’d take with me, I wouldn’t know where to stop …

“Solaris,” Stanislaw Lem

If speculative fiction is the last surviving instance of the novel of ideas, this to me is the greatest of them all.

“The Complete Stories,” Flannery O’Connor

I’d have to cut the pages out of “The Habit of Being” (O’Connor’s collected letters) and sneak them in among the pages of “The Complete Stories.” She’s the goddess, right? And I’d need both books.

“Pastoralia,” George Saunders

I love George Saunders. I truly love George Saunders. What else need be said?

“To the Lighthouse,” Virginia Woolf

It’d be good to be reminded, as I pass my days sitting on a beach under a coconut tree, of all the life, all the beauty and sorrow, all the mystery; all that can be contained within a relatively modest number of pages. It’d be good to be continually reminded, as I grew older, about how much rampant life, how much emotion and conflict and joy and disappointment, can be conveyed in a novel so perfectly, symmetrically structured.

I’m sneaking in an eleventh:

A blank book.

I’d take a book with nothing written in it at all. I wouldn’t write in it; I’d keep it blank. I’d merely look at it sometimes, and think about all the books I wasn’t allowed to take, and all the books yet to be written.


