


JERUSALEM — An Israeli court on Tuesday convicted a Palestinian teenager of two counts of attempted murder for his role in a stabbing attack that critically injured an Israeli teenager and wounded an Israeli man in a Jewish area of East Jerusalem in October.

The stabbings, which were part of a wave of violence that began that month but has subsided somewhat, shocked Israelis because of the ages of those involved: The teenager, Ahmad Manasra, and the victim, Naor Ben-Ezra, who lived in adjacent districts of East Jerusalem, were both 13 at the time.

Ahmad had come with his cousin, Hassan Manasra, then 15, to Pisgat Zeev from the nearby Palestinian neighborhood of Beit Hanina. The police released security footage showing them running through the streets of Pisgat Zeev, chasing residents and armed with knives. Both areas are in a part of the city that Israel conquered from Jordan in the 1967 war and annexed in a move that was never internationally recognized.

Hassan, who was also seen on video running at the police with a knife, was fatally shot by officers. Ahmad was run over by a vehicle while fleeing, and was treated in an Israeli hospital.

Leah Tsemel, an Israeli lawyer who represented Ahmad Manasra and who is known for her advocacy for Palestinians, described the conviction as “surprising, unbalanced and problematic.” She said it was the cousin, Hassan, who carried out the stabbings, and that the court was holding Ahmad responsible for his dead cousin’s crimes.

“The court saw them as partners,” Ms. Tsemel said in a phone interview, saying an appeal was certain. The conviction came on the eve of Israel’s Remembrance Day for its fallen soldiers and victims of terrorism. Sentencing was scheduled for July.

Yuval Kedar, a state prosecutor, said after the hearing: “The fact that the accused is a minor does not alter the danger involved in these acts.” He added, “The prosecution will continue to take strong legal action against perpetrators of terrorist acts of all ages, and will demand to impose a severe punishment on the accused, in accordance with the law.”

The case gained notoriety after Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, said mistakenly that Ahmad Manasra — who had been seen in a video bleeding from the head and being struck by passers-by after he was run over — had been executed in cold blood.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and other Israeli officials seized on that misstatement, saying it reflected what they called a pattern of cynical dishonesty and incitement to violence among the Palestinian leadership and its official news media. The Israeli hospital released images of the boy recovering and being spoon-fed in his bed.

About a month after the Pisgat Zeev stabbings, video clips were leaked from the interrogation of Ahmad Manasra showing him crying and pounding his head in frustration as an Israeli interrogator shouted questions at him in Arabic. The clips were broadcast on Palestinian television and distributed widely on social media, further fueling Palestinian outrage.

Another pair of Palestinian cousins, 12 and 14, are accused of carrying out a copycat attack in November, stabbing and wounding an Israeli guard on a train in East Jerusalem. Their relatives said they had seen the video clips of Ahmad’s interrogation the night before.

There has been a sharp rise in Palestinian minors incarcerated by Israel during the wave of violence in recent months. About 30 Israelis, two Americans and a Palestinian bystander have been killed in a series of stabbings, shootings and vehicular attacks that began on Oct. 1.

On Tuesday, a group of five women in their 70s and 80s were attacked by two Palestinian youths as they walked on a path near a wooded area known as the Peace Forest between East and West Jerusalem, according to the police. Two of the women were stabbed and were taken to a hospital, where they were in moderate condition.

The Israeli authorities say that 37 percent of the Palestinians who perpetrated or attempted attacks from Oct. 1 to Feb. 10 were 16 to 20 years old, and that 10 percent were 15 or younger.

Israeli forces have killed more than 200 Palestinians since October, according to the Palestinian authorities. Most of the Palestinians were killed while committing, or trying to commit, an attack.


