


PARMA, N.Y.

WHAT: A brick Victorian with five bedrooms, three and a half bathrooms, and an attached lighthouse, plus a one-bedroom, one-bath carriage house.

HOW MUCH: $1,500,000

SIZE: 4,284 square feet in the main house and 1,300 square feet in the carriage house.

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $269

SETTING: Parma is a town on Lake Ontario, within 30 minutes of Rochester and 80 minutes of Buffalo. This property is a five-minute drive north of the village of Hilton, which the town encompasses. Much of the area is agricultural or part of a land trust, while the lakefront is lined with homes.

INDOORS: The lighthouse and the attached house were built about 1895; the house was updated within the last 10 years. The walls of the house are solid brick and 18 inches thick. The interior is High Victorian, with the original gumwood trim and doors, hardwood floors, ornate mantels, wainscoting, molding and pocket doors.

Several of the lighting fixtures are also original, while other details are salvage or of the period. The claw-foot tub upstairs, for example, was custom-made with whirlpool jets and painted with an image of the lighthouse. Nearly every room has broad views of the lake.

Common rooms include a family room with walls of glass, and living and dining rooms, both with fireplaces. The kitchen has been updated with a large reproduction gas stove. The room’s porcelain sink is original, returned from another property in town during renovations. The old lighthouse keeper’s bedroom is on the first floor. Three of the other bedrooms are upstairs, and part of suites with bathrooms updated in subway tile and marble. The fifth bedroom is in the finished basement.

A spiral staircase in the lighthouse winds up to a sitting room at the top of the lighthouse tower, with a panorama of the lake and surrounding countryside.

The carriage house is a two-story brick building with extensive exposed brick and wood inside. The lower level is open, while the upstairs is a loft with a pitched wood-paneled ceiling, porthole windows and skylights, as well as a sleeping nook.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is 1.1 acres, with 150 feet of frontage on the lake.

TAXES: $18,166 a year

CONTACT: Mike Franklin, Franklin Ruttan, (315) 876-2262; historiclighthouseforsale.com

•

PENINSULA, OHIO

WHAT: A contemporary with three bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms, and a two-bedroom, two-bath cabin

HOW MUCH: $1,500,000

SIZE: 3,600 square feet in the main house, 1,600 square feet in the guesthouse

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $288

SETTING: Peninsula is a village of about 600 people in northern Ohio, about 20 miles from Cleveland and 16 miles from Akron. A bucolic area surrounded by Cuyahoga Valley National Park, the village is popular with weekenders and tourists, with shops, restaurants and galleries in its 19th-century downtown. A bicycle trail along a towpath for the Ohio & Erie Canal leads from town into the park. This property consists of 15 mostly wooded acres near the western edge of town, with trails leading directly into the park.

INDOORS: The two-story main house was designed by Thomas P. Montalto, an architect, and built in 1997. A contemporary riff on neo-Classical architecture, it has a symmetrical Dryvit stucco facade, copper trim and a peaked steel roof.

The house is at the end of a thousand-foot driveway lined with red maple trees. The porte-cochere connects to a small greenhouse that doubles as an oversize lantern at night, lighted from inside.

The interior of the main house is airy and open, with light-colored wood floors. The owners are patrons of the arts, and there is plenty of wall space for hanging paintings.

The front door opens to a long, skylit gallery with a double-height ceiling that extends to the back of the house. Glass doors here open to an elevated walkway, at the end of which is a screened twin of the greenhouse that looks over a pond. Common rooms are off the gallery, and include a dining room, a kitchen, a living room and a library and media room.

The kitchen has a Jenn-Air cooktop, a double-door Fisher & Paykel refrigerator and a Miele dishwasher. The countertops are butcher block; the cabinetry throughout the house was custom-designed by MBA Design of Peninsula. The living room opens to a deck and a long bridge that ends at a path leading into the national park. The kitchen and dining room also open to decks.

An open staircase with oak risers leads to the second floor. Here, there are two offices, both with partial walls, lofted over the entry gallery. Bedrooms are upstairs. The master is part of a suite with two separate bathrooms; the other two bedrooms are clustered together to form a guest wing. The basement is finished with an exercise room and a heated two-car garage.

A path through the woods leads to the guesthouse, a rustic cabin with an exposed-wood interior. Its living area has a cathedral ceiling and a fireplace; its master bedroom is part of a suite.

OUTDOOR SPACE: Nearly all of the property is wooded, with a circular clearing around the main house. The landscaping includes ferns, white pines and birches.

TAXES: $24,800 a year

CONTACT: Fred Bidwell, for sale by owner, (330) 730-1273; slipperrun.com

•

AUSTIN, TEX.

WHAT: A lakefront house with three bedrooms and three bathrooms, plus a one-bedroom, one-bath garage apartment

HOW MUCH: $1,450,000

SIZE: About 3,700 square feet total, with about 2,600 square feet in the main house

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $392

SETTING: This house is on Hudson Bend, a peninsula on Lake Travis, about 20 miles from downtown Austin. The house is one of four in a community called Back of the Moon, about 25 lakefront acres dotted with old-growth oak trees. Each property is about six acres; there is a communal guesthouse. The community was designed by Christopher Alexander, an architect and theoretician whose ideas, found in books like “A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction” (Oxford University Press, 1977), extend beyond his field.

INDOORS: The two-story house was built in 1995. The interior is airy and bright, with large double-hung windows and views of the water throughout. Common areas are on the first floor, anchored by large living and dining areas with intricate wooden ceilings, tile floors and large windows running across the waterfront side of the house.

The kitchen has marble countertops and appliances by Bosch and Thermador. Floors in this part of the house are stained concrete; ceilings are coffered, with exposed wood.

Bedrooms are upstairs. Here, floors are pecan. The master bedroom is part of a private wing with a hallway lined with built-ins leading to a bathroom. The master bedroom has French doors opening to a private balcony with built-in seating and views over the treetops and water; the bathroom has blue-green tile and a tub.

The apartment is over the detached two-car garage and workshop. The floor plan here is open, with a great room with a tiled floor and walls of windows overlooking the lake and the Hill Country. The garage building also has an indoor exercise pool.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property has about six acres, with oak, elm and cedar trees, as well as some stone benches near the water. There is a dock and a slip.

TAXES: $15,086 a year plus $500 a month in homeowner’s association dues, which cover lawn care, garbage pickup, pest control and community maintenance.

CONTACT: Brady Miner, Pantheon Property Group, (512) 660-9037; pantheonpropertygroup.com


