


MOSCOW — Hailing the Soviet Union for having “brought freedom to other peoples” and taking a swipe at the West over “unacceptable double standards,” President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia presided on Monday over the traditional Victory Day exhibition of military might in Red Square.

Among the many weapons on display were warplanes of the type Moscow has deployed in Syria and an updated version of the Buk antiaircraft missile system that, according to Dutch investigators, shot down a passenger aircraft over eastern Ukraine in 2014.

The military parade and flyby in Moscow signaled the start of a nationwide series of such events, an annual commemoration of the Soviet Union’s defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945 and of the 26 million Soviet soldiers and citizens who died during World War II, far more than in any other country. Smaller parades were held across the country and at a Russian military base in Syria.

After the solemn, lock-step formality of events in Red Square, hundreds of thousands of ordinary Russians streamed through Moscow, St. Petersburg and other cities later on Monday holding placards pasted with black-and-white photographs of relatives who fought and, in many cases, died during the war. Known as the “immortal regiment,” the commemoration began in 2012 in the Siberian city of Tomsk as a private initiative but proved so popular that it has since been embraced and, critics say, hijacked by government authorities. Mr. Putin marched at the front of a huge remembrance procession in Moscow, holding a picture of his father, Vladimir, a war veteran who was wounded fighting the Nazis.

Moscow held its first grand victory parade in 1945, an event presided over by Stalin, and then resumed the ritual in 1965 under the Soviet leader Leonid I. Brezhnev. The tradition halted after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union until President Boris N. Yeltsin revived it in 1995. But the parades have taken on new significance under Mr. Putin, who has used them to showcase Russia’s military revival and renewed national pride after the chaos of the ’90s.

Victory Day has also become a festival of Soviet nostalgia, with Mr. Putin greeting soldiers on Monday as “comrades,” citizens donning Red Army hats and, in some cases, full uniforms, and state-run television channels showing little but war movies and footage of the parade.

“Our soldiers and commanders have proved that they are worthy successors of the Great Patriotic War heroes and that they honorably protect the interests of Russia,” Mr. Putin, using the Russian term for World War II, said in his speech from a Red Square reviewing stand near a granite tomb containing the embalmed corpse of Lenin, the Soviet Union’s founder.

As has become customary, Mr. Putin made no mention of his country’s principal allies during the war, the United States and Britain. But he allowed that Russia was open to working with other nations to combat what he called the “global threat” of terrorism and to create “a modern, nonaligned system of international security,” a system that Moscow believes has been blocked by the existence of NATO and the expansion of the United States-led military alliance into former Soviet territory in the Baltics.

In an apparent swipe at the West, particularly the United States, he said, “Comrades, history lessons teach us that peace on Earth is not established by itself; that one needs to be cautious; that double standards as well as shortsighted indulgence of those who nurture criminal plans are impermissible.” The remark seemed to refer to Washington’s support for rebel groups in Syria that Russia views as terrorist organizations.

This year’s parade was scaled back from last year’s event, which had marked the 70th anniversary of Russia’s victory, but it still included 10,000 troops — 6,000 fewer than in 2015 — and a flotilla of tanks, armored personnel carriers and missile systems. Among them were Iskander short-range ballistic missiles of the type that Russia has deployed in the western Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, a move that NATO’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said last year would “fundamentally change the balance of security in Europe.”

Watched by Mr. Putin and by President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, the procession of military vehicles across the cobblestones of Red Square was led by a Soviet-era T-34 tank, the mainstay of Red Army forces as they beat back Hitler’s army, which invaded in 1941, and then advanced to conquer Berlin in 1945. Behind it rumbled the Armata T-14, a new generation of battle tank first displayed last year, and around 100 other vehicles and weapon systems, including Russia’s latest Yars mobile intercontinental nuclear missile launcher. A battalion of female soldiers took part for the first time.

Also on display was the S-400 air defense missile system, which Russia has deployed in Syria to protect its base at Latakia, and Buk surface-to-air missiles, an updated version of the system that the Dutch Safety Board, in a report issued in October, said was fired in July 2014 at Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over territory held by Russian-backed separatists. The plane, en route from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, crashed, killing all 298 passengers and crew members on board.

Russia has denied any role in the catastrophe, advancing so-far-unsubstantiated theories that Ukrainian warplanes had been responsible or that the Ukrainians had attacked Flight 17 with their own Buk system.


