


Nicklas Backstrom scored, Braden Holtby had 26 saves, and the Washington Capitals beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 1-0, on Sunday to advance to the Eastern Conference semifinals with a win on the road in Game 6.

The Capitals will play the Pittsburgh Penguins, setting up a marquee matchup of Alex Ovechkin against Sidney Crosby.

Ovechkin had an assist on Backstrom’s second-period goal, which was easily enough against the punchless Flyers.

Michal Neuvirth was again sensational in goal, but the Flyers could not cash in against Holtby, wasting nearly two minutes of a 5-on-3 power play in the second period.

“We sacrificed our body, 5 on 3,” Ovechkin said. “We paid the price, and we won.”

The reward: keeping alive the pursuit of the first Stanley Cup title in franchise history.

“It’s a different group,” Holtby said. “The past is a different regime. We are trying to write our own history.”

Holtby, who had a 19-save shutout in Game 1, was barely tested the last two games. Most of their shots Sunday were from long range, and the Flyers never really attacked Holtby.

Backstrom broke Neuvirth’s shutout streak, which stretched nearly 110 minutes, when he scored on a one-timer just below the circle with 8 minutes 59 seconds left in the second period.

STARS 5, WILD 4 Jason Spezza scored his fourth goal of the series and added three assists, and Dallas needed every last one of them to hold off Minnesota in St. Paul, Minn., to win the first-round series, four games to two.

Jared Spurgeon scored two of Minnesota’s four third-period goals, both on power plays, and the Wild came within a fraction of an inch of tying the game with 34 seconds remaining when Nino Niederreiter whacked at a loose puck in the crease.

Freeze-frame replays showed it in the net but not quite fully across the goal line as it connected with goalie Kari Lehtonen’s right pad, a close call that was upheld on review.

John Klingberg, Patrick Sharp, Jamie Benn and Alex Goligoski also scored for the Stars.

With 24 seconds remaining in a sleepy second period, Benn put the Stars in front, 4-0, with his top-shelf shot. But the Wild were not ready to pack it in, as they proved during 20 torrid minutes.

The Stars advanced in the playoffs for the first time since 2008, moving on to face the winner of the Chicago-St. Louis series, which will go to Game 7 on Monday night.

LECAVALIER ENDS CAREER Los Angeles Kings center Vincent Lecavalier, who led the Tampa Bay Lightning to a Stanley Cup championship in 2004, announced that he was retiring.

Lecavalier, 36, accrued 949 career points in 17 seasons and was the league’s top goal scorer in 2007, with 52 goals in 82 games. He was drafted first over all by the Lightning in 1998.


