


BRISTOL, England — In a crescent of elegant, uniform stone villas in the city of Bristol, in southwest England, sits a grand Victorian home that also bears traces of Regency and Georgian style. The house, which has been recognized by Historic England as being of significant historical interest, dates from about 1850.

One of many illustrious merchant homes in Clifton, a Bristol neighborhood, from the late 18th and 19th centuries, it is on the market for 2.25 million pounds, or $3.25 million, with Knight Frank real estate agency.

Then as now, the area was affluent and prestigious, though that has not consistently been the case, according to Paul Wilson, who owns the house with his wife, Jacqueline.

“Clifton became very decrepit in the 1960s, and most of the houses were rented out by the room,” Mr. Wilson said.

The house, which sprawls over four floors, was a training school for nannies before being turned into apartments.

The Wilsons moved into the top-floor apartment 15 years ago and gradually bought up the other residences.

“Anyone could still afford to live here, then,” Mr. Wilson said. Once they owned the whole building, the couple started converting it back into the 5,200-square-foot single-family home it now is.

“It was a joy for the heritage professionals,” Mr. Wilson added.

False ceilings were removed to reveal original cornicing and roses, partitions were torn down to recreate the large rooms and fireplaces were restored. When the hallway carpet was ripped up, an authentic flagstone floor was discovered underneath.

“These houses are not really ours,” Mrs. Wilson said. “You pour energy into them, and renovate them and make sure they are good for another hundred years.”

The heart of the home is the large kitchen-dining room, which has a fireplace as well as floor-to-ceiling windows opening on to a private patio garden. A small garage for parking is at the end.

Opposite the kitchen, across the entrance hall, is a generously sized formal dining room similar to the living and sitting rooms above. The soaring ceilings, large sash windows and majestic cantilevered staircase embody the enduring appeal of many of these classically designed properties.

The remaining two floors have five bedrooms. Two have en suite bathrooms, while the three on the top floor share a bathroom and are used by the couple’s children. They are grouped around an impressive oval viewing landing crowned by a glass dome that floods the stairwell with light; so though tall and large, the house feels light and airy.

The house overlooks a square with a large tree-lined communal garden; it has a playground area and large lawn and is for the private use of all the residents.

Bristol Zoo, Clifton Downs and Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s renowned Suspension Bridge over the River Avon are all part of the area.

“We are starting to see more Londoners and overseas buyers,” said Tom Hood, managing partner with Hydes, a local real estate agency. Its international airport makes Bristol easy to reach, he added. “We have sold flats to a number of people from Russia and China who have children at Clifton College.”

A vibrant riverside city, Bristol is home to the University of Bristol and The Old Vic theater, as well as the graffiti artist Banksy and about 19,000 businesses. In 2014 it was voted the best city in which to live in Britain.

According to recent research by Knight Frank, average property prices in Bristol rose 6.6 percent in 2015, more than double the wider country market’s average growth of 3.1 percent.

In 2017, the main railway line between Bristol and London will be electrified, reducing travel time to the capital to 80 minutes.


