


Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in a new version of the Playlist column. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like this format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.

It is the condition of extreme celebrity to be filmed, constantly. There are videos that constitute your work, videos filmed by friends, videos surreptitiously filmed by others, videos you’ve filmed yourself. To not be documented is, somehow, to not exist.

So it’s odd that the video for “Company,” the tepid Justin Bieber club ballad, feels so pasted-together and like an afterthought. A modern version of the classic hair-metal road/tour video, it’s an amalgam of clips of Justin Doing Things. There’s performing, of course — snippets of recent appearances on the “Purpose” tour, one of the most fascinating and tragic live arena shows in recent memory, though little of that pathos is conveyed in these clips — but also sleeping in a van, jumping on a van, skateboarding, riding on a yacht, walking with Floyd Mayweather Jr., modeling Calvin Klein undergarments and seemingly hurling an iPhone into the desert. Symbolism!

Mostly, Mr. Bieber looks tired, no matter the milieu. Such is the breadth of his fame that he’s free to mope anywhere in the world he so chooses. He looks the happiest when making small gestures of authority-tweaking. With that in mind, if you would like to learn more about Mr. Bieber, perhaps check out a different video, also released this week, of him in a street fight outside a hotel in Cleveland, in which he displays more raw emotion than in the whole “Company” clip. JON CARAMANICA

A 1960s-soul backbeat, a laconic electric rhythm guitar, some pinging keyboard tones and backup voices going “ooh ooh” are all Esmé Patterson needs in “No River” as she measures herself against the vast, impersonal powers of Nature — a theme she often returns to on her new album, “We Were Wild.” “I can’t run forever — I’m no river,” she sings, and later, “I can’t sit still forever — I’m no mountain.” Instead, she has consciousness: “I know that I’m alive,” she insists. “I’m human.” Her voice, slender but determined, insists that the tradeoff is worthwhile. JON PARELES

A young singer and cellist from North Carolina now based in Brooklyn, Kelsey Lu makes slow and spacious music, confronting you with lingering tones and vocal melodies that ascend and dive. She recently made an EP called “Church,” to be released July 9, which was recorded in Holy Family Roman Catholic Church in Greenpoint. The first song from it, “Dreams,” begins with multiple, echoed cello lines, some of them moving in contrary motion, continuing until halfway through a seven-and-a-half-minute song, when a steady pulse begins, made by finger on cello string. Her voice enters; she’s singing about the Holy Ghost. Fair enough. But then she starts to sing pop lyrics in the same measured, intense manner: “I know you’re no good but I can’t get enough of you.” On Thursday she’ll perform a solo concert at that same church; tickets are available here. BEN RATLIFF

Like Juan Atkins with techno and João Gilberto with bossa nova, the southern California band the Descendents have architect status in their field. Thirty-four years ago, on the record “Milo Goes to College,” they figured out the sardonic blueprint for pop-punk, in short and tuneful songs with bass lines running wide patterns. They’re only together on and off anymore, but they’ve got a new record coming out in July, “Hypercaffium Spazzinate,” and its first single, “Victim of Me,” came out this week: excited, self-analytical, middle-aged realism compressed into 97 seconds. BEN RATLIFF

Are we at the freestyle revival yet? That fleet music — a fixture of mid-to-late-1980s New York dance floors, and one of the country’s underappreciated Latin sounds — often feels relegated to reunion shows. But on “Crybaby,” the singer-songwriter-producer Abra has found a modern way in. Those jaunty synths! That clattering, crisp percussion! Sweet vocals about dark things that sigh and fade! “Crybaby” has it all, while retaining a touch of the cloudiness that’s always been a part of her work, all the way back to when she was recording goth-folk Gucci Mane covers. J.C.

Since the early 1960s, the Brazilian singer Elza Soares has used her gritty voice like a jazz trumpet tone to scuff up samba songs. After a circuitous career traveling from popular to cult status, she can use it in different contexts and with different connotations. “A Mulher do Fim do Mundo” (“The Woman at the End of the World”), produced by Guilherme Kastrup and featuring a slate of São Paolo musicians including Kiko Dinucci of the excellent band Metá Metá, is up-to-date in sound: strings, electronics, dissonant electric guitars, Afro-Brazilian grooves, a raw samba-rock band. And it’s universal and tragic in its lyrics: death, domestic abuse, drug addiction, racism, deep-blood family ties. The album’s title track, written for her by Romulo Froes and streamable at the Soundcloud page of the Brazilian label Mais Um Discos, is about a woman who lasts righteously — a witness, a celebrant, a mode of resistance. It doesn’t sound like an aging artist of stature airlifted in to avant-gardism: Ms. Soares is pushing as hard as anyone else. B.R.


