


Through the crackle of an old phonograph recording, the tenor’s voice sounds musky and slightly metallic, but the German words ring out sharp and clear. The soprano’s tone is warm, opulent and heady.

I am listening to the love duet from Act II of Wagner’s “Tristan and Isolde” in a 1943 recording, with Max Lorenz and Paula Buchner as the doomed lovers. Someone put up a clip of it on YouTube, where it has drawn more than 16,000 clicks and many comments from opera buffs debating the relative merits of wartime Wagnerians. Links beckon — to other “Tristan” excerpts, to a documentary about Lorenz, to a clip of Prince playing “Summertime.” The page is a portal inviting the viewer to roam freely through time and space.

For me, it is a portal into my family’s history, to a cold April Sunday in 1944 in the Buchenwald concentration camp. My grandfather, Hermann da Fonseca-Wollheim, a doctor and at the time a political prisoner, had recently been transferred there from a Gestapo prison in Hamburg, where he was interrogated about what authorities suspected were subversive views. Six weeks later he was dead of acute dysentery, one of more than 50,000 who perished there and one of the millions of victims commemorated on Yom Hashoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day, on Thursday.

My grandfather wrote a letter that day to his wife, Käthe, in which he tried to reassure her that he was in good health, enjoying the fresh air — a reference, most likely to his work in the camp’s quarries — and the “splendid” views of the Harz Mountains.

The letter, which is now in the possession of my uncle, is fascinating from a different angle. On the 70th anniversary of the end of the war in Europe last year, my husband, a political commentator for The Wall Street Journal, used it as a point of departure to interview my father — who turned 11 on V-E Day — about his wartime memories and to reflect the tensions facing 21st-century Europe.

But what caught my attention, and set me on the search that brought me to the vintage recording of “Tristan,” was a single line in the letter. “Tonight at six I will listen to the Furtwängler concert on the radio,” my grandfather wrote to my grandmother. “Why don’t you, too, turn on the radio on Sundays, so we can think of each other fervently.”

What was the concert that was broadcast that day? What music might have served as a bridge between a bunk in Block 59 and the bourgeois living room of his family’s Hamburg villa, where my grandmother now did her best to raise two young boys on her own amid frequent air raids?

I was moved by the notion of music as a kind of telepathic conduit between two lovers separated by fate. In some ways, it seemed so modern, similar to the late-night requests to radio stations for songs dedicated to faraway sweethearts. Today, in the age of streaming, on-demand listening, that sense of music as a public space, capable of sheltering secret trysts, seems to be vanishing.

I haven’t been able to find out whether the speaker system at Buchenwald, normally used for barking out orders, really was given over to classical-music broadcasts every Sunday evening. The Buchenwald survivor and author Jorge Semprún, who wrote a memoir of his time in the camp, mentions the concert broadcasts but suggests that they were subject to the whims of the guards.

As for the program, I received answers from Jörg Wyrschowy, an archivist at the German Broadcasting Archive in Frankfurt. What my grandfather referred to as the “Furtwängler Concert” was in fact a weekly classical-music hour featuring an array of ensembles and conductors that was broadcast, at Goebbels’s behest, beginning in 1944. Each one opened with a fanfare from the last movement of Bruckner’s Third Symphony, signaling, in the words of one radio host at the time, “the fighting spirit of the German people and its attachment to the indelible musical masterworks of its culture.”

A glance at the program for spring 1944 shows that these “indelible” masterworks included operetta arias as well as Bach’s St. Matthew’s Passion, waltzes and that second act from “Tristan,” which aired the day of my grandfather’s letter.

Did Käthe receive it in time for the following Sunday’s broadcast of Bruckner’s Fourth, with its wistful opening horn solo? If so, did it remind both of the pilgrimage they had made to Bruckner’s grave in the St. Florian Monastery?

My grandfather, who spent lavishly on books and music, owned a fine gramophone and a large collection of recordings. In the early years of their marriage, he and Käthe hosted listening parties for their friends at which guests seated themselves on a staircase while Hermann nimbly flipped records: One side could hold only about eight minutes of music. They must have created a deep stock of shared musical memories in my grandparents.

Were Hermann and Käthe able to listen to the following weeks’ broadcasts of music by Mozart, Handel and Strauss? And if so how did the joyous “Hallelujah” chorus from Handel’s “Messiah” resonate with the starving and terrified inmates of Buchenwald?

On April 17 of this year, my uncle and two of my cousins attended a rededication ceremony at the Buchenwald memorial, where a new permanent exhibition was unveiled. Among the individual stories singled out for display is that of my grandfather. Apparently the reason for his arrest — the word scrawled on his police file — was so unusual that it caught the eye of researchers. Ausländerfreundlichkeit was the verdict that would ultimately carry a death sentence: “friendliness to foreigners.”

As a doctor (whose Jewish grandfather made him, in the eyes of the Nazis, a “second-degree mongrel”) he had treated Ukrainian forced laborers employed in a nearby factory, showing them great kindness and teaching himself Russian to better care for them. “One day we’ll all have to learn Russian,” he was overheard saying — a dangerously defeatist statement and possibly, my grandmother speculated, the cause for his arrest. The Gestapo would also find a note one of the Ukrainian women had written for Hermann attesting to his kindness, to show in event of a Red Army victory.

Among those acts of kindness: sliding open the doors that connected his medical studio to his living room and playing classical records for his Ukrainian patients, in the belief that, however temporarily, music could offer some solace.


