


The former N.B.A. forward Kermit Washington faces allegations that he embezzled about a half-million dollars in charitable donations meant to help the needy in Africa.

An indictment unsealed Wednesday alleged that Washington took money that had been donated to a charity he founded, Project Contact Africa, and used it to pay for jewelry and vacations, among other things. He was charged with counts including interfering with internal revenue laws.

Washington was charged in an indictment filed in Kansas City, Mo., on Monday. He was arrested Tuesday in Los Angeles, said Tammy Dickinson, the United States attorney for the western district of Missouri.

A lawyer who prosecutors said would be representing Washington did not return a message seeking comment.

Washington, 64, played in the N.B.A. in the 1970s and 1980s for several teams, including the Los Angeles Lakers, the Boston Celtics and the San Diego Clippers. He is perhaps best known for, as a Laker, throwing a punch that fractured the face of the Houston Rockets’ Rudy Tomjanovich during a game in 1977.

STAYING ANOTHER YEAR Kris Jenkins, who made a buzzer-beating 3-pointer in Villanova’s championship victory over North Carolina, and guard Josh Hart will return to the program next season rather than leave for the N.B.A., which had set Wednesday as the deadline for players to decide if they would enter its draft.

The Rangers rookie Nomar Mazara, the youngest player in the majors, hit the longest home run of the season as Texas beat the visiting Los Angeles Angels, 15-9.

Mazara, 21, drove a pitch high into the second deck in right field at Globe Life Park, a ball that would have traveled an estimated 491 feet had it landed unimpeded.

Rougned Odor, Mazara’s Texas teammate, drove in three runs in what may have been his last game before a suspension for punching Toronto’s Jose Bautista during a bench-clearing brawl on May 15. A decision on his appeal is expected before Friday’s game against Pittsburgh.

ARRIETA REMAINS UNBEATEN Jake Arrieta allowed four runs for the first time in nearly a year but still captured his ninth win of the season as the Chicago Cubs won at St. Louis, 9-8.

Kris Bryant hit a three-run homer, and Jason Heyward and Ben Zobrist each drove in two runs in support of Arrieta, who became the second nine-game winner in the majors, after the Chicago White Sox’ Chris Sale.

BRADLEY’S STREAK CONTINUES Jackie Bradley Jr. extended his major-league-best hitting streak to 29 games, and Boston beat visiting Colorado, 10-3, as the Red Sox won their fourth straight. The Red Sox have scored eight or more runs 10 times in their last 14 home games.

And Bradley is not the only hot player for Boston: Xander Bogaerts homered to put his hitting streak at 18 games.

AROUND THE MAJORS Brandon Crawford hit a run-scoring single with two outs in the 10th inning, and the surging San Francisco Giants beat the visiting San Diego Padres, 4-3, for their 13th win in 14 games. Matt Duffy singled off Brad Hand (1-2) with one out and advanced on a wild pitch one out later before Crawford drove a pitch past Padres center fielder Jon Jay. • Cleveland roughed up a top White Sox pitcher for the second straight game and beat host Chicago, 4-3. A day after sending Chris Sale to his first loss after a 9-0 start, the Indians scored three runs and had five hits against Joel Quintana, who had entered the game with a 1.98 E.R.A. • Andres Blanco stole home, and Philadelphia avoided a sweep by winning at Detroit, 8-5. • Miguel Sano hit a go-ahead two-run homer, and host Minnesota staved off another series sweep by beating Kansas City, 7-5.

The New England Patriots have joined Tom Brady’s court fight against the N.F.L. and Commissioner Roger Goodell for the first time.

In an eight-page friend-of-the-court brief filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, the Patriots said they “stand to lose their All-Pro quarterback for 25 percent of the upcoming regular season based on a severely flawed process” undertaken by the league in its so-called Deflategate investigation.

Brady was suspended last May for four games for what Goodell said was a scheme to use improperly inflated footballs in the A.F.C. championship game in January 2015. The Patriots went on to win the Super Bowl.

The suspension was overturned by a federal judge before the 2015 regular season, but a circuit court panel ruled, 2-1, last month that Goodell had been within the rights granted to him by the collective bargaining agreement.

BILLS’ G.M. SOFTENS REMARKSBuffalo Bills General Manager Doug Whaley said he had used “a poor choice of words” in saying Tuesday that he did not think football was intended to be played by humans. Whaley, a former college safety, said he had been trying to make the point that football is a physical game and that injuries are a part of it.

All tickets for Sunday’s 100th running of the Indianapolis 500 have been sold, and for only the third time in history, local fans will be able to watch the race live on television.

The race has traditionally been televised on tape delay in the Indianapolis television market. It has not been televised live locally since the 1950s.

Between 350,000 and 375,000 spectators are expected.

Darlington Nagbe scored his first international goal on a volley in the 90th minute, and the United States beat Ecuador, 1-0, in an exhibition in Frisco, Tex., before next month’s Copa América.

Bobby Wood headed a pass to Nagbe, who controlled the ball with his chest and scored on a right-footed shot from 8 yards.

The United States will play an exhibition against Bolivia on Saturday and then open the Copa América against Colombia on June 3.


