


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

Last night’s Tonys were just a delight. In addition to of course activating my “Hamilton” pleasure receptors, the show included both a knockout opening number and my most favorite thing of all: Winners who have clearly prepared acceptance speeches. I cried the entire time. Plus the cast of “The Humans” took its Tony on the subway!

We’re trying another new format in today’s newsletter, and I’d love to hear how you like it: Do you prefer the shows broken down by time commitment? By day of the week? By general vibe? Or some other way? I’d also love to hear if you’ve named a pet after a favorite TV character. No particular reason, I just like pets. Team Watching and I eagerly await your responses: watching@nytimes.com.

“Spartan: Ultimate Team Challenge” (Monday, 10 p.m., NBC)

Watch if you like “American Ninja Warrior,” or fitness contest shows in general.

I still can’t believe NBC couldn’t make that “American Gladiators” reboot work a few years ago, because apparently our society’s appetite for absurd competitive feats of strength has only grown. Here’s “Spartan,” as in the company that stages obstacle course races for the ostentatiously athletic, joining several very similar series. It’s pretty good, if you’re looking for viewing where ordinary (if very fit) citizens throw spears, lift logs, slither through mud, etc.

Shows like this work best when they depict the competition and become unbearable when they’re just talking-head confessionals, contrived spiels and schlocky backstories that scam us into caring. “Spartan” is on the correct side of this divide, focusing the vast majority of its energy on the grueling physical processes and very little on the frankly worthless “we can all live our dreams!” sidebars.

Also this week on broadcast:

“BrainDead,” from the creators of “The Good Wife,” is a zombie show (sort of) and a political show. (Read The New York Times review here.) The first episode can’t quite figure itself out, and if you have any aversion to creepy-crawly bug stuff, avoid this. I’m not ready to write it off completely, but this was not the answer to my prayers for “more ‘Good Wife.’” (Monday, 10 p.m., CBS)

“Uncle Buck” is not something that needs another TV adaptation — there was an attempt back in 1990, too — but here we are anyway. Mike Epps is tremendously appealing as Uncle Buck himself, but the show is otherwise nothing too special. Yes, there are giant pancakes, thank god. (Tuesday, 9 p.m., ABC)

“Animal Kingdom,” Tuesday, 9 p.m., TNT

Watch if you like early “Sons of Anarchy,” unsettling family dramas and stories of the seedy side of California.

Based on the 2010 Australian film of the same name, “Animal Kingdom” moves its action to Southern California and swaps in a silky Ellen Barkin for Jacki Weaver as the matriarch of a scuzzy crime family. There are a lot of shows about scuzzy crime families, but “Kingdom” is a solid enough contribution to the genre, complete with incestuous vibes, dirtbags throwing pool parties and the idea that gunplay is what makes one “a man.”

The show was originally developed for Showtime, and it feels that way — maybe a little more style than substance, but the style’s so titillating it might not matter. Barkin’s the draw here, with additional intrigue from Scott Speedman and Shawn Hatosy.

Also this week on basic cable:

The five-part documentary “O.J.: Made in America” continues on ESPN; it’s unbelievably good, particularly the finale. (Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday; 9 p.m., ESPN)

“Another Period,” one of the goofiest shows on TV, returns for its second season. (Catch up for free with Season 1.) The show combines the conventions of the modern-day Bravo-style reality show with the setting of a “Downton Abbey”–esque manor. Ridiculousness abounds. (Wednesday, 10 p.m., Comedy Central)

“Mr. Robot,” now on Amazon Prime

Watch if you like “Black Mirror,” psychological thrillers, stories about technology and social commentary.

Last summer’s surprise breakout is finally available to stream. The second season comes out July 13, so you have plenty of time to watch the 10 hourlong episodes — though try to watch them when you have time to concentrate.

Our hero is Elliot, a hoodie-clad cybersecurity expert. He joins a group called fsociety, in which like-minded hackers strategize ways to take down the massive E Corp — or as Elliot calls it, Evil Corp. There’s a lot of (accurate) technobabble, but a background in data security is not necessary.

The most interesting parts of “Mr. Robot” are the ways it teases its audience with Elliot’s unreliability as a narrator and its aggressive anti-consumerism stances/general distaste for capitalism. There’s a slight dip around Episode 6, but things pick back up significantly after that.

I’m generally not much of a spoilerphobe, but I’ll say that “Mr. Robot” works better if you go in totally unspoiled about plot developments. Google very very carefully.

“Orange Is the New Black,” Season 4 (Friday, Netflix)

Watch if you already know and love “OITNB.”

Back to Litchfield we go for another season of Netflix’s fantastic ensemble dramedy. If you never watched the show, definitely start at the beginning — the characters’ personal histories matter a great deal. Earlier seasons suggested that the show could work even without Piper, and this season she’s definitely less present than before.

Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee, Thursday

Jerry Seinfeld’s indulgent but sometimes illuminating web series returns with six more episodes and guests Judd Apatow, Margaret Cho, Lorne Michaels, John Oliver and J.B. Smoove. This week’s season premiere is with Jim Gaffigan.

Amazon’s new pilots, Friday

Block out an hour on Friday to watch Amazon’s pilot “The Interestings,” based on Meg Wolitzer’s book. It’s about a group of friends who meet as teenagers at an arts summer camp and grow up messy and complicated. Lauren Ambrose (“Six Feet Under”) stars, and if you like relationship-oriented dramas — and boy, do I — you are in for a treat. There’s also “The Last Tycoon,” starring Matt Bomer (“White Collar”), and based on F. Scott Fitzgerald’s final work.

“Game of Thrones”: “The larger issue is that the show burned a lot of calories over the past couple of seasons on Arya’s mostly uncaptivating assassin training, only to have her arrive where we expected her to: reaffirming her sense of self and off in search of greater adventures.”

The Tonys: “The relentless march of ‘Hamilton’ was the news, but Mr. Miranda’s megahit was overshadowed by performances from other shows.”

“Veep”: “International diplomacy aside, in sitcom terms, ‘Camp David’ is a classic story of ‘two dates on the same night.’”

“Silicon Valley”: “In the end, though, the episode is another affirmation of friendship as a defining value of Pied Piper.”

“Outlander”: “It’s really Jamie, Murtagh and the other men of ‘Outlander’ that give this episode its power.”


