


BALTIMORE — The Yankees have traveled almost a decade with Alex Rodriguez on his current contract, weaving through dark corners and over rugged terrain. His production and priorities have shifted through the years, but Rodriguez has been a reliable attraction, a reason for fans to show up or tune in.

Even this season, with the Yankees stuck in last place in the American League East, Rodriguez commands attention. He struggled early and then started to hit, pulling within eight home runs of 700 for his career.

The meaning of those homers is a tiresome topic. No matter how a hitter does it, smashing 692 homers stamps him as a slugger who will never be forgotten. Contextualize A-Rod however you like, but never deny his star power.

The Yankees, and most of their fans, made peace with Rodriguez last season. He returned from a yearlong drug suspension and belted 33 homers, helping the team to a wild-card berth. Humble, courteous, grateful — name an adjective you would want from a chastened celebrity, and it applied to Rodriguez. Once scrubbed from the team’s giveaway calendar, Rodriguez now has a replica-bat day in his honor at Yankee Stadium.

The first 10,000 guests age 14 and younger will still receive their A-Rod bat at the Stadium on May 14. But Rodriguez will not be using a real one in the game that day. He was placed on the disabled list Wednesday with a strained right hamstring.

“I can’t think of a worse time to go on the D.L.,” Rodriguez said. “Obviously, the offense has been struggling, and I take a lot of pride and responsibility in making sure that our offense plays well. I talked to the team yesterday: There’s no reason why we can’t score five runs per nine innings. That should be a good par for us.”

The Yankees surpassed that standard on Wednesday, beating the Baltimore Orioles by 7-0 to improve their record to 9-16. But they ranked 26th in runs per game before that, at 3.42, and Rodriguez was hitting just .194.

In his last six games, though, he had gone 7 for 19 (.368) with three homers. It was a small sample, to be sure, but a flat-lining patient can find hope in any blip.

“Usually you have two or three guys that rotate and carry the team,” first baseman Mark Teixeira said. “Take your No. 1 hitter, your No. 3 hitter and your No. 5 hitter — if they’re all doing well and a couple of guys are getting on in between, you’re scoring five or six runs a game. Well, none of us are doing that right now. You have a big team slump.”

Rodriguez understands his standing in that framework. After starting last season not knowing what to expect from himself, he was again a force in the lineup. The Yankees, whose left-leaning order faces more infield shifts than any other team, need Rodriguez’s thump.

That is the duty he signed up for after his last most valuable player season, in 2007, when the Yankees brought him back for 10 years and $275 million.

“I enjoy it,” Rodriguez said. “I mean, the thing is, it’s twofold: No. 1, I’m in the middle of the lineup, but I’m also one of the few right-handed batters, which for our lineup is extremely important, especially with all the lefties that they throw at us.”

The Yankees’ bigger problem is not losing Rodriguez, who faded down the stretch after turning 40 in July. It is relying so much on him in the first place.

It is hard to ask Rodriguez, or the Yankees’ over-30 free-agent power hitters — Teixeira, Carlos Beltran and Brian McCann — to be more than they are at this stage of their careers. What they need are homegrown hitters who provide prime-years production at low cost. They have none.

The injury to Rodriguez gave the Yankees a free shot at injecting new life into the lineup. They resisted the old (Nick Swisher) and the new (Aaron Judge) in favor of another relief pitcher, the left-hander James Pazos. The middling rotation is a pressing problem, too.

“We believe in them,” Manager Joe Girardi said of his hitters. “I’m not saying we’re going to have 13 pitchers the whole time, but it’s what we decided to do.”

Without Rodriguez as the designated hitter, the Yankees can put other veterans there and use Aaron Hicks more often in the outfield. That improves their defense and gives Hicks, who is batting .067 with no homers, a chance to find his swing.

Learning more about Hicks, a former first-round draft pick who never quite established himself in Minnesota, is the kind of thing the Yankees should be doing now. At 26, he still has the chance to get better. Few other Yankees do.

Finding and developing true offensive stars is difficult, of course. The Yankees never had a chance to draft Bryce Harper, who went first to the Washington Nationals in 2010, or Manny Machado, who went to the Orioles two picks later.

But impact hitters do not always go in the top of Round 1. Mike Trout was drafted 25th over all, Josh Donaldson 48th, Nolan Arenado 59th, Giancarlo Stanton 76th — not to mention the many superstars signed internationally. All teams have access to players like that — Trout, in fact, was chosen in a slot the Yankees abandoned to sign Teixeira — but none of those players are on the team.

So the Yankees are left to absorb a body blow when a 40-year-old designated hitter falls to injury. Rodriguez makes things interesting, and that does count for something. But most of his stature is based on his past. The Yankees need reasons to be excited about the present, and they do not have enough.


