


The Golden State Warriors won 73 of 82 regular-season games this season, never losing back to back. They were the prohibitive favorites for the N.B.A. championship, and the idea of the team dropping a seven-game series in the playoffs seemed impossible to many.

But the impossible may be coming true, as Golden State is down, three games to two, to the Oklahoma City Thunder and facing elimination on Saturday night.

Plenty of athletes and teams have looked like unbeatable Goliaths, only to turn in a result similar to the biblical Goliath. Here are some of them.

Goliath: Ronda Rousey, undefeated champion who had won her previous three bouts in under a minute.

David: Holly Holm, former boxer with two Ultimate Fighting Championship bouts.

Event: U.F.C. women’s bantamweight championship, Melbourne, Australia, Nov. 15, 2015.

The New York Times said before: “Ronda Rousey’s U.F.C. dominance evokes a young Mike Tyson.”

Result: Holm knocked Rousey out in the second round.

The Times said after: “Those who watched it were stunned. Those who read about it the next morning did a double take.”

More upsets: Mike Tyson loses to Buster Douglas, 1990. Jack Dempsey loses to Gene Tunney, 1926.

Goliath: Serena Williams, winner of the previous four Grand Slam events.

David: Roberta Vinci, a 32-year-old who had never made a Grand Slam final.

Event: United States Open semifinal, New York, Sept. 11, 2015.

The Times said before: "Serena will be a particularly heavy favorite in the next round against Roberta Vinci, an unseeded Italian veteran better known for her doubles prowess.”

Result: Vinci won, 2-6, 6-4, 6-4.

The Times said after: “Beyond any reasonable doubt, a gargantuan upset.”

More upsets: Rafael Nadal loses to Robin Soderling, 2009. Steffi Graf loses to Lori McNeil, 1994.

Goliath: The New England Patriots, the first 16-0 regular-season N.F.L. team.

David: The Giants, a 10-6 wild-card team.

Event: Super Bowl XLII, Glendale, Ariz., Feb. 3, 2008.

The Times said before: “With a victory, the Patriots will take their place alongside other landmark sports triumphs, like the boxer Rocky Marciano’s spotless 49-0 career record or the U.C.L.A. basketball teams of the 1960s.”

Result: The Giants won, 17-14.

The Times said after: “One of the greatest upsets in Super Bowl history.”

More upsets: Colts lose to Jets, 1969. Notre Dame loses to Carnegie Tech (now Carnegie Mellon), 1926.

Goliath: Aleksandr Karelin, three-time Olympic champion and undefeated for 13 years.

David: Rulon Gardner, wrestling in his second major international tournament.

Event: Olympic Greco Roman superheavyweight gold medal match, Sydney, Australia, Sept. 27, 2000.

The Times said before: “There is one dominant wrestler: Aleksandr Karelin, the 286-pound Russian who has won three consecutive gold medals and nine world championships. In his trademark maneuver, he lifts opponents off the ground and throws them over his head.”

Result: Gardner won, 1-0.

The Times said after: “One of the most startling upsets in Olympic wrestling history.”

Another upset: Dan Gable loses to Larry Owings, 1970.

Goliath: The Soviet Union, winner of four straight Olympic gold medals.

David: The United States, a ragtag bunch of college kids.

Event: Olympic medal-round game, Lake Placid, N.Y., Feb. 22, 1980.

The Times said before: “This evening the young Yanks come face to face with the Russians, who walloped them, 10-3, in Madison Square Garden in a pre-Olympics tuneup, the Russians who are unbeaten and considered unbeatable here.”

Result: The Americans won, 4-3.

The Times said after: “One of the most startling and dramatic upsets in Olympic history.”

More upsets: Red Wings lose to Oilers, 2006. Canadiens lose to Maple Leafs, 1945.

Goliath: England, inventor of the game, deigning to appear in its first World Cup.

David: The United States, a ragtag bunch of semipros from a country in which soccer was far off the radar.

Event: World Cup preliminary-round game, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, June 29, 1950.

The Times said before: Nothing. There was no pregame coverage.

Result: The United States won, 1-0.

The Times said after: “It compared with a major league All-Star team being beaten in London by nine part-time English baseball players.” (Associated Press article)

More upsets: France loses to Senegal, 2002. Brazil loses to Uruguay, 1950.

Goliath: Ben Hogan, nine-time major winner.

David: Jack Fleck, winner of only two minor tournaments.

Event: United States Open, San Francisco, June 19, 1955.

The Times said before: “When Hogan learned that Fleck would be his rival in the playoff, he smiled and said, ‘That’s fine.’ ”

Result: Fleck won in the 18-hole playoff, 69-72.

The Times said after: “A man who was practically unknown in the world of sports a few days ago became the United States Open golf champion today.”

More upsets: Tiger Woods loses to Y.E. Yang, 2009. Harry Vardon and Ted Ray lose to Francis Ouimet, 1913.

Goliath: Man o’ War, winner of six of six career races.

David: The aptly named Upset.

Event: Sanford Memorial, Saratoga Springs, N.Y., Aug. 13, 1919.

The Times said before: “It was quite generally conceded that Man o’ War was the best 2-year-old that had been seen this season.”

Result: Man o’ War lost to Upset by half a length, the only loss of his career.

The Times said after: “Though defeated, Man o’ War was not discredited.”

More upsets: Secretariat loses to Onion, 1973. Nijinsky loses to Sassafras, 1970.


