


BASEL, Switzerland — The most talked about installation at the 47th edition of the Art Basel fair, which opened this week in Switzerland and runs through Sunday, could hardly have been a more extreme metaphor for the current trepidation of the art market.

The Belgian artist Hans Op de Beeck’s gray plaster interior, “The Collector’s House,” is a private museum completely covered in what appears to be volcanic ash. It seemed to sum up the market’s uncertainty in the face of political and financial tensions.

“The economy is so volatile, the world so precarious at the moment,” said Arianne Levene, an art consultant in London. “People want to play it safe and buy a solid investment.”

Mr. de Beeck’s walk-in installation was one among a record 88 artworks in the fair’s huge Unlimited project space, which is adjacent to the fair’s main Galleries section. Unlimited’s buyer base, for reasons of scale, tends to be restricted to private and public museums.

“It’s a unique opportunity to present large-scale installations that can’t be presented anywhere else,” said Adrian Turner, a partner at the Marianne Boesky Gallery in New York, one of three dealerships collaborating to present the piece. “Sharing with other galleries helps with the burden of cost and gets more collectors in front of it.” “The Collector’s House” was priced at 750,000 euros, about $820,000, and as of Thursday was still available.

Some eyebrows were raised by the gargantuan scale of some of these Unlimited projects, given the more selective mood in today’s art market. Despite year-on-year totals that were down by as much as 64 percent at last month’s Impressionist, modern and contemporary auctions in New York, works like Frank Stella’s 50-foot-wide “Damascus Gate (Stretch Variation I),” from 1970, sold to an Asian collection on Thursday for $14 million. James Rosenquist’s 46-foot-wide “Four New Clear Women” from 1982 was available for $4 million.

A preponderance of such historical pieces was also noted at Unlimited. “They’re here because of the conservative nature of today’s market,” said Michael Short, an art adviser in Berlin “If you’re going to spend $5 million you want to spend it on something that will get you $5 million back.”

Some significant sales were made after Unlimited’s Monday night preview. Paul McCarthy’s 1994 sculpture “Tomato Head (Green),” presented by Hauser & Wirth and priced at $4.75 million, was bought by an American private collection, and the New York dealer Skarstedt found a home for Mike Kelley’s 50-part work on paper, “Reconstructed History,” from 1989, at $1.5 million.

The Tuesday preview of the main Galleries section, which features 286 exhibitors from 33 countries, was a far more telling indicator of how the world’s leading art dealers are faring in today’s uncertain times. As collectors filed through the rain into the two-floor Messe Basel, it soon became clear that the “primary” trade in new works by contemporary artists and “secondary” re-sales by dealers and auction houses — usually at significantly higher prices — are two distinct markets. Even though visitors were moving with less urgency than they had been in recent years and the lunchtime lines looked shorter, new “primary market’’ pieces by bankable names were selling steadily.

A 2016 “Degenerate Art” abstract by the Romanian-born auction favorite Adrian Ghenie, priced at $460,000, was among the numerous early sales by the Paris dealer Thaddaeus Ropac, helped by the knowledge that a 2014 canvas by Mr. Ghenie sold for $4.5 million at Sotheby’s in February. The Los Angeles, New York and Tokyo gallery Blum & Poe sold the typically stylized Yoshitomo Nara figure painting, “Mia,” also dated 2016, for $700,000.

Chantal Crousel of Paris sold a new Wade Guyton inkjet-on-linen painting of the metal frame of a Marcel Breuer chair the artist owns. This was bought for $600,000 by a French collector. It was one of five new large-scale works offered by different dealers at the fair. In 2014, at the height of the last art market boom, five such Guyton works sold for $350,000 each.

Back then, many collectors and advisers would rush upstairs to the cutting-edge galleries on Art Basel’s first floor to snap up the latest abstracts by artists in their 20s and 30s. But the speculative mania for young abstraction has cooled.

Instead, collectors this year were focusing on work like Rodney Graham’s painstakingly devised 2016 lightbox photograph, “Artist in Artists’ Bar, 1950s,” showing the 67-year-old Vancouver artist sitting pensively in an imaginary bar surrounded by 20th-century modernist abstracts (which he himself had painted). Two of the four examples of this editioned work were sold by New York’s 303 Gallery, priced at $275,000 each, with the remaining two on reserve.

“Basel was more conservative this year both in terms of what people brought and what people were buying,” said Ms. Levene, the London art consultant. “Clients are nervous about buying works by younger artists if they’re not sure where their careers are going.”

Collectors would, however, love to acquire new works by Njideka Akunyili Crosby, but at the moment museums, which dealers regard as the key to building an artist’s long-term reputation, are the only buyers.

Ms. Crosby, 33, is a Los Angeles artist of Nigerian birth who makes large-scale figurative portraits using a range of media on paper. In March, the Whitney Museum of American Art bought a diptych portrait shown by the London dealer Victoria Miro at the Armory Show in New York. Here at Basel, the dealer sold the serene nine-foot-wide portrait of a woman in an interior, “Super Blue Omo,” for an undisclosed five-figure sum to another, as yet undisclosed American institution. Victoria Miro’s co-director, Glenn Scott Wright, said the dealership has a waiting list of 18 museums for examples of Ms. Crosby’s work.

The continuing desirability of new art bought directly from galleries was emphasized on Wednesday in an Art Market Confidence survey published by the London analysts ArtTactic. Based on responses from 122 experts, the survey’s confidence indicator for dealers in the primary market stood at 64, up 32 percent over the past six months, while that for the auction market stood at 42, a decline of 7 percent over the same period.”The market has changed,” said Andrew Fabricant, a partner at the Richard Gray Gallery of Chicago and New York, which was exhibiting at Basel.. “The auction houses have been marketing B-quality works as masterpieces and people are waking up.” But Mr. Fabricant added that the secondary market for works re-offered by dealers has also become more price-sensitive.

A 2014 Rudolf Stingel gold brocade-pattern “wallpaper” painting on his booth priced at $2 million attracted at least 50 inquiries at the Tuesday preview, but no sale by Thursday. Another gold example, but dating from 2004 and almost twice the size, was bought at auction in 2014 for $1.4 million. “Prices will continue to change,” Mr. Fabricant said.

But high quality secondary market works by blue-chip artists were selling at Art Basel, if perceived to be at a fair price. The New York and London dealer Dominique Levy, for example, sold a totally market-fresh white kaolin on pleated canvas “Achrome” by Piero Manzoni from 1958-1959 for just under $7 million. An example of the same size and date sold at auction in February for $8.1 million, according to the Artnet database of salesroom results.

A few booths away on the ground floor, the London dealership Hazlitt Holland-Hibbert sold the 1981 Sean Scully canvas “Enough,” one of the first of the [British] American-based Irish artist’s trademark striped abstracts, to a New York collector for about $ 1million.“There’s a lot going on in the world at the moment, but wealthy collectors have enough money to ride out this situation,” said the gallery’s director, James Holland-Hibbert, who deals almost exclusively in secondary market works. “But they are price-sensitive at the moment. If a good work doesn’t sell you know you’ve just priced it too high.”


