


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Did you read Melissa Clark’s treatise on summer cooking a while back, in which she advised using your grill not just as a place to sear steaks and kebabs and fish, but as an outdoor oven? She has a terrific recipe for grill-roasted chicken with ricotta crostini that goes with it that would be a delight to cook this weekend.

But you can do more than think of your grill as an oven. I sometimes think of it as an outdoor stovetop as well, using it to heat oil in a deep cast-iron frying pan to crisp plump pieces of buttermilk-soaked chicken beneath a crust of flour amped up with spices, salt and pepper: fried chicken for a crowd.

Cooking has loads of recipes for fried chicken, and perhaps one of them will inspire you to cook this weekend. All of us hope so. Lately I’ve been making sure to have a warm bowl of honey mixed with red pepper flakes to drizzle over the meat. And for side dishes, I’m thinking pickleback slaw or potato salad, with macaroni and cheese, with grilled romaine. For dessert, a banana pudding, of course.

So that’s Saturday night. Won’t you join us? Post pictures of your fried chicken feast on social media, using the hashtag #NYTCooking, and we’ll compare notes.

Other recipes on the docket for this weekend include a fresh batch of granola to greet our forthcoming mornings, with yogurt and fresh berries. And, while we’re cooking for the future, we’ll follow Julia Moskin’s lead and cook some recipes for foodstuffs you should make, not buy, chief among them her recipe for mustard-shallot vinaigrette and a batch of her Chinese chili-scallion oil.

Maybe some radish-and-butter sandwiches for lunch on Sunday. Then, for dinner, we’ll make a big bowl of Filipino lugaw, off the recipe Kevin Pang got us from the Chicago diner Uncle Mike’s Place, and call it a weekend.

You can find many more things to cook this weekend on Cooking, of course. It’s smart practice to save the ones you’re interested in cooking to your recipe box, and it’s good behavior to share them with friends and family if you think they may feel the same way.

Now, have you found a recipe you like on a site that isn’t Cooking? Hey, it happens: Here’s Molly Yeh’s recipe for chocolate-chili splatter-paint cake on My Name Is Yeh. You can save recipes from other sites to your Cooking recipe box as well, just as if it were homegrown. Here’s how.

If you run into trouble along the way, either with the technology or the recipes, you can reach us at cookingcare@nytimes.com. (Or you can find me on Twitter and Facebook, Pinterest and Instagram.) This is a service play we’ve got going. We’re here to serve.

Finally, lunchtime’s coming, so why don’t you grab a sandwich and read, or at least look at beautiful things on your screen? Here’s Ashley Powers in The California Sunday Magazine, on the Fort Bragg manhunt back in 2011. Here’s Ben Lerner’s short story, “The Polish Rider,” in The New Yorker. And because it’s his birthday and he would have been 109, here’s a collection of paintings by Fairfield Porter. Have a great weekend.


