


Abby Hannah Volin and Max Samuel Polonsky are to be married on Sunday. Rabbi Aaron Alexander will perform the ceremony at Adas Israel in Washington.

The bride, 36, works in Washington on state legislation and policy for the Humane Society of the United States. She graduated from Tufts and received a law degree from Loyola University Chicago.

She is a daughter of Andrea G. Volin and Leonard S. Volin of Potomac, Md. The bride’s father, who is retired, was a senior partner focusing on corporate and banking law at the Washington law firm Housley, Kantarian and Bronstein. Her mother, also retired, was the music teacher at Bannockburn Elementary School in Bethesda, Md.

The groom, 34, is a lawyer in the trading and markets division of the Securities and Exchange Commission. He graduated from Brandeis and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.

He is the son of Rita S. Polonsky and Alan H. Polonsky of Cherry Hill, N.J. Both his parents are partners at their law firm in Audubon, N.J., where the groom’s father focuses on Social Security and disability law and the groom’s mother on family law.

The couple met at a mutual friend’s potluck Sabbath dinner in New York in 2008. Although they dated briefly in the summer of 2009, something wasn’t quite right.

“It didn’t stick,” Ms. Volin said. But in 2010, after getting out of a fairly serious relationship, she reached out to Mr. Polonsky

This time, she said, “He stuck.”

After they dated for two years, Ms. Volin got a dream job opportunity in Washington to work at the Humane Society. The couple had a lot to consider. They both had jobs they loved and had planned to move into Mr. Polonsky’s freshly purchased two-bedroom apartment in the West Village, a dream location for them. “It’s like the holy grail of New York living,” Ms. Volin said.

For Mr. Polonsky, moving to be with Ms. Volin was a no-brainer. “Sometimes you need to make a move,” he said. “I was following her for love.”

They dated long distance for eight months while Mr. Polonsky looked for a job in Washington, traveling there every other weekend to be with Ms. Volin.

Once he finally found a job and moved, he and Ms. Volin focused on getting acclimated with their new life together. But as newness became routine, Ms. Volin learned she had stage-one breast cancer.

“It was pretty devastating,” Mr. Polonsky said. “I never had any doubt that I would be her man and be who she needed. You can’t let yourself doubt.”

Her partner’s positive attitude constantly surprised her. She asked if he dreaded coming home from work to someone who was “cranky and bald” from the drugs, and he said he loved to get there and be there for her.

“He was my rock through all of this,” she said. “It wasn’t a fun time.”

After several rounds of chemotherapy and a mastectomy, Ms. Volin’s cancer went into remission in January 2015. Nine months later, Mr. Polonsky proposed on the balcony of their apartment. He was too nervous to remove the ring (which he bought before the cancer diagnosis) from his pocket, and it was her turn to be his helper, taking it out herself.

The couple has bought a home in the Takoma neighborhood of Washington that is a real fixer-upper. “Everyone was warning us about how hard it is to renovate a house,” Ms. Volin said.

She has reason for being confident that they can handle it.

“I think everything has its unique challenges,” she said. “We’ve shown that we’re a really strong unit and that whatever obstacle that is in front of us, we will be able to overcome.”


