


James Blake’s third album, “The Colour in Anything,” is rainy-day music in excelsis. It is a protracted, unresolved, feeling of inward emotion, demanding that you notice its small details. It’s all detail, really.

Mr. Blake came out of English dubstep in 2009, and moved quickly toward a slow and lonely model of voice-keyboard-and-laptop songwriting. His music has always had stripes of R&B, descending in blurry ways from Stevie Wonder, D’Angelo and Joni Mitchell, with snipped, repeating loops and digital stuttering. The model has grown modestly, but it has grown. Here he is still working mostly alone, with some production help from Rick Rubin. Frank Ocean and Justin Vernon, a.k.a. Bon Iver, two other artists given to introspection, each contribute songwriting to the record. Mr. Blake has worked a smart array of subtle variations into his sound: delicate, high-voiced, musically spacious to the point of near-transparency, ebb-tide to the point of miasma.

“The Colour in Anything” grows self-pitying, almost maudlin, in ways Mr. Blake has managed to avoid in the past simply by using more elusive lyrical metaphors. It is also unreasonably long: a little over an hour and a quarter. The spell breaks long before it’s over, even if it returns near the end for “Always,” the album’s vaguest and possibly best track.

In other ways its timing is exquisite: Released online Thursday, the record appears less than two weeks after Beyoncé’s “Lemonade,” which introduced Mr. Blake to much of the wider world through his written and sung contributions to the songs “Pray You Catch Me” and “Forward.” (And two-and-a-half years after Kanye West declared Mr. Blake his favorite artist in a radio interview.)

Within the record’s general emotion are a few specific concerns, expressed in word and sound. The most obvious is vanished love. In many of the lyrics, Mr. Blake’s persona focuses on an unrecoverable romantic past; he can see it but he can’t connect with it. (“It’s sad that you’re no longer her,” he sings in “Points.”) And he redoubles the notion of lagging behind the present by lagging radically behind the beat. It’s a common device at which he’s unusually adept, and the softness of his attack — the floppy, spongy, slightly delayed keyboard chords you hear in a piano loop during “Radio Silence” — is an ace up his sleeve. He can do that for years. It will always work.

Mr. Blake’s other ace is his falsetto range, which he uses for easily 70 percent of his singing. It’s vulnerable and pretty — especially when he draws out a vowel in a dry, pained vibrato — but what does it signify? In Nathaniel Mackey’s 1986 novel, “Bedouin Hornbook,” the character N. writes a letter about Al Green’s falsetto, musing about “the dislocated African’s pursuit of a meta-voice.” A voice like Mr. Green’s, the narrator continues, “bears the weight of a gnostic, transformative desire to be done with the world. By this I mean the deliberately forced, deliberately ‘false’ voice we get from someone like Al Green creatively hallucinates a ‘new world,’ indicts the more insidious falseness of the world as we know it.”

Mr. Green sings a lot about joy, and so for Mr. Mackey to interpret his falsetto as a desire to be done with the world, or to hallucinate a new one, is a great act of critical interpretation; it discovers a deep meaning. For anyone to interpret Mr. Blake’s falsetto that way would be a truism. He’s telling you as much in his lyrics. “I hope my life is no sign of the times,” he sings in “I Hope My Life (1-800 Mix).” “I’m not living here/I’m not living here anymore,” he sings in “Put That Away and Talk to Me.” He is abstracted: floating, worried, not part of things. (There’s an unintentionally funny moment in “Points” in which you hear the distant sound of an air horn: There’s a dance party somewhere. Mr. Blake hasn’t been invited!)The overriding notion in Mr. Blake’s music is that of living outside of time. He wants to connect but can’t. This notion lies on the surface; there’s little deeper meaning. This record is an achievement of manner and the songwriting process. But in a strange way, it undercuts its own possibilities.


