


Meghan Leah Murphy, the daughter of Geri L. Smith and Thomas F. Murphy Jr. of Washington, was married June 18 to Trevor Morehead Kempner, a son of Katheryn C. Patterson and Thomas L. Kempner Jr. of New York. Madalyn Ciocca McCaleb, a friend of the groom’s mother who became a minister with the American Marriage Ministries for the occasion, officiated at the Crystal Springs Estate, an event space in St. Helena, Calif.

The couple met at Yale, from which they graduated.

Ms. Murphy, 29, who will keep her name, received an M.B.A. from Harvard in May. In September, she is to begin work as a project manager for global retail expansion at Apple in Cupertino, Calif.

Her father is a principal banking specialist with the International Finance Corporation, a part of the World Bank in Washington, where he manages on-site appraisals of its investments in financial institutions in developing countries. Her mother is a principal communications specialist for the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington.

Mr. Kempner, 28, is a law clerk in Boston for Judge Douglas P. Woodlock of the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts. In November, he is to begin work as an associate in the litigation department of the San Francisco law firm Cooley. He received a law degree from Stanford.

His mother, who retired as a partner in the New York law firm Coudert Brothers, is the vice chairwoman of the boards of the Juilliard School and the Roundabout Theater Company, both in New York. She is also a trustee of the American Museum of Natural History. His father is a founder and the managing partner in Davidson Kempner Capital Management, an investment management firm in New York. He is the chairman of the Central Park Conservancy in New York, and is on the boards of the Harvard Management Company in Boston, which oversees the endowment and financial assets of Harvard University, and Harlem Village Academies, a network of five charter schools in New York.

The groom is a grandson of the late Nan Kempner, the New York socialite.


