


The characters in Kelly Reichardt’s movies are often lost in space, their lives on earth notwithstanding. The unmoored loners who populate her movies are isolated even in groups or pairs. It’s an existential condition evident as early as her first feature, “River of Grass” (1994), restored and out on disc from Oscilloscope.

Ms. Reichardt, now in her early 50s, is regarded as a leading American independent filmmaker, but early on her career stalled: There were 12 years between her first film and its follow-up, the rueful bromance “Old Joy.” Subsequent films include the heart-rending girl-and-dog story “Wendy and Lucy” (2008) and the wagon-train western “Meek’s Cutoff” (2010), both with Michelle Williams; “Night Moves” (2013), about a cadre of eco-terrorists; and “Certain Women” (2016), which, like “River of Grass,” had its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival.

While all of Ms. Reichardt’s features through “Night Moves” could be named after the Talking Heads song “Road to Nowhere,” “River of Grass” is the most provocatively negative of the lot. It’s an action movie about things that don’t really happen, centered on a character, a lonely Florida stay-at-home mom, Cozy (Lisa Bowman), who leaves everything behind and winds up in the same place. In one of the movie’s understated jokes, a purloined police revolver that motivates the plot is randomly returned to the exact spot where it was first found.

When “River of Grass” was shown at Sundance in 1994, Ms. Reichardt and her associates described it as “a love story without the love, a murder mystery without the murder, a road movie that never gets on the road.” Back then, “River of Grass” was overshadowed by the festival’s two great crowd-pleasers, Rose Troche’s lesbian romance “Go Fish” and Kevin Smith’s slacker comedy “Clerks.” Today those films feel dated, while “River of Grass” seems a small classic.

The film is semiautobiographical. Cozy is approximately Ms. Reichardt’s age and, like her, was born into a family of police officers living on the asphalt edge of what was once the Everglades. Cozy is also deeply alienated, although in that she is not alone. Her morose father misplaces his gun; it’s found by a neighborhood slacker who gives it to an even more shambolic character, Lee (the filmmaker Larry Fessenden), a 30-ish ne’er-do-well living with his grandmother.

Drifting out of her domestic routine, Cozy meets Lee in a low-rent cocktail lounge and accepts his invitation to go pool hopping. A befuddled homeowner appears; the gun goes off. Panicked, the newly established outlaw couple take it on the lam, holing up in a ratty motel until their money runs out and they are reduced to sleeping in their car.

That’s pretty much that. Excitement is generated by Ms. Reichardt’s comic lack of affect as well as her feel for landscape and underlying formalism. The compositions are deliberate and often symmetrical; camera movement is minimal.

“River of Grass” has a deadpan quality suggestive of Jim Jarmusch’s “Stranger Than Paradise” (1984) — which also featured Florida locations. But where Mr. Jarmusch is a connoisseur of bleakness, Ms. Reichardt makes her artfully banal terrain of laundromats, convenience stores and cloverleaf highways seem brain-numbingly oppressive.

Whether she loved or loathed her native territory, Ms. Reichardt never again used Florida as a location. Regional with a vengeance, “River of Grass” is both an introduction and a kiss-off.

As “Stranger Than Paradise” created a tradition for “River of Grass,” so Mr. Jarmusch drew on the early films of Wim Wenders, most obviously those just packaged by Criterion as “The Road Trilogy”: “Alice in the Cities” (1974), “Wrong Move” (1975) and “Kings of the Road” (1976).

Mr. Wenders has made substantial films since then, but these three low-budget movies — produced in rapid succession before he turned 31 — would confirm his reputation as a major European filmmaker. All three are characterized by a mood of free-floating homesickness, as well as the interplay of German anomie and American popular culture; all of them star the craggy, bemused Rüdiger Vogler, feature Mr. Wenders’s wife at the time, Lisa Kreuzer (sometimes billed as Elisabeth Kreuzer), and show a remarkable eye for landscape.

The beginning of “Alice in the Cities,” shot partly in the United States, suggests a homage to the photographer Robert Frank’s collection “The Americans.” Mr. Vogler plays a West German journalist navigating a world of gas stations, roadside snack bars and seedy motel rooms before returning to an even less welcoming Germany in the company of a 9-year-old girl left behind in America by her mother (Ms. Kreuzer). In “Wrong Move,” an updated version of Goethe’s “Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship” written by Peter Handke, Mr. Vogler plays a petulant would-be poet whose search for a utopian unity of poetry and politics telescopes, even as it satirizes, two centuries of German Romanticism.

“Kings of the Road,” which runs nearly three hours, depicts an empty, imprisoning West Germany. The land seems as vast and sparsely populated as North Dakota, and the movie, which Mr. Wenders originally wanted to title “As Time Goes By,” is a sort of western. Here Mr. Vogler plays an itinerant mechanic, traveling from town to town repairing movie projectors — a conceit that allows the film to mourn the end of movies as a mass medium while dramatizing one character’s assertion that “the Yanks colonized our subconscious.” It is Mr. Wenders’s definitive statement and arguably his masterpiece.

The Criterion set comes with a handsome booklet; extras include interviews, outtakes and, most interesting, two of Mr. Wenders’s student films, “Same Player Shoots Again” (1967) and “Silver City Revisited” (1968).

NEWLY RELEASED

CRY OF THE HUNTED A hard-bitten cop (Barry Sullivan) chases a Cajun fugitive (Vittorio Gassman in one of his first Hollywood movies) into the Louisiana bayou. Best known for “Gun Crazy,” Joseph H. Lewis directs this 1953 B movie with his customary economy and aplomb. (Warner Archive)

FIGURES IN A LANDSCAPE Theater of the Absurd antics meet action allegory in Joseph Losey’s 1970 film maudit, an alternately ridiculous and majestic portrait of two men on the lam (Robert Shaw and Malcolm McDowell) pursued by a black helicopter across a monumental landscape. Shot mainly in Spain, the aerial footage transcends the banal symbolism. (Kino Lorber)

MYSTERIOUS ISLAND Cy Endfield’s spirited direction, Ray Harryhausen’s special effects and Bernard Herrmann’s brooding score elevate this nonsensical 1961 adventure film, adapted from Jules Verne’s sequel to “Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea” and made with a largely British cast that includes Joan Greenwood and Herbert Lom. (Twilight Time)

STAND CLEAR OF THE CLOSING DOORS Sam Fleischner updates the indie classic “Little Fugitive” to the onset of Hurricane Sandy. An autistic teenager from an immigrant family rides the subway for several days even as the monster storm bears down on the defenseless city. Writing in The New York Times in May 2014, Stephen Holden called it “a small miracle of a film.” (Kino Lorber)

WHERE TO INVADE NEXT Michael Moore looks for solutions to America’s problems and finds them in Europe. “The film’s premise is only half serious and wildly exaggerated, but there is enough truth in it to make you squirm and consider what went wrong,” Mr. Holden wrote in The Times in December. (Anchor Bay)


