


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this article, the Metro reporter Winnie Hu describes her excitement and trepidation about going behind closed doors at 520 First Avenue, the headquarters of the New York City Office of Chief Medical Examiner.

The city morgue was less creepy than I imagined.

Yes, there were dead bodies everywhere. But they were mostly hidden from view, zipped into body bags and neatly tagged. There was little to suggest the violence and misfortune that had landed some of them in this subterranean warren of rooms.

Even the autopsies were not so bad. Medical examiners outfitted in scrubs, aprons, masks and gloves matter-of-factly dissected bodies in a sterile white room. The radio played in the background, and technicians chatted animatedly as they rolled bodies in and out. There was a surprising sense of normalcy to it all.

“We see so much tragedy here, you have to keep a good attitude, or it would be overwhelming,” explained Jeff Spielman, a forensic photographer.

As a reporter for the Metro section, I had caught glimpses before of bodies, and body parts, at murder scenes and train crashes, among other places. But I had worried that in a morgue I would be surrounded by bodies, too close to ignore the blood and gore. In the end, curiosity beat out trepidation when I was invited to see firsthand how the city trains medical examiners.

For years, I had walked by the headquarters of the New York City Office of Chief Medical Examiner at 520 First Avenue, a short, brick building in the shadow of the gleaming towers of New York University Langone Medical Center. What was it like inside, I wondered. From the outside, it looked small and unimpressive. Its name out front was nearly unreadable, with missing letters, like a word on “Wheel of Fortune.”

In the lobby, silver block letters on the wall behind the reception desk spell out a phrase, in Latin, that translates roughly to: “This is the place where the dead help the living.”

The agency is one of the largest and busiest medical examiners’ offices in the nation, performing about 5,000 autopsies a year for deaths that are deemed sudden, violent or unexpected. Now, to peel back the curtain on the work it does, the office had taken the unusual step of granting The Times access to its mortuaries and work areas over several months.

I had seen autopsies performed on crime shows like “C.S.I.” over the years. The reality was much different, of course. It was messier, for one thing: I had dreaded seeing blood; but far more gruesome, as it turned out, was the greenish fluid that drips out of decomposing bodies. The smell was worse than the worst body odor on a sweltering summer day.

The first time I watched an autopsy at the morgue, Dr. Barbara Sampson, the city’s chief medical examiner, rolled over a stool in case I felt faint. People have hit the floor hard, she said. Although the stool proved unnecessary, I did look away when I heard the whir of an electric saw that would soon open a skull.

I also learned that autopsies were more physically demanding than the crime shows let on. One day, I followed Dr. Jacqueline Nunez, 34, who spent the past year training as a medical examiner. She had been on her feet for more than six hours, working on three autopsies back to back without a break. She pulled and pushed heavy bodies twice her size. She leaned over them with scalpels and knives, pushing down with all her weight.

Just watching was tiring. “You build endurance,” she told me. “You pick up stamina and you get used to it. That’s what this year is for.”

Another thing the crime shows gloss over is the uncertainty of the work. Many autopsies yield only clues — not answers — about what happened to someone. Medical examiners can spend weeks, even months, following up with lab tests, researching scientific literature and interviewing family members and police detectives. Even then, there may never be an answer. Medical examiners sometimes refer to those cases as “undetermined squared” — when both the cause and the manner of death cannot be identified.

Dr. Stephen Melito, 32, a father of two who also trained as a medical examiner this year, said he felt that the crime shows had created some misunderstandings. “They don’t give us guns,” he said. “We’re not going out arresting people. That’s not our job.”

Instead, Dr. Melito said he saw himself as simply the final doctor in a person’s life, the one who explains death, answers questions and tries to offer comfort to those left behind: “You provide a service to the city and to the legal system, but most of all you provide a service to the families in arguably the most difficult time of their life.”


