


The actors who were singing and dancing their way through “Cherchez La Femme: The Musical” in a rehearsal room on Great Jones Street were in street clothes and gymwear. The show’s co-author, songwriter and inspiration, who kept a close eye on the proceedings, was far more dapper. When asked, August Darnell proudly itemized his outfit: black-and-white wingtip shoes, dark gray three-piece pinstripe suit with pleated pants, white shirt, vintage necktie, pocket handkerchief folded just so and a classic Fedora. “Once I discovered this mode of attire, I never gave it up,” Mr. Darnell said.

Now 65, Mr. Darnell has sported his 1940s look since he played bass in Dr. Buzzard’s Original Savannah Band, whose definitive 1976 hit, “Cherchez La Femme,” merged big-band swing with disco. The Savannah Band was led by Mr. Darnell’s brother, Stony Browder Jr.; Mr. Darnell (born Thomas Darnell Browder) went on to lead Kid Creole and the Coconuts, which found a huge audience in Europe in the 1980s with songs like “I’m a Wonderful Thing, Baby,” “My Male Curiosity” and “Annie, I’m Not Your Daddy,” which all appear in the new musical.

Both bands danced across time warps and racial categories. They were costumed like performers from nightclub revues in black-and-white movies; their songs told stories, and their music folded together the retro and the contemporary with multicultural panache.

Mr. Darnell had majored in drama at Hofstra and went into music, he said, as a “frustrated actor”; in its heyday, Kid Creole and the Coconuts always seemed like a musical waiting to happen. Now that musical was taking shape, to open May 20 at La MaMa. It’s a double time warp: the 2010s looking back on the 1980s looking back on the 1940s.

The story is a fictional, parallel-universe take on Mr. Darnell’s world, using songs from his albums with dialogue written by Mr. Darnell and Vivien Goldman, a longtime music journalist from England who wrote a novelistic history of Kid Creole and the Coconuts, “Indiscreet,” and who is now a professor at the Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music at NYU’s Tisch School.

Ms. Goldman was drawn to Kid Creole because — as Mr. Darnell’s alias suggests — within the danceable, tropical-treat songs were also thoughts on a post-racial culture and on the paradoxes of masculinity. Kid Creole’s music posited Manhattan as the northernmost Caribbean island, drawing on calypso, salsa, funk, rock and show tunes — a reflection, he said, of childhood in a Bronx that was multiethnic but neighborly. Pressed to place Kid Creole in a category during the 1980s, Mr. Darnell termed it “mulatto music.”

The Coconuts, as choreographed by Mr. Darnell’s wife at the time, Adriana Kaegi, often sang sassy comeuppances to Kid Creole’s boasts; in one song they mocked him as “Mr. Softee.” (Mr. Darnell and Ms. Kaegi divorced in 1985; Ms. Kaegi selected the costumes for the musical.)

In the United States, Kid Creole didn’t have the formula for a pop hit. “My Male Curiosity,” despite a flashy music video sequence in the 1984 film “Against All Odds,” didn’t break through; neither did “The Sex of It,” a song Prince wrote for the band because he was a fan.

But across Europe and Japan, Kid Creole and the Coconuts were a sensation; Ms. Goldman recalls that in 1980s England, their music and look spawned a zoot-suited club underground. Mr. Darnell now has two residences: in Sweden, with a chateau by a lake, and in Maui, Hawaii, where he also owns a martini bar called Ambrosia. “I’m living the dream,” he said. But he still wants to work.

“Cherchez La Femme” is more screwball comedy than band saga, though Kid Creole fans will find familiar aspects. “They’ll expect the cross-cultural element, obviously,” Mr. Darnell said. “They’ll expect the mixed nations. They’ll expect the humor, the wit and the tongue-in-cheek comments. They’re also going to expect a lot to do with womanizing, a lot to do with the macho breed.”

Much of the script was written in a burst of collaboration. “We laughed nonstop for five days,” Ms. Goldman said. “I thought, maybe naïvely, that if we were laughing all the way through, other people would find it funny.”

At a time when the most in-demand Broadway musical is the historically minded, hip-hop-centered “Hamilton,” “Cherchez La Femme” is proudly old-fashioned.

“This musical is out of sync with musicals now,” Mr. Darnell said. “We could look at that as playwrights and say, ‘We’ve got to get serious topics because that’s what gets the critics excited.’ But that’s not my choice. We made a conscious decision. We want a happy-go-lucky musical that reflects the kind of people we are.”

Mia Yoo, La MaMa’s artistic director, said: “It is retro, but it sheds light on who we are now by looking at something that’s come before us in a new way.” With a cast of 15, it is a “huge production” for La MaMa, she added. La MaMa is providing rehearsal space, the theater, lighting, props and infrastructure; when an initial investor dropped out, Mr. Darnell chose to pay the actors himself.

“Who knows when the next opportunity is going to come to have a theater in Manhattan?” he said. “It doesn’t happen every day. So I decided to forge ahead.”

Because a live band exceeded the budget, the musical will use recorded instrumental tracks. Mr. Darnell hopes that a next, larger iteration will restore a band. He wrote eight new songs for the musical, but as the running time was pared from three hours to two, they were cut. Still, some songs will be new to all but the most determined Kid Creole devotees; those were on 1990s albums that sold, Mr. Darnell said, “seven copies.”

The plot is straightforward. The bandleader Caufy Keeps (Isaac Gay), a Don Juan with a romantic streak, scuttles a world tour with his backup singers, the Lemon Drops, to chase his girlfriend, Deliciosa (Skyler Volpe), back to Haiti, which has just fallen under the brutal dictatorship of Jean-Claude Duvalier, known as Baby Doc. On his return to New York, he has to reconcile with the band.

Mr. Darnell insists it is not an autobiography, but there are parallels: On the 1981 Kid Creole album “Fresh Fruit in Foreign Places,” the singer traverses the Caribbean to find his beloved Mimi while the songs dip into multiple Caribbean styles.

And Mr. Darnell himself had two children with a Haitian woman named Mimosa. “If you met this woman and you told her that Deliciosa is based on her,” Mr. Darnell said, “she would slap your face, because nothing is further from the truth.”

Caufy Keeps’s streetwise sidekick in the musical is named Stingy Brim, sharing initials with Stony Browder Jr., who died in 2001. “Stony never called women bitches, never in life,” Mr. Darnell said. But, he added, “The character Stingy always has a joint in his mouth, and that was Stony. So it’s a definitely a combination of characters.”

Kid Creole and the Coconuts never offered heavy-handed messages, only an embodiment of collaboration across differences. The musical strives to work the same way. Ms. Goldman said: “It does touch on very deep things, but we do it in such a way, hopefully, that it appears like a frothy confection.”


