


RIO DE JANEIRO — Brazil’s interim president, Michel Temer, announced an array of proposals on Tuesday aimed at restoring confidence in the sickly economy of Latin America’s largest country.

Seeking to draw a contrast with Dilma Rousseff, the suspended leftist president whom Mr. Temer maneuvered to oust this month, he said he would try to repeal nationalist oil legislation, curb public spending and shut down a sovereign wealth fund.

Still, Mr. Temer’s televised briefing was light on detail as to how he planned to win approval in a fractious Congress for an array of measures like overhauling a crisis-ridden pension system that allows Brazilians to retire at an average age of 54.

While announcing the measures, Mr. Temer, 75, who is two weeks into the job, expressed frustration with his critics, contending his government was the victim of “psychological aggression.”

Mr. Temer, a lawyer and politician, has come under scrutiny over his cabinet, which does not include any women or Afro-Brazilians, and a scandal over recordings suggesting that one of his top advisers pursued Ms. Rousseff’s ouster to cripple a colossal graft investigation into the national oil company, Petrobras.

Slapping his hand on his desk before television cameras, a perturbed Mr. Temer proclaimed: “I’ve heard, ‘Temer is very fragile, poor little thing, he doesn’t know how to govern.’ Gibberish!”

Reactions to Mr. Temer’s announcements were mixed, with lawmakers loyal to Ms. Rousseff, who is preparing for an impeachment trial in the Senate, insisting that Mr. Temer’s government is illegitimate.

Some economists also said that details were lacking about how Mr. Temer could persuade legislators to peel back laws that have enhanced government control of the nation’s oil industry or limit education spending without raising taxes on wealthy Brazilians.

Yet others said they were willing to give the new leader the benefit of the doubt.

“This was a good start,” Monica de Bolle, a Brazilian economist at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, said in an analysis in the newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo. “The focus of these measures is the medium term because right now, nothing is possible.”

Still, Ms. de Bolle emphasized that Mr. Temer had failed to propose a broader reform of Brazil’s giant national development bank, the BNDES. She also said that his government needed to hammer out a plan to renegotiate debts owed by Brazilian states.

Various states are facing dire financial problems, including Rio de Janeiro, which is suffering from a sharp decline in oil royalties. Rio’s political leaders are seeking a moratorium on the state’s interest payments to the federal government for two years.


