


COMMERCE, Calif. — With two weeks before California’s delegate-rich primary, Hillary Clinton stopped here on Tuesday and went on the attack against a rival. Just not the one she is currently running against.

Mrs. Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont each courted voters in California, which has more delegates to divvy up than any other state, but their appearances showed how differently they are approaching the coming contest. Both have harshly criticized Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, but while Mrs. Clinton has made him her main focus, Mr. Sanders’s hopes are centered on an upset victory in the primary.

California, the nation’s most populous state, would be a prize for Mr. Sanders, who is hoping for a marquee victory that he could showcase heading into the party’s summer convention in Philadelphia. But however lustrous a victory might be, it would be largely symbolic given Mrs. Clinton’s nearly insurmountable delegate lead, and she is spending her time building a case against Mr. Trump.

At a rally in Los Angeles County, Mrs. Clinton continued to try out different attacks against the billionaire businessman, touching on subjects including his business acumen, his foreign policy views and even his reality-show catchphrase.

“You can’t say to the senator from some state, ‘You’re fired,’” she said. “That’s not the way the government works.”

Pressing Mr. Trump to release his tax returns, Mrs. Clinton said that perhaps he had never paid federal income tax. And she brought up a comment he made before the Great Recession, in which he expressed hope that the real estate market would crash because he could profit from such an event.

“He actually said he was hoping for the crash that caused hard-working families in California and across America to lose their homes, all because he thought he could take advantage of it to make some money for himself,” Mrs. Clinton said.

In a coordinated effort around the country, numerous elected officials who support Mrs. Clinton criticized Mr. Trump along the same lines, spreading that line of attack in battleground states.

In a statement, Mr. Trump said he had “made a lot of money in down markets.”

“Frankly, this is the kind of thinking our country needs, understanding how to get a good result out of a very bad and sad situation,” he said. “Politicians have no idea how to do this — they don’t have a clue.”

Speaking at the rally, the mayor of Los Angeles, Eric Garcetti, showed the fine line that Mrs. Clinton and her allies are trying to walk while Mr. Sanders remains in the race.

They do not want to alienate the senator’s many supporters, and to that end, Mr. Garcetti told the crowd, “I love all my Democrats — I love Bernie Sanders, I love the people who are supporting him.”

Polling averages have shown Mrs. Clinton with a consistent lead in the Democratic primary in California. Her lack of interest in further tangling with Mr. Sanders was apparent on Monday, when her campaign said it had declined an invitation from Fox News to participate in a debate before the state’s primary.

Undeterred, Mr. Sanders is camping out in California, vowing to hold rallies up and down the state and aiming to speak in front of 200,000 people. If Mrs. Clinton longs to put the primary battle behind her, he has been unrelenting.

The senator asked on Tuesday for a recanvassing of the results from Kentucky, which voted last week. Mrs. Clinton prevailed there by about 1,900 votes, according to unofficial results, though she won only one more delegate than Mr. Sanders.

On Tuesday, Mr. Sanders’s campaign also released a new television advertisement that it said would run in California. The ad features Mr. Sanders talking about his signature policy issues, including tuition-free public colleges and Wall Street reform.

“What choice do Californians have in this election?” Mr. Sanders asks in the ad. “The biggest one of all. You have the power to choose a new direction for the Democratic Party.”

At a morning rally in Anaheim near Disneyland, Mr. Sanders repeated his support for a ballot initiative that would legalize marijuana in California.

He also took aim at Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump and Disney, while railing against the campaign finance system and economic inequality.

“I’m probably the only politician to come to Anaheim and say this,” Mr. Sanders said. “Disney pays its workers wages that are so low, that many of them are forced to live in motels because they can’t afford a decent place to live. Meanwhile, Disney made a record-breaking profit of nearly $3 billion last quarter.”

Mr. Sanders also cast California as pivotal to his campaign and said a win here could lead him to the presidency.

“If we win in California, we are going to go marching into the Democratic convention with a lot of momentum,” Mr. Sanders said. “And if we go marching into the Democratic convention with a lot of momentum, we are going to march out with the Democratic nomination. And if we march out with the Democratic nomination, Donald Trump is toast.”


