


Russia’s sports ministry is embracing an uncharacteristic openness as it tries to project an atmosphere of reform to the global sports officials and the American authorities who are scrutinizing Russia over allegations of a government-run doping program.

On Monday, only weeks after the ministry hired crisis communicators based in Washington to advise it, Natalia Zhelanova, the antidoping adviser to Russia’s sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, took to Twitter to answer questions in an unusual public question-and-answer session. The session was announced by the American public relations firm Burson Marstaller, which later helped the Russians announce the creation of a new doping education program in the country.

Over the course of an hour, Ms. Zhelanova responded to 15 questions, advancing familiar messages without speaking in specifics.

In one answer, she echoed Mr. Murko’s recent broad apology for “serious mistakes,” writing, “We acknowledge past problems and are working tirelessly to reform our antidoping program in the long term.”

Without defining those problems, Ms. Zhelanova denied the allegations that doping in Russia was part of a state-sponsored scheme.

“I don't believe there is any truth to these allegations,” she posted. “Clean athletes shouldn’t be punished for the mistakes of others.”

Next week, on June 17, track and field’s governing body — known as the International Association of Athletics Federation, or I.A.A.F. — will decide whether to lift a ban on Russian athletes. If the ban is not lifted, Russian athletes will be barred from competing in the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, which start Aug. 5.

The International Olympics Committee has scheduled a meeting June 22, four days after the I.A.A.F. vote, at which it will consider “collective responsibility” versus “individual justice,” an I.O.C. spokesman said, to decide who is barred from the Rio Games.

“We’re hopeful that the I.A.A.F. will make the right decision because we’re doing everything possible to regain trust,” Ms. Zhelanova said in another post.

Last month, a former longtime director of Russia’s antidoping laboratory, Dr. Grigory Rodchenkov, said he had acted at the direction of the sports ministry to help athletes surreptitiously dope.

Dr. Rodchenkov, who received the prestigious Order of Friendship from Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, in 2014, was asked to resign by Mr. Mutko the next year, he said, the day after a report published by the World Anti-Doping Agency named him as a key actor in a state-run doping system.

Ms. Zhelanova did not dispute Dr. Rodchenkov’s characterization of his departure from the job, attributing the decision to the World Anti-Doping Agency’s directive.

“WADA wrote to us saying he must go because he was at the heart of doping cover-up, taking money from athletes,” Ms. Zhelanova said on Twitter.

Dr. Rodchenkov — who has acknowledged making mixtures of steroids that sports officials provided to top athletes, and has also said he destroyed hundreds of tainted urine samples — has denied accepting bribes.

He said that Mr. Mutko had suggested, in the palatial sports ministry headquarters in Moscow, that they “take the civilized route” and that he step down.

Dr. Rodchenkov fled to the United States seven days later, he said, fearing for his safety. He brought with him one change of clothes and the laptop he used for work, including spreadsheets he said were sent to him by the Russian sports ministry, identifying the dozens of athletes who were taking part in a federal doping program.

Dmitry S. Peskov, a spokesman for Mr. Putin, has called Dr. Rodchenkov’s account “slander by a turncoat.”

Hours after Monday’s Twitter chat, the Russian sports ministry issued a news release through Burson Marsteller announcing the creation of a government program aimed at changing attitudes toward doping in Russia and advancing the message that “doping is unacceptable.”

The program, the news release said, will include mandatory antidoping education for doctors, coaches, employees of sports federations and schoolchildren.

According to Dr. Rodchenkov, it was not just Olympians who were doping in Russia. He said university-level athletes also took banned substances in international competition.


