


At an art fair, there are many visible roles in play: director, exhibitor, client, critic, installer. But an undersung — and increasingly critical — part is the one inhabited by the conservator Gloria Velandia and her team of trained assistants. Almost invisible, except to those in the know, Velandia runs the international circuit as the preferred conservator for major-league fairs (including Frieze New York, which begins this Thursday). “I’m the doctor on call,” Velandia says of her unique position under the fair tent. “My role is primarily to help make sure, one, people have an understanding of what they are purchasing, that would be for condition reporting; and two, helping ensure that the artworks are in the best condition for display and sale.” Her now-ubiquitous presence at fairs came out of a casual conversation in Paris with the former Art Basel director Sam Keller. “Who does something for the exhibitors if something happens?” she asked Keller, referring to works being damaged, however slightly, during the bustle of the fair. “He said they had no one, and invited me to give it a try.” Sixteen years later, Velandia is the go-to for Art Basel, Frieze and the Armory — with a master’s degree in chemistry and conservation, she’s the person you want on the scene when a vacuum-cleaner hose fondles a floor piece or a painting gets hassled during the V.I.P. bum rush.

Velandia travels the world as a consultant and contemporary art preservation specialist, but the bulk of her business takes place at her studio in New York, where she and her team repair, clean and restore work for museums, auction houses, galleries and collectors. Velandia’s shop handles sculpture, painting and works on paper, according to protocols she has developed with artists and their estates. “Throughout the year, we receive artworks for restoration and conservation; we are also brought to evaluate conditions and give advice on collection management and maintenance,” she says. “For some clients, we provide protocols on a given collection. We help them create annual maintenance data so they understand how to take preventative steps on conservation and cleaning. If it’s a Jeff Koons outside, it can be cleaned once a month. If it’s an Anish Kapoor piece with pigment, don’t touch it, no maintenance required.” Clients flock to Velandia for her expertise across modern and contemporary works — and her discretion.

The fair atmosphere presents a different set challenge for Velandia and her team: They must perform last-minute touch-ups and evaluations on-site, rather than in the comfort of their well-appointed headquarters. “The majority of the work happens during the install process,” she says. “As you can imagine, the exhibitors want their booths to look beautiful for the moment it opens for the V.I.P.s. If they anticipate a client will request a recent condition report, they want to have those documents ready so they can make the sale.” As a third-party consultant, Velandia is hired to act as an informed second opinion on what can be an extremely high-end investment. Despite the meticulous attention to detail her work entails, though, Velandia takes a rather Zen approach to the weathering process that’s impossible to avoid when living with art. “Everything changes, everything ages; aging doesn’t necessarily mean damage,” she says. “It’s about teaching collectors how to live with these ephemeral materials.”


