


PARIS — With the early stages of the French Open playing out in Paris, the two-time champion Maria Sharapova is awaiting a ruling from the International Tennis Federation on her positive test at the Australian Open for the banned substance meldonium.

In March, Sharapova announced that she had tested positive for the drug, which was added to the World Anti-Doping Agency’s prohibited list on Jan. 1. The I.T.F. subsequently confirmed the test result and the beginning of a provisional suspension, the highest-profile in a wave of meldonium cases involving athletes from the former Soviet Union.

In tennis, discussions about doping cases are not always so public. Under I.T.F. policy, a positive test that does not end with a verdict of a violation is never announced, and no pending cases are ever acknowledged. The onus, and the opportunity for transparency, often lies in the hands of the athletes.

Thus on Tuesday, at another news conference, meldonium was the topic of an awkward one-sided conversation.

Varvara Lepchenko, an American citizen who was born in Uzbekistan, had not played in March or April, returning this month at the Italian Open. Last week, the Russian newspaper Sport Express published an interview with Anatoly Glebov, a Russian trainer, who contended that Lepchenko’s father, Peter, had told him that Lepchenko had also tested positive for meldonium at the Australian Open.

“I talked with her dad, too; I know about it from his lips,” Glebov told the newspaper. “However, the I.T.F. has not made this public.”

Glebov also said Lepchenko had been “amnestied” and returned to competition.

Lepchenko, ranked 64th, has repeatedly declined to discuss the report.

Forwarded the Russian news reports via text message last week, Lepchenko said: “It’s not very pleasant for me as I didn’t do anything wrong. I’m able to say more later.”

But she did not respond to subsequent messages. On Friday, after her quarterfinal loss at the Nürnberger Versicherungscup in Germany, Lepchenko refused to comment further.

Asked about her two-month absence from the tour, Lepchenko cited a knee injury. “It’s been going on since last year,” she said.

After Lepchenko’s 5-7, 6-4, 6-3 loss to Ekaterina Makarova of Russia on Tuesday in the first round of the French Open, the reported positive test was the subject of most of the questions at Lepchenko’s news conference.

“At the moment I have no comment on any of this,” she said. “I’m here just to answer tennis questions. If you have any questions about my match, I would gladly answer them. But otherwise, I just have no comments.”

The I.T.F. would not say whether there was a case involving Lepchenko.

“The rules of the tennis antidoping program do not allow us to confirm or deny that a player has tested positive until a final decision is made,” an I.T.F. spokeswoman said. “The only exception to this is if the player him- or herself acknowledges the positive test.”

Under tennis’s antidoping program, players are often given provisional suspensions while their cases are being adjudicated, so an absence from the tour without confirmation or denial of a doping case can stir speculation, with a recent precedent still very much in mind. In 2013, Marin Cilic cited a knee injury in withdrawing from Wimbledon and subsequently missing time on the tour, but it was later announced that he had tested positive for a banned substance and was serving a provisional suspension.

Roselyne Bachelot, a former French minister of sport, said in March during a French television program that Rafael Nadal had been serving a silent ban from the sport during a seven-month stretch in 2012 and 2013 when he was absent from the tour. Nadal, who had cited knee injuries for his absence, sued Bachelot for defamation in a Paris court in April, and the I.T.F. publicly sided with Nadal.

”The accusations by Roselyne Bachelot against Nadal are not only surprising, they are also incorrect,” the I.T.F. said in a statement. “The names of all players sanctioned for a violation of tennis’s antidoping program are announced publicly, as demanded by the rules of the program and the worldwide antidoping code.”

Sharapova was the only tennis player to step forward and announce she had tested positive for meldonium at the Australian Open, but the doubles specialist Sergey Betov of Belarus is also known to have tested positive for the substance in Melbourne. His test result was not disclosed until nearly two months after Sharapova’s announcement. He was out of competition from late February until early May.

In late April, a statement from the I.T.F. announced the dismissal of Betov’s previously confidential case because the amount of meldonium in his sample was below the revised minimums WADA had announced weeks earlier, after it became clear the agency lacked conclusive research on how long the drug might stay in the body after ingestion. These new guidelines meant it was possible Betov had last used the substance in October, as he contended, and he was found to have “no fault or negligence,” a verdict that the I.T.F. does not consider an exoneration.

The Russian sports minister Vitaly Mutko said last week that all the Russian athletes who had tested positive for meldonium this year had been cleared to return to competition, except Sharapova. Mutko said the athletes had been able to prove that their positive tests had resulted from using the drug before it was banned.

There have been more than 300 positive tests this year for meldonium, a heart medication that was frequently used as a supplement in Russia. Sharapova has said she did not realize meldonium, which she had taken for 10 years, had been added to the prohibited list.


