


Jake Arrieta’s bid for a second straight no-hitter was dashed on his fifth pitch. His Wrigley Field scoreless streak ended at 52 2/3 innings.

Oh, and he won his 16th consecutive decision, the longest streak in the major leagues in more than a decade.

“I was a little flat today,” Arrieta said Thursday after leading the Cubs over the Milwaukee Brewers, 7-2, in Chicago.

Chicago improved to 16-5, its best 21-game start since opening at 17-4 in 1907.

Arrieta (5-0) gave up one run, three hits and four walks in five innings — the first run he had allowed at home since July 25. Alex Presley’s fifth-inning R.B.I. double ended Arrieta’s home scoreless streak four outs shy of Ray Herbert’s major league record, set with the Chicago White Sox in 1962 and 1963.

Arrieta’s streak of consecutive winning decisions is the longest since Jose Contreras of the White Sox won 17 in a row from August 2005 to July 2006, according to the research firm Stats.

Chicago has won in Arrieta’s last 18 starts, a team record. Arrieta’s streak of consecutive quality starts ended at 24, two shy of Bob Gibson’s record from 1967 to 1968.

“I saw 92 pitches,” Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said. “I saw the Cubs trying to win a World Series. I saw the next five years of his career. All that stuff mattered much more than breaking Gibson’s record.”

Cubs left fielder Kris Bryant left in the fifth after rolling his right ankle while running the bases two innings earlier. The team called it a “mild” sprain but said Bryant was to undergo a magnetic resonance imaging exam.

Ben Zobrist hit a two-run single in the first off Taylor Jungmann (0-4), who gave up five runs, six hits and three walks in three and two-thirds innings as his E.R.A. rose to 9.15. He also hit Bryant with two pitches.

Ross hit a solo home run onto Waveland Avenue in the second, and Anthony Rizzo and Tommy La Stella added R.B.I. doubles in the third for a 5-0 lead.

TIGERS 7, ATHLETICS 3 Anthony Gose doubled and homered, Anibal Sanchez pitched through a wild outing, and Detroit beat Oakland to take three of four in the series against the visiting Athletics. Gose, who entered the game with a .170 batting average, had not gotten an extra-base hit since homering on opening day.

Sanchez (3-2) scraped through five and two-thirds innings while still searching for his proper mechanics. Sanchez allowed two runs and three hits while striking out nine, but walked seven — one shy of his major league high. He allowed three runners to steal without a throw.

Sanchez was the first Tigers starter to walk seven and strike out nine in the same start since Jack Morris did so against Texas on April 14, 1988.

Chris Bassitt (0-2) gave up seven runs, 10 hits and three walks in three and two-thirds innings. He is 0-2 with a 13.50 E.R.A. in his last two outings, allowing 24 runners in eight and two-thirds innings.

ORIOLES 10, WHITE SOX 2 Manny Machado had a grand slam and a career-high five R.B.I., leading Baltimore over the visiting White Sox and stopping Chicago’s six-game winning streak.

Chris Davis and Mark Trumbo hit consecutive third-inning homers for the Orioles, who are 8-1 at Camden Yards and have the best home record in the major leagues.

Machado stopped an 0-for-17 slide with a run-scoring double in a four-run third inning against John Danks (0-4) and homered in the sixth off Jake Petricka. Machado is batting .333 with a team-high seven homers.

BRAVES 5, RED SOX 3 Atlanta ended an eight-game losing streak, beating host Boston as Nick Markakis had three singles, a double and three R.B.I.

Mallex Smith doubled twice and had a run-scoring single for the Braves, a big-league-worst 5-17. Atlanta won for the first time since April 19.

Jhoulys Chachin (1-1) gave up two runs and six hits in five-plus innings to win for the first time since signing with the Braves as a free agent in December. Five pitchers combined for four-hit relief, with Arodys Vizcaino getting three outs for his second save.

PHILLIES 3 NATIONALS 0 Cameron Rupp hit a tiebreaking, two-run double off Jonathan Papelbon in a three-run ninth inning, and Philadelphia beat host Washington to complete a three-game sweep.

Aaron Nola, Dalier Hinojosa, Elvis Araujo (1-0) and Jeanmar Gomez combined on a four-hitter and extended Washington’s scoreless streak to 22 innings.

Philadelphia has won six of seven and, at 12-10, has moved two games over .500. The Phillies swept a series in Washington for the first time since May 2009.


