


Donald J. Trump’s hair is the latest point of contention between Gawker Media and Hulk Hogan’s lawyers.

In a letter sent last week to Gawker on behalf of a hair treatment clinic, Charles J. Harder, who is representing Mr. Hogan, the retired wrestler, in his invasion of privacy lawsuit against the media company, said a recent article about Mr. Trump’s hair made “numerous false and defamatory statements about my clients.”

Mr. Harder demanded that Gawker immediately remove the article and publish a public apology and full retraction. The letter also threatened legal action on behalf of the clinic, Ivari International, and Edward Ivari.

The letter continues a legal battle between Mr. Harder and Gawker. His Los Angeles-based law firm, Harder, Mirell & Abrams, was thrust into the spotlight last month when it was revealed that the Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel was secretly providing financial support for lawsuits against Gawker.

It is not clear whether Mr. Thiel, who is a pledged delegate for Mr. Trump for the 2016 Republican convention, is behind the letter.

The letter, which was obtained by The New York Times, lists 19 “false and defamatory” statements in the article, many of which were taken from two lawsuits. It contends that Gawker’s actions intentionally inflicted emotional distress, invaded Mr. Ivari’s privacy and constituted tortious interference “with actual and prospective business relations.”

The article, which was published in late May under the headline “Is Donald Trump’s Hair a $60,000 Weave? A Gawker Investigation,” said a “tipster” had suggested that Mr. Trump’s hair was “not his own, costs tens of thousands of dollars for installation and upkeep, and comes from a man as mysterious as Trump is bombastic.”

In the article, the anonymous tipster said Mr. Trump relied on “microcylinder intervention,” a hair restoration treatment that is “only performed by one clinic that we know of — Ivari International.” The article, which was peppered with pictures of Mr. Trump’s golden mane, also claimed that Ivari’s New York location was in Trump Tower “on the private floor reserved for Donald Trump’s own office.”

In the letter, Mr. Harder wrote that Gawker’s actions exposed the company “to substantial monetary damages and punitive damages.”

He also appeared to want the letter to stay out of the public eye: “This letter is confidential and protected by applicable copyright law,” he wrote.

In Gawker’s response, Heather Dietrick, the company’s general counsel and president, said Mr. Harder’s order that the article be removed was a “vastly overbroad demand to be made for Mr. Ivari, who plays only a part in the article about Donald Trump.”

Ms. Dietrick called the demand surprising because Mr. Harder took “no issue with the central thesis of the piece — that Mr. Ivari has worked on Donald Trump’s hair.”


