


Runners and bicyclists zoomed across the landscaped corridor on Saturday, taking advantage of the breezy, sunny conditions to enjoy what many had long sought — a link connecting the South Bronx to Randalls Island.

They were trailed by power walkers and others who slowed to take in the scene and snap photographs of the flowering vines, shrubs and ornamental grasses that, along with the chirping birds, created an idyllic scene and masked the bustle of the busy streets nearby.

“It’s like Central Park in the Bronx,” Karen Olivares, 23, said while she strolled with her boyfriend. “This is like a secret getaway.”

After years of delays, the Randalls Island Connector, which crosses over a narrow waterway known as the Bronx Kill, is finally a reality for Bronx residents who have long felt cut off from Randalls Island, one of the city’s main recreation hubs. Though the connector opened to pedestrians and cyclists last year, local residents decided, with spring underway, to treat Saturday as an unofficial grand opening.

“This has been years in the making, and seeing people walking and biking over the Bronx Kill to Randalls Island makes it all worth it,” said Maria Torres-Springer, president of the New York City Economic Development Corporation, which oversaw the project. “This gives Bronx residents access to all the amenities that Randalls Island has to offer, improving quality of life in the neighborhood and exemplifying our commitment to building strong and equitable communities across all five boroughs.”

Before the connector was finished, the only direct route to Randalls Island by foot was a difficult crossing on the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge (formerly the Triborough Bridge) that required navigating steep steps or winding ramps alongside heavy traffic.

The new link, by contrast, is a wide, ground-level pathway that starts just down the street from the bridge and runs a quarter-mile under the arches of an Amtrak trestle and over a red pedestrian bridge. It is accessible to those with disabilities, has dedicated bike and pedestrian lanes and is flanked with lights and shrubs.

The eagerly awaited connector was originally scheduled to open last summer, but remained blocked off by a black metal gate and construction barriers. It was not completed until mid-November, long past the peak season for outdoor activities. Ian Fried, a spokesman for the Economic Development Corporation, said that extensive testing of the connector to ensure its safety had caused the delay.

The city proposed the $6-million project, which was paid for with local, state and federal money, in 2006 as part of a larger plan to create a South Bronx Greenway in an industrial swath of the borough. Work began in late 2013, following protracted negotiations over the easements needed to build the pathway, which runs through property that is owned by the state, but privately controlled.

“While separated from the Bronx by just a few feet of water, Randalls Island had for decades seemed distant to the people of the South Bronx,” Ms. Torres-Springer said.

The lack of easy access to Randalls Island — a 330-acre expanse of public parkland that includes wildflower meadows, a track-and-field stadium, baseball and soccer fields, and tennis courts — has long been a contentious issue in the Bronx. Residents of some parts of the borough, where rates of asthma, diabetes and obesity-related illnesses are high, lack sizable parks. The problem is particularly acute in the South Bronx.

Many residents have begun to make the connector part of their routines in recent months, taking advantage of an unusually mild winter. Bicycle commuters pass use it to pass through the island daily on their way to jobs in Manhattan or Queens.

Randalls Island now draws more than 3 million visitors a year, up from 1.7 million in 2012, according to the Randalls Island Park Alliance, a nonprofit group that maintains the parkland in partnership with the city’s parks department. The island, which was joined with Wards Island by landfill, was once known primarily as a setting for asylums and hospitals before being developed for recreation beginning in the 1930s.

Aimee Boden, the alliance’s president, said that her group had noted steady use of the connector, and recently installed a clicker with a motion-activated sensor to count the number of people passing through.

The alliance had increased the number of free events held on the island to 100 this year, up from 15 in 2014, partly in anticipation of increased foot traffic from the new connector, Ms Boden said.

Among those events: a cherry blossom festival held on the island on Saturday. The alliance will also be offering programs that teach fishing and orienteering; bird-watching excursions and historical walking tours are planned as well.

On the Bronx side of the connector on Saturday, a celebration was organized by Jeanine Alfieri, an artist who lives nearby and considers the link a linchpin to efforts to transform a stretch of industrial waterfront in Port Morris, a South Bronx neighborhood that has attracted artists and new businesses in recent years.

Ms. Alfieri and other artists opened their studios for the day as part of the celebration, which also included a jazz concert and the staging of an original piece by Autumn Kioti, a performance artist. “This is really the community’s celebration,” Ms. Alfieri said. “We didn’t get a chance in November when it officially opened.”

Ms. Alfieri said she had not gone to Randalls Island in the past because she disliked the crossing. But recently, she said, she had been crossing the connector several times a week with her dog.

“It’s beyond easy,” she said. “It’s just like walking out your front door and having Randalls Island in front of you.”

Ms. Olivares, who lives in the Bronx, went to the connector with her boyfriend, Francisco Torres Jr., on Saturday morning after learning about the festivities from a flier posted at a nearby subway station. The couple said they had recently started running outdoors and were planning to take advantage of the new pathway on weekends.

Mr. Torres, a 37-year-old city bus driver, said he remembered when the ground he was walking on was piled high with trash, used tires and abandoned cars. “Now,” he said, “it’s like heaven.”


