


FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — The Jets, whose starting quarterback remains unsigned, continued their annual tradition of restocking the position on Friday when they selected Christian Hackenberg of Penn State in the second round of the N.F.L. draft.

It was the fourth year in a row the Jets have drafted a quarterback: They took Bryce Petty from Baylor in the fourth round last year, Tajh Boyd from Clemson in the sixth round in 2014 and Geno Smith from West Virginia in the second round in 2013.

“I’m extremely grateful for the opportunity,” said Hackenberg, who had one year of eligibility remaining. “A lot of hours have gone into this.”

Ryan Fitzpatrick was acquired from the Houston Texans last year and led the Jets to a surprising 10-6 record in Todd Bowles’s first year as head coach. Although the Jets have said they want to re-sign Fitzpatrick, he remains a free agent.

So the Jets, who still have Petty and Smith, used the No. 51 overall pick to add Hackenberg, a 6-foot-4, 228-pound native of Palmyra, Va. He started strongly under Bill O’Brien, but O’Brien left to coach the Texans, and Hackenberg scuffled under James Franklin.

Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan and Coach Todd Bowles said the team selected Hackenberg because of his potential, work ethic and character and because he was the highest player rated on the board at the time. 

“It doesn’t change anything with our approach to Ryan,” Maccagnan said.

Bowles said of Fitzpatrick as a starter, “It’s going to be hard to take it from him.”

As a freshman, Hackenberg passed for 2,955 yards, with 20 touchdowns, but his statistics last season dwindled to 2,525 yards, with 16 touchdowns. He was sacked 82 times in his last two seasons at Penn State, though he threw only six interceptions last year, compared with 15 in 2014.

Penn State lost its last four games last season to finish with a 7-6 record. Hackenberg ended his collegiate career by being knocked out with a sprained shoulder in the second quarter of a TaxSlayer Bowl loss to Georgia. He passed for only 103 yards and was sacked 10 times in an opening-game loss to Temple, the Owls’ first victory over the Nittany Lions since 1941.

“It’s a new opportunity, it’s a new environment,” Hackenberg said of joining the Jets.

Jordan Jenkins, a 6-foot-2, 259-pound outside linebacker from Georgia, was selected with their third-round pick, No. 83 over all. Jenkins had 204 tackles in four years with the Bulldogs, but he had only 19 sacks, just four in 11 games last season, when he was hampered by a groin injury.

“I bring a lot of physicality,” Jenkins said.


