


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

This past week was “upfronts” — the week where networks unveil their coming fall lineups to advertisers. It’s also when we learn which pilots will go to series, which shows will be back and which shows were canceled or stalled out before they even truly began. (R.I.P., “Nashville,” you beautiful tire fire.) Most of the pilot trailers left me cold, but I’m intrigued by “Pitch,” Fox’s drama about a screwball pitcher who becomes the first woman to play Major League Baseball. And NBC’s “The Good Place,” starring Ted Danson and Kristen Bell. I love political thrillers, so I’m curious about ABC’s “Designated Survivor,” in which Kiefer Sutherland becomes the president after everyone else is killed at the State of the Union.

This weekend I’ll be digging into “Lady Dynamite,” sobbing into the season finale of “Call the Midwife” and going to TV church to light candles and pray that CBS stops making joyless cop shows and sitcoms about hapless dads.

Thanks to all of you who wrote in with feedback about what you’d like to see in this newsletter. In today’s, we’re turning more of our attention to movies than we have before, and we’ll be covering movies more often in general in the coming months. We’d still love to hear from you, so keep those ideas and questions coming to watching@nytimes.com. Have a terrific weekend.

The plot to the 2015 German film “Phoenix” sounds far-fetched, but the movie itself is suspenseful, sad and — if you get on its wavelength — unforgettable. Her face disfigured, a concentration camp survivor named Nelly returns to Berlin after the war, has reconstructive surgery and goes in search of her husband, Johnny. When they finally meet, he does not recognize her, believing her to be dead. But, thinking she vaguely resembles his wife, Johnny enlists Nelly in a plot to claim her inheritance. Suspend your disbelief and sink into this moody noir. As Nelly, Nina Hoss (seen recently as a German intelligence officer in “Homeland”) is stunning. (Watch the trailer here; stream on Netflix; rent on Amazon or iTunes) — Gilbert Cruz

What would life (undeath?) be like for four vampires who decided to room together in a rambling mansion in New Zealand? And what would it look like if a film crew decided to follow that fangy quartet for a documentary? Jemaine Clement (“Flight of the Conchords”) stars in “What We Do in the Shadows,” which he co-wrote and co-directed with Taika Waititi (who also stars), and there’s definitely a “Conchords”-ish feel to the whole thing. This horror-comedy is barely scary, often silly and entirely delightful. (Watch the trailer here; watch on HBO; purchase on Amazon or iTunes) — G.C.

You don’t have to be particularly interested in magic to enjoy “An Honest Liar,” about the life of the Amazing Randi. You just have to be interested in quirky people. Born in 1928, James Randi — a magician and escape artist — transitioned into using the tools of his trade to debunk psychics and televangelists. He took a particular dislike to Uri Geller, who made a name for himself in the ’70s through his ability to supposedly bend spoons with his mind. With his hats, capes, cane and beard, Randi looks like a villainous monk, though the more you get to know him over the course of the film, the more he grows into your coolest uncle. (Watch the trailer here; stream on Netflix; rent on iTunes or Amazon) — G.C.

Hi Margaret. I’m a comedy girl, but I’m not into sitcoms — more “The Office,” “Veep,” “Silicon Valley,” etc. Maybe I’m a workplace comedy gal. I need something new (or at least new to me) to watch. — Amy

Two of my favorite comedies of all time are single-camera workplace comedies: “Sports Night” (Hulu, iTunes) and “Party Down” (Hulu, iTunes). “Sports Night,” which debuted in 1998, is Aaron Sorkin’s first TV series, and it’s set behind-the-scenes at a “SportsCenter”–esque show, though an interest in actual sports is not at all necessary for enjoying this series. There’s a laugh track early on, but it disappears eventually, so don’t let that keep you away. Felicity Huffman, Peter Krause, Josh Charles, Joshua Malina — plus all the walk-and-talks and soaring monologues you could dream of.

“Party Down” aired in relative obscurity on Starz in 2009 and ’10. It stars Adam Scott, Lizzy Caplan, Martin Starr and Ken Marino as L.A. cater-waiters, and is arguably TV’s best and funniest portrait of collective misanthropy. “Party” is one of those special shows that gets better and better upon repeat viewing, and one whose characters seem different to you as you yourself mature.

On the much sillier, oddball side of things, try “Better Off Ted” (Netflix), a kooky takedown of baffling corporate culture that aired on ABC in 2009. You might also like “Scrubs” (Netflix) which never gets enough credit, but is funny and strange and wonderful. If you want something more grounded, the British series “W1A” (Netflix), set within the BBC itself, is terrific.

Finally, if you’re willing to branch into hourlong dramedies, “Slings and Arrows” (Amazon Prime) will dazzle and amaze you. It’s set within a Canadian Shakespearean theater company whose former bad-boy leading man has returned, after years in a psychiatric facility, to direct “Hamlet.” (In Season 2, they do “Macbeth,” and in Season 3 “King Lear.”) Every time I watch it I’m amazed all over again, and I’ve watched it a lot. A lot.

This new AMC show, adapted from a comic-book series, follows an ex-criminal turned reverend who is soon possessed by some kind of phantasm. It premieres Sunday.

• Read The New York Times Review

• A special prom edition of “Say Yes to the Dress” (Friday, 9:30 p.m., TLC)

• Bryan Cranston stars as L.B.J. in a movie adaptation of his Tony-winning turn in “All the Way.” Read The New York Times review. (Saturday, 8 p.m., HBO)

• “Mr. Selfridge” ends its four-season run (Sunday, 10:30 p.m., PBS)

Vulture has one of this week’s best longreads, an in-depth look at how “Peak TV” — there were more than 400 scripted series last year, almost double the number from 2009 — has affected actors, agents, writers and the entire industry. If you fancy yourself a television geek, you’ll love it.

If you still like to look at a more traditional scheduling grid, EW has the breakdown of what the network’s fall schedules will look like. Not on the grid: How much time slots still matter, or don’t matter.

Finally, for anyone who has fond memories of the 2009 potato-chip sketch on “Saturday Night Live,” Uproxx has a stunningly thorough history of the oddball piece.

Like what you read? Sign up here to receive our guide straight to your inbox.


