


Food trends seem to come in waves that bring in the new, modify the old and sweep away the unviable. You might still be enjoying the ramen craze or those ice creams flavored with herbs and vegetables, and then the food halls roll in.

In New York City, food halls have been opening faster than nail salons, and each with its own personality.

Westchester County has finally claimed its first: Exit 4 Food Hall, in Mount Kisco. And more are anticipated. At the Westchester in White Plains, the mall’s food court is being revamped with a promise of soignée atmosphere and food to please “discriminating palates.” As for the casual Exit 4, which has been open since February, cuisine is being offered that is fresh and innovative in a space that ranks well above mall food courts. Experienced cooks and chefs with strong points of view helped plan Exit 4’s nine stations, and much of what is offered here happens to be good for you — and for the planet.

Isi Albanese, a co-owner with Jeff Friedlaender, is ecologically aware. The reusable glassware is handsome; the cutlery is metal, not plastic; and the big cloth napkins mean less paper goes into landfills. At the bar, beers are on tap, eliminating as much bottle and can disposal as possible. Tables, floors and wall design use reclaimed wood.

Visitors will find detailed menus posted at each station next to bins and trays heaped with enticing ingredients, but they might find ordering a little bewildering amid all the hustle and buzz.

A look at the menus online beforehand may be helpful. Service is semicafeteria style. Submit a credit card with your first order, and any subsequent orders will be added to the tab. At the end, check out at any register. If an item is ready, you can take it to a table. If it needs preparation, you will be given a number; when it’s ready, it will be brought over.

Navigating the hall is easy. Communal high tables stand in the center of a semicircle of food stations anchored at one end by X4 on Tap, a popular wine, beer and coffee bar that offers an interesting selection of craft beers that can be tasted in flights. There are happy hour specials from 3 to 6 p.m., Mondays through Thursdays.

A bar menu offers small plates, like sliders, wings and dumplings. The adjoining Charcuterie 153 can put together salumi for you as well — a plate of thin-sliced cheeses and meats like mortadella, prosciutto and various salamis, all perfect with a glass of red wine or beer.

Next is Myong Feiner’s Dirty Roots with a menu of her famous salads. Try the X4 Cobb, which includes avocado, chickpeas, chicken and a quail egg. Or the chopped baked salmon with kale, quinoa and sesame.

Have them alone or with a Dirty Roots sandwich, a grilled vegetable panini with balsamic pesto, perhaps, or an ahi tuna banh mi or a chicken club.

The scent of pizza is hard to resist, so follow it to the back of the room where Fuoco fires its fragrant combinations, from a plain but perfect Margherita to a delicious fig with caramelized onions to a mushroom with truffle oil. Or you can build your own. Next door at Piacci, fresh pastas and sauces are the specialty; about a half-dozen are offered every day. We have the lemon herb spaghetti and fettuccine Bolognese earmarked to try on a future visit, unless we succumb to the lumache ala vodka instead.

At Rotiss-A-Q, our pulled pork taco with lots of fresh slaw hit all the right notes: crunchy, tender and savory. This station roasts chicken and racks of ribs and matches these with lots of sides like cornbread and even mac and cheese. Eat dinner here or take it home.

A seafood section ends the semicircle. At Inno Sushi by James, customers can order sushi or sashimi of their choice or take packages of the ready-made rolls, plain and fancy, back to the office desk or home dinner table.

The final anchor, appropriately, is Mount Kisco Seafood’s Rawsome Seafood Bar. A bed of ice holds luscious seasonal oysters and coppery clams, all shucked to order. Pretty platters can be assembled to a customer’s liking, and might include other items, like shrimp, crab claws (in season) and lobster.

Exit 4 is lively and fun and — though the desire to sample all the offerings at one sitting is hard to resist — it is perhaps best enjoyed in smaller bites. Reservations are not taken, and waiting at peak meal hours may be hard for those with small children. But turnover is usually swift: The communal tables (there are some low ones in back) discourage lingering. Those avoiding peak times will enjoy a less hectic atmosphere.

Finally, the name itself might be a bit of a puzzle for those coming to Mount Kisco via the Saw Mill River Parkway, less than a mile to the west: Exit 4 actually refers to the exit on Interstate 684, about two miles to the east.


