


NEW YORK

A map on Thursday with an article about a proposed expansion of ferry service in New York City omitted one of the proposed ferry terminals. One is planned for Roosevelt Island. The map also misidentified two proposed terminals in Manhattan and failed to label an existing one. The third stop from the bottom of the map, a planned stop, is Grand Avenue, not Stuyvesant Cove; the planned stop above that is Stuyvesant Cove, not East 34th Street; and the existing stop above that is East 34th Street. A corrected map can be found at nytimes.com/nyregion.

•

An article in some editions on Tuesday about an outing on Long Island Sound that left two people dead after a kayak and paddleboard were swept far from shore transposed the given names of the two survivors, using information from the authorities. The mother is Delfina Reynoso of Hartford, and her daughter is Damaris.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about a second vigil at the Stonewall Inn in New York for the 49 people who died in an attack on a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., misstated, in some editions, the surname of a 25-year-old man from Brooklyn who was one of those killed. He was Enrique Rios, not Ross.

BUSINESS DAY

A headline on Friday with an article about the appointment of Stacey Snider as chairman and chief executive at 21st Century Fox misstated Ms. Snider’s current job. As the article correctly noted, she is co-chairwoman of 20th Century Fox, the film studio — not its parent, 21st Century Fox.

•

An article on the Square Feet page on June 8 about activist investors who are taking an interest in real estate investment trusts rendered incorrectly the name of the company with which New York REIT, a target of activist investors, plans to merge. It is JBG Companies, not JBP Companies.

THE ARTS

The Books of The Times review on June 7, about “Ordinarily Well: The Case for Antidepressants” by Peter D. Kramer, referred incorrectly to the antidepressant trials conducted at a facility that is not named in the book. They were commercially sponsored, not conducted, by the Food and Drug Administration. (The F.D.A. does not conduct drug trials.)

WEEKEND

The Friday File on Friday, about The New York Times’s review of James Joyce’s “Ulysses” in 1922, misstated the name of the agency that burned copies of the novel in the 1920s. Though it is now the United States Postal Service, at the time the copies were burned it was known as the Post Office Department. (The current name came into being in 1970.)

•

A picture caption on Friday with the Antiques column misidentified the object shown. It is a vase made around 1895 at the Dorflinger glass factory in White Mills, Pa., not a wine ewer from 1899.

ARTS & LEISURE

An article on Page 8 this weekend about J. T. Rogers’s account of how his new play “Oslo” evolved misstates the circumstances under which he conceived the project. It was during a meeting with Terje Rod-Larsen, then a United Nations special envoy, who had been involved in the making of the Oslo Accords; it was not with Mr. Larsen and Mona Juul, an ambassador and representative to the United Nations Norway Mission. (Ms. Juul, who is married to Mr. Larsen, joined the project later.) A revised version of the article, in which Mr. Rogers clarifies his dealings with the diplomats, can be found at nytimes.com/arts.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Friday about Kenneth Walton, a top official in the New York office of the F.B.I. in the early 1980s, referred incorrectly to the 1981 robbery of a Brink’s armored truck in Rockland County. It was carried out by a coalition of groups that included members of the Weather Underground and the Black Liberation Army. It was not carried out solely by the Weather Underground.

OPINION

An Opinion article on June 5 about opioids and depression incorrectly described the approved uses of buprenorphine. It is F.D.A.-approved for the treatment of acute and chronic pain as well as opioid addiction; it is not approved only for the treatment of opioid addiction.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed toletters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


