


A FOUR-BEDROOM VICTORIAN NEAR TORONTO

$1.17 MILLION (1,499,900 CANADIAN DOLLARS)

This four-bedroom Victorian house, built around 1876 in Unionville, a village in the Toronto suburbs, has served several purposes. Part of its ground floor was once a bank, and later the building was used as a boardinghouse and a creamery.

A wide veranda stretches across the front of the house, which is about 3,000 square feet and painted pale yellow. The front door leads to an open foyer and a spacious living room with a fireplace. To the left of the fireplace, a doorway leads to the formal dining room, which has walls of Wedgwood blue.

The kitchen, with a granite island and countertops, is past the dining room, through double glass doors. Next to the kitchen is a sunroom with a heated stone floor, which serves as the painting studio of the owner, Linda Fearnley. A family room, added in the 1960s, has a cast iron stove and doors that open onto the back deck. The backyard has a large lawn, chestnut and maple trees, and landscaping with native perennials.

Stairs near the front door lead to the bedrooms. There’s a half-bath under the stairs. On the second floor, the master bedroom has an en-suite bath with a claw foot bathtub and a separate shower. Its cabinetry came from a church, said Alanna English, a broker with Re/Max All-Stars Realty in Unionville, who has the listing. The second upstairs bathroom serves the other three bedrooms, including one in the converted attic.

The home, on a quarter-acre lot, was renovated around 12 years ago, with upgrades to the kitchen, bathrooms and roof. The random-width pine plank floors and some of the windows and light fixtures are original.

The house is in Unionville, a village in the Toronto suburbs within the city of Markham, which has about 350,000 residents. Nearby are a pond, which is sometimes used for skating in winter, Mrs. English said, and walking trails.

The train station is about a five-minute drive, Mrs. English said. The trip to Union Station in Toronto (train at rush hours, bus at other times) is about 45 minutes. Restaurants and boutiques are a short walk away, and a large mall is a 10-minute drive, Ms. Fearnley said. The village has annual festivals, she added, and its streets are sometimes used for filming. Downtown Toronto is about 20 miles away; the international airport, about 25 miles.

MARKET OVERVIEW

Toronto’s real estate market is performing “exceptionally well,” said Mark McLean, the president of the Toronto Real Estate Board, a nonprofit group.

In the first quarter of 2016, 475 homes with prices starting at 2 million Canadian dollars, or about $1.56 million, were sold, compared with 259 in the same period last year, Mr. McLean said.

According to a report from his organization, the number of sales over all was up 16 percent over the same period. The average selling price for all home types combined was up 12.1 percent year over year in March.

Several factors are contributing to this strong market, he and other real estate agents said. Growing traffic congestion and the rising appeal of downtown living have led to increased demand for the city’s center and its near suburbs. Low interest rates have made borrowing attractive. And international buyers are also creating demand, partly because of a weak Canadian dollar.

According to Andy Taylor, a senior vice president of sales with the Toronto-based Sotheby’s International Realty Canada, condominium prices per square foot start at 750 Canadian dollars, or around $585, and reach 2,000 Canadian dollars, or $1,560, for the top of the luxury market.

In recent years, the ceiling for Toronto’s luxury home prices has increased. Prices above 10 million Canadian dollars were “almost nonexistent five or 10 years ago,” Mr. Taylor said. “It’s not a huge market here, but we’re starting to see a lot more properties listed and selling above the 10 million mark.” Most of those buyers are foreign, he added.

Mrs. English said prospective home buyers were drawn to Markham because it has a good job market and good schools, train access to downtown Toronto and lower corporate and industrial tax rates than Toronto. The average price of a single-family home in Markham in March was just under 1.3 million Canadian dollars, or about $1.01 million, which was slightly higher than in Toronto, according to a report from the Toronto Real Estate Board.

WHO BUYS IN TORONTO

Chinese buyers, once focused on Vancouver, started spilling over to Toronto about six or seven years ago in search of better values, Mr. Taylor said. That interest has continued to grow more recently, he added.

Large estates in the central Bridle Path area and in Bayview Village, which is farther from the city’s downtown, are both “highly sought after” by Chinese buyers, he said. Quality schools are “probably the number one factor that they look for,” Mr. Taylor said.

Mr. Taylor estimated that 20 percent to 30 percent of luxury single-family homes in the Rosedale, Forest Hill and Lawrence Park neighborhoods, where prices cost between 3 million and 5 million Canadian dollars ($2.34 million and $3.9 million), go to foreign buyers.

BUYING BASICS

Ontario’s real estate laws are similar to those of the United States, said Jerry B. Udell, a partner at the McTague Law Firm in Windsor, Ontario, who specializes in real estate.

Buyers and sellers hire their own real estate lawyers, who function as notaries in Canada, Mr. Udell said. No additional notary is required, he said.

Legal fees range from several hundred to several thousand dollars, depending on the complexity of the transaction and the scope of the work required.

Denise Lash, the founder of Lash Condo Law, a Toronto condominium law firm, said the buyer’s closing costs include land transfer taxes for the province of Ontario and the city of Toronto, both of which are calculated on a sliding scale based on the purchase price. For newly constructed homes and condominiums, there is a 13 percent Harmonized Sales Tax, also payable by the buyer, unless it is included in the purchase price, she said.

Both lawyers recommended getting title insurance, which is not mandatory.

It is “relatively easy” for foreign buyers with good credit to get financing in Canada, Mr. Udell said. Legal fees are higher, Ms. Lash said, if a buyer requires a mortgage.

WEBSITES

City of Markham: markham.ca

Unionville Business Improvement Area: unionvilleinfo.com

Ontario Tourism: ontariotravel.net

Unionville Festival: unionvillefestival.com

Markham Jazz Festival: markhamjazzfestival.com

LANGUAGES AND CURRENCY

English, French; Canadian dollar (1 Canadian dollar = $0.78)

TAXES AND FEES

Property taxes for this house in 2015 were approximately 5,300 Canadian dollars, or about $4,135.

CONTACT

Alanna English, Re/Max All-Stars, (416) 566-9087; alannaenglish.com


