


A few weeks ago, the start of the N.F.L. draft looked as if it would be filled with linemen and defensive players. Two huge trades and one Jerry Jones pick later, two quarterbacks and a running back had been taken within the first four picks. The first round alone featured eight players who are likely to be drafted this year by fantasy owners. Here is a look at the newest members of the N.F.L. who are relevant to fantasy drafts.

Quarterbacks

Jared Goff, California, Los Angeles Rams

Carson Wentz, North Dakota State, Philadelphia Eagles

Any discussion of the first round has to start with the two signal-callers who will forever be linked, even though they do not share many similarities outside their draft spots. Goff, a four-star recruit, had his choice of Division I programs, while Wentz started his college career as a backup at the Football Championship Subdivision powerhouse North Dakota State. From a fantasy angle, Wentz is unlikely to start in Week 1 for the Eagles, while Goff is the prohibitive favorite to open for the Rams. Wentz, though, is more of a dual threat; he rushed for more than 1,000 yards in his Bison career, while Goff graduated with minus 114 rushing yards (the N.C.A.A. counts sacks as rushing yards lost; the N.F.L. does not). Since 2006, six quarterbacks with negative career rushing yards have been drafted in the top 60: Matt Leinart, Brandon Weeden, Jimmy Clausen, Chad Henne, Goff and Christian Hackenberg — who was sacked on practically every snap. Despite their draft status, neither Goff nor Wentz should have much impact in standard fantasy leagues as rookies — Wentz because of a lack of opportunity, and Goff because of a lack of weapons at wide receiver.

Paxton Lynch, Memphis, Denver Broncos

Given the situations that the quarterbacks drafted in the first round will face, Paxton Lynch has the best chance to finish the season as a top-10 fantasy quarterback. For starters, he will be throwing to Emmanuel Sanders and Demaryius Thomas, who are two of the most talented wideouts in the league. Lynch also has the ability to use his legs as a fantasy asset: He rushed for 13 touchdowns as a redshirt sophomore. However, the training wheels will not come off right away, and we expect this to be a run-first offense. At this point, Lynch is certainly not more than a QB2 or a bye-week replacement.

Christian Hackenberg, Penn State, Jets

Jacoby Brissett, North Carolina State, New England Patriots

Cody Kessler, Southern California, Cleveland Browns

To many observers, the most polarizing player in the draft is the former Penn State quarterback Christian Hackenberg. His raw arm talent and his ability to read defenses provide an upside, but just about everything else needs major work. He will need time. If anybody in this group throws in regular-season games this year, something will have gone terribly wrong.

Running Backs

Ezekiel Elliott, Ohio State, Dallas Cowboys

Entering the draft, it was clear that Elliott would very likely be the top fantasy prospect. With the Cowboys, he will be able to run behind a great offensive line that helped Darren McFadden and Joseph Randle combine for 1,402 rushing yards and seven touchdowns last season; many fantasy owners also remember DeMarco Murray rushing for 1,845 yards in 2014. Even with Alfred Morris and McFadden still around, Elliott will become the featured back behind one of the best lines in football, making him a top-10 option with the kind of star potential to be a frequent first-round pick.

Derrick Henry, Alabama, Tennessee Titans

Kenyan Drake, Alabama, Miami Dolphins

The reigning Heisman Trophy winner, Henry, will team up with the 2014 winner, quarterback Marcus Mariota, but it is Henry’s former college teammate Kenyan Drake who should end up having more fantasy value this season. Henry has no value in the passing game and does not seem like an ideal fit next to Mariota in the backfield. He will most likely take some goal-line touchdowns from Murray, but he will not have many carries if Murray stays healthy. Fantasy owners who recognize Henry’s name will very likely overdraft him.

Savvy fantasy owners should target the more explosive Drake. He enters a Miami backfield with little stability behind the current starter Jay Ajayi, who has massive injury concerns and rushed for 187 yards last season. Betting against Ajayi as a three-down back for 16 weeks seems like a wise gamble. Drake will have immediate value as a point-per-reception option with the upside for a lot more if (or when) he is able to take the starting role.

C. J. Prosise, Notre Dame, Seattle Seahawks

One of the most explosive players in the draft, Prosise spent his early years at Notre Dame as a safety and only switched to offense last season. He rushed for more than 10 yards on 24 percent of his carries at Notre Dame, and he will immediately step into the third-down role that the Seahawks have struggled to fill. While Thomas Rawls will be the starter, he is recovering from a broken ankle. Prosise’s talent should make him a high-upside pick as fantasy owners fill out their benches.

Wide Receivers

Corey Coleman, Baylor, Cleveland Browns

Amari Cooper was the sole stud in last year’s class of receivers. This year offers a deeper group, but do not expect star-level statistics from their rookie seasons. Coleman is the top option because of his talent and the opportunity he will have in Cleveland. The Browns are not counting on Josh Gordon to return, and whether he does or not, Coleman should be one of quarterback Robert Griffin III’s top targets, flashing the skills that resulted in 20 touchdowns for Baylor last season and led to Coleman being the first receiver picked.

Josh Doctson, T.C.U., Washington Redskins

One of the best vertical and red zone threats in the draft, Doctson’s fantasy value will be tied to Kirk Cousins’s ability to build upon his breakout 2015 season. With DeSean Jackson, Pierre Garcon, and Jordan Reed, there will not be quite as many of the opportunities Doctson would need to be a fantasy option every week, but he has the tools to become a key member of the Redskins’ pass-heavy offense. In a dynasty format, Doctson would be our top wide receiver.

Sterling Shepard, Oklahoma, Giants

Not just a slot receiver, Shepard was a star at Oklahoma and has been called the best route-runner in the draft class by many scouts. He is a great fit with the Giants and will have many opportunities for targets in another N.F.C. East pass-heavy offense. Shepard should fill the role Rueben Randle left open in the Giants’ offense, but he is far more talented. Playing both in the slot and outside, he should be a decent flex option and a good upside pick in P.P.R. leagues.

Will Fuller, Notre Dame, Houston Texans

Braxton Miller, Ohio State, Houston Texans

The Texans completely revitalized their offense in the off-season, moving on from Arian Foster and opting for a young, speedy offensive core around quarterback Brock Osweiler. Fuller ran a 4.32 40-yard dash at the combine, the fastest of any receiver prospect. Unfortunately, he does not have the hands to match the star potential his speed gives him. He tallied 21 drops over his last two seasons for the Irish. He and Miller, a quarterback turned receiver, should make some great plays as rookies, but not with the reliability necessary to be great fantasy options. Fuller is worth a late-round flier, while Miller should be left undrafted.

Laquon Treadwell, Mississippi, Minnesota Vikings

Tyler Boyd, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati Bengals

Michael Thomas, Ohio State, New Orleans Saints

Leonte Carroo, Rutgers, Miami Dolphins

This final group of receivers taken on Days 1 and 2 offers a mixed bag of potential and opportunity. Treadwell is the highest-drafted and most physically talented, but he lands in an offense that has been terrible for receivers under quarterback Teddy Bridgewater, who has 14 touchdown passes in each of the last two seasons. Boyd should be a steady deep-league option, but he is unlikely to have many red-zone looks with Tyler Eifert and A. J. Green around. Thomas will play in another prolific passing offense but most likely will be inconsistent unless he can win the No. 2 receiver role. Carroo is an extremely talented and sure-handed receiver, but landing in Miami leaves much to be desired. All four of these players could be late-round options or undrafted in most standard fantasy drafts, but they should be monitored as the season progresses.

As for the other fantasy positions, no rookie tight end is very likely to have much fantasy relevance in 2016. In an absolutely shocking turn of events, kicker Roberto Aguayo was drafted in the second round and is likely to be fantasy relevant. However, we cannot recommend drafting a kicker before the final round. If only the Buccaneers felt the same.


