


Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Denise Grady, a Times science writer, recounts how the first man in the United States to receive a penis transplant urged her to report “the unvarnished truth.”

I didn’t expect Thomas Manning to talk to me about his penis transplant. When I was doing the reporting for a previous article, about plans to perform this kind of operation at Johns Hopkins, I learned that the doctors there had several potential candidates. A hospital spokeswoman checked, and not one of those candidates was willing to talk, not even if we promised anonymity. So when I first discussed the transplant with Noah Brown, a public affairs officer for Massachusetts General Hospital, I asked if the recipient would talk. I said we understood that this was a sensitive and embarrassing subject, and we would keep his name out of it if he wished.

But really, I doubted that he would want to be interviewed at all.

Noah said not only was the patient eager to talk, but he wanted his name and picture used and he wanted to meet me in person and look me in the eye. I thought, wow, who is this guy?

One of the best things about being a reporter is that you get to meet some remarkable people, and it’s your job to ask them questions.

Mr. Manning turned out to be a man of strong opinions. He expected firm handshakes from all visitors, even though he was recovering from surgery and hooked up to IV’s and people were afraid of hurting him. He described himself as “straightforward, maybe too straightforward,” and a fan of what he called “the unvarnished truth.” Several times, he launched into a subject by saying, “I’m not looking for a fight, but ...”

Something that infuriated him, he said, were the ridiculous taboos around talking about sex and genitals in this country. How do people think we all got here? he asked. Go ahead, ask me questions, ask me whatever you want. It was almost a dare.

He was willing to go public, he said, because there were other men in the same boat — who had lost their penises because of cancer or injuries — and he knew that many of them were so ashamed and mortified that they were depressed, isolated, withdrawn, living in the shadows, hiding what had happened to them. He thought younger men had the greatest difficulty, and he knew that many of them would rather lose an arm or a leg or even die than have a genital injury. He thought, too, that some younger men, if confronted with cancer as he had been, would probably rather risk their lives with lesser, ineffective treatments than allow their penises to be amputated. But the amputation saved his life. He wanted to speak out, thinking maybe it would help other men.

He didn’t try to minimize how devastating it was to have the amputation. But he said that while he was recovering, and feeling down, he looked around the hospital and saw sick children, and a girl with brain cancer, and decided he had no right to complain. He also became determined to have a transplant if it ever became possible.

His doctor was startled by the idea at first. Mr. Manning’s siblings humored him when he brought it up, apparently thinking he was talking nonsense. His mother, with whom he lives, was initially frightened at the thought of such an operation. But she finally changed her mind and wound up in his corner, supporting him all the way. A few months ago, when it became clear that the transplant was a possibility, Mr. Manning decided not to even tell his brother and two sisters about it until after it was over. He wanted to surprise them, he said. I think there was a bit of “I told you so” involved.

Could Mr. Manning’s decision to talk about his condition in public become one of those “moments” that opens the doors for others to do the same? Women like Betty Ford brought mastectomy out into the open. Thomas Manning isn’t rich or famous, but maybe it’s even more compelling that an ordinary man with a high-school education, who earns his living moving packages around for a bank, is willing to stand up and say, this is what happened to me, I’m not the only one, it’s no disgrace. And now, there might be a way to repair the damage.

I love what our readers have said about Mr. Manning. There were many comments like this: “I think Manning is a great guy for speaking out about this, for realizing that he has nothing to be ashamed of and for his frank, bold, take-it-or-leave-it facial expression in the accompanying picture. Although his anatomy may have been damaged, he’s got courage and he’s all man.”


