


The 2015 baseball season began amid speculation that the Mets would actually outperform the Yankees, which is not something that happens that often.

Those predictions turned out to be accurate, but it took awhile to pan out. At the conclusion of the July 31 trading deadline, for instance, the Yankees were a solid 58-44 and six games up in the American League East. The Mets? They were barely above .500 at 53-50 and were fortunate to be just two games back of an underachieving Washington club in the National League East.

Things changed in August. With Yoenis Cespedes added to their lineup, the Mets took off. By Sept. 1, they were 73-59 and had roared right past the Nationals. The Yankees, meanwhile, flattened out. Their 73-58 record was barely better than it had been a month before and they were now a second-place club, trailing Toronto.

The contrasting trends continued through the remainder of the season. The fading Yankees finished at 87-75, a wild-card club that lasted all of nine innings in the postseason.

The surging Mets finished at 90-72, division winners who made it all the way to the World Series.

Now, 20 games into the 2016 season, nothing has changed. The Yankees, who have an intimidating late-game bullpen, inconsistent starting pitching and a creaky middle of the batting order, are floundering with an 8-12 mark. The Mets, with a capable-looking lineup and a standout rotation that is coming together after a bumpy start, are an impressive 13-7.

That is a five-game gap that could mean something, or nothing at all, since it is still so early in the season. But it does sort of hint at the notion that the Mets are now in one of those rare periods where they might be the better New York team for a while.

The last time it happened was in the mid- to late 1980s, when the Yankees were usually pretty decent but not as good as the Mets, who twice won 100 games in the regular season and, in 1986, prevailed in the World Series.

This season’s gap is easily grasped from a handful of team statistics. The Mets, with a surprising 30 home runs, ranked fourth in that category in the majors going into Thursday’s games. The Yankees, with 21 homers, ranked 15th. The Mets were 13th in team batting average (.251) and runs scored (88). In those two categories, the Yankees were a woeful 23rd (.237) and 27th (72).

On the pitching side, the Mets ranked fourth in team E.R.A., at 2.91. The Yankees, with a 4.42 E.R.A., ranked 23rd.

Both teams have intriguing weekends ahead of them. The Yankees will be in Fenway Park for their first meeting this season with a Boston team trying to rebound from consecutive last-place finishes in the A.L. East. The Red Sox are 12-10, with better hitting than pitching. However, the Yankees are scheduled to face Boston’s expensive new ace, David Price, who is 3-0 this season (with a shaky 5.76 E.R.A.) and, on Sunday night, will be making the 31st start of his career against the Yankees.

Set to oppose him is Nathan Eovaldi, who carried a no-hitter into the seventh inning when he faced Texas on Monday.

As is often the case when the Yankees play the Red Sox, the Sunday game will get prime-time treatment from ESPN. But in a reflection of the shifting terrain in New York, that game may be overshadowed by Sunday afternoon’s marquee matchup at Citi Field, with San Francisco’s Madison Bumgarner scheduled to go up against the Mets’ Noah Syndergaard.

Bumgarner, who has three World Series rings and was voted the most valuable player of the 2014 Series, is 2-2 this season with a 3.64 E.R.A. He has not pitched that well, but he did hit the 12th home run of his career this month, and his second off Clayton Kershaw. As for Syndergaard, he is 2-0 this season with a 1.69 E.R.A. and has been making the radar gun go berserk.

Then again, Syndergaard doesn’t throw any harder than the Yankees’ Aroldis Chapman, who, when he returns from his suspension, will combine with Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller to create a potential nightmare for opposing teams in the late innings of close games.

Perhaps that threesome will even come to rival the popular appeal of the Mets’ starting pitchers — Syndergaard and Jacob deGrom and Matt Harvey and Steven Matz. But not yet. For now, at least, the Mets continue to be No. 1.


