


A man suspected of sprinkling a combination of mouse poison, hand sanitizer and water on produce in grocery stores in Michigan was arraigned on Thursday in district court in Ann Arbor, Mich., on four felony counts of poisoning food and drink.

The man, Kyle Andrew Bessemer, 29, had been arrested after he was identified by members of the public when images from surveillance video showing him in a grocery store with a red shopping basket were published online, the F.B.I. and the local police announced on Tuesday.

The authorities said Mr. Bessemer, of Ann Arbor, had intentionally contaminated food in open food bars and produce sections by spraying the items with the mixture at stores, including a Whole Foods Market, a Meijer and a Plum Market, over the last two weeks.

It was not clear if anyone had been sickened by the poison or how it had been detected. The authorities did not provide a motive.

A Washtenaw Count district court judge, Elizabeth Pollard Hines, ordered Mr. Bessemer to be held on $250,000 bail. A hearing was set for next Thursday.

State authorities listed at least 15 other stores in other cities, including Flint and Midland, that might have been affected. Health officials in Michigan said that the man also admitted to contaminating some produce stacked in stands.

The authorities said the chemicals in the mixture were a form of anticoagulant, similar to what is found in medicines that prevent blood clotting. The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services said that it “does not anticipate any adverse health effects” for anyone who ate the contaminated products.

The authorities were investigating those episodes, the Washtenaw district attorney’s office said in a statement.

The announcement that someone had randomly doused self-serve food sent a shudder of concern throughout the food industry, which is well aware of the unintentional contamination associated with people serving themselves from common bowls and trays, said Michael Doyle, the director of the Center for Food Safety at the University of Georgia.

Consumers lean in and heap their plates, some without utensils. People sneeze into the food. Some scoop up a little taste with their fingers. Strands of hair, from scalps or beards, can drift down into the serving bowls. Mr. Doyle said his wife once found a Band-Aid in a salad.

“I try to avoid them,” he said, referring to salad bars and buffets.

After the mouse poison scare in Michigan, state health officials advised residents to discard foods like salads and olives if they had been purchased between mid-March and the end of April.

Plum Market said in an emailed statement on Thursday that it had “proactively removed all exposed produce and prepared foods.” A spokeswoman, Andrea Ritter, said in a telephone interview that “guests were pleased” by the measures.


