


ARLINGTON, Tex. — If Yankees Manager Joe Girardi were instead the king of baseball, able to change the game on a whim, one of his edicts would be to outlaw defensive shifts.

“Absolutely,” Girardi said Tuesday, his liberal deployment of shifts notwithstanding. “I just think the field was built this way for a reason — it’s two on one side, two on another.”

If Girardi wielded such power in his current job, he would get writer’s cramp from compiling a list of all the matters that need redress: a faulty offense, a growing list of injuries and the puzzling decline of Luis Severino.

Severino, 22, showed poise when he was called up in August, giving the rotation the kind of boost that most likely would have landed him a start to begin the Yankees’ division series had they won the American League wild-card game.

Severino has not looked like that pitcher this season, especially on Tuesday, when the Texas Rangers broke out of their offensive funk by chasing him after only three innings on their way to a 10-1 win.

Severino — who gave up five runs in the third inning, all with two outs — dropped to 0-3 while his E.R.A. ballooned to 6.86. He has allowed 32 hits in 192/3 innings.

Although Severino has made just four starts and other Yankees starters have struggled to find consistency, Girardi indicated that Severino’s spot in the rotation could be in jeopardy sooner than later.

“The mind is a big part of it — how you’re adjusting to it mentally, and are you starting to execute pitches as time goes on?” Girardi said. “You watch younger players closer than you watch veterans who have a track record because you don’t know how they’re going to react when they struggle.”

The Rangers did their biggest damage in the third inning, when six straight batters reached base, all while hail and rain pelted the players. The Rangers treated relievers Ivan Nova and Chasen Shreve only slightly more kindly, with Ian Desmond hitting a home run off Nova and Rougned Odor blasting one off Shreve.

Meanwhile, the Yankees have scored more than four runs just once since April 9, and with Tuesday’s loss, they fell to 8-11.

On Tuesday, it was A. J. Griffin’s turn to stifle the Yankees. Griffin scattered four hits (all singles), walked one and struck out five in eight innings. The Yankees’ only run came in the seventh when Brett Gardner walked, took third on a Carlos Beltran single and scored on an infield hit by Mark Teixeira. Any thoughts of a big inning evaporated quickly as Brian McCann hit into a double play and Starlin Castro took a called third strike.

Shortly after, the public-address announcer advised fans to leave the upper deck of the stadium, with high winds, hail and thunderstorms in the area. Many took the cue to head for the exits, the Yankees surely wishing they could join them.


