


At the start of the N.B.A. playoffs, LeBron James began reading Jerry West’s autobiography, “West by West: My Charmed, Tormented Life.” It was a story he could relate to. Despite being a transcendent figure in basketball — he is, after all, the inspiration for the N.B.A. logo — West, like James, had often been criticized for his losing record in the N.B.A. finals.

If James gathered any advice in preventing another letdown in his seventh finals appearance, it proved prescient as the Cleveland Cavaliers overcame a three-games-to-one series deficit against the Golden State Warriors to capture their first N.B.A. championship. For James, who scored 27 points and had 11 rebounds and 11 assists in the Cavaliers’ 93-89 Game 7 victory on Sunday, it was his third title in his sixth straight trip to the finals.

The victory not only helped James deliver on his promise of bringing a long-awaited title to Cleveland, but it assuaged the criticisms from the hordes who had made dissecting his playoff performances a social media pastime.

The laws of the N.B.A. championship can be fickle. It is fitting that a legend like Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics leads all players with 11 titles, against one finals loss. But sometimes players earn rings — or do not — more as a matter of circumstance. After all, West was 1-8 in the finals and is still known as Mr. Clutch.

His teammate Elgin Baylor, a Hall of Famer who played his entire career with the Lakers, in Minneapolis and then Los Angeles, was 0 for 8 in the finals, including seven series losses to the Celtics. If Twitter had existed in the 1960s, Baylor might have been the internet’s king of basketball memes. (Imagine Crying Baylor instead of Crying Jordan.)

In a cruel twist, after knee injuries had led Baylor to retire nine games into the 1971-72 season, West and the Lakers won the long elusive championship. (“I do not want to prolong my career when I cannot maintain the standards I established for myself over the years,” Baylor said at the time.)

Others are more fortunate. John Salley was a vital role player on the Detroit Pistons when they lost in the 1988 finals and won the next two titles. He earned another ring with the Chicago Bulls in 1996 but barely played for the team. After spending the next season in Greece and retiring for a couple of years, he returned to the N.B.A. and collected another ring, with the Lakers in 2000.

Salley was respected for his veteran experience while he was with the Bulls and the Lakers, but Robert Horry had a more tangible asset that elevated him from occasional starter to seven-time champion.

His demonstrated ability to make baskets in the waning seconds of playoff games earned Horry the nickname Big Shot Rob and a spot on the championship squads of the Houston Rockets (1994, 1995), the Lakers (2000, 2001, 2002) and the San Antonio Spurs (2005, 2007), making him the second player, after Salley, to have won titles with three N.B.A. teams.

Horry is also the only player with seven or more rings who did not collect a majority of them during the Celtics’ dominating run from 1957 to 1969, which featured 11 championships.

Among those Celtics, Sam Jones was 10-1 in the finals, and Tom Heinsohn was 8-1. K. C. Jones, Satch Sanders and John Havlicek were 8-0, and Frank Ramsey won seven of eight.

The only non-Celtic to have appeared in 10 N.B.A. finals is Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, who was victorious six times. His Lakers teammate Magic Johnson reached the finals in nine of his 13 seasons, winning five titles.

Two other longtime Lakers, Michael Cooper and Derek Fisher, appeared in eight finals and won five. (One of Fisher’s finals appearances, in 2012, came with the Oklahoma City Thunder.)

Baylor — he of the 0-8 finals record — actually received a ring for the 1972 Lakers championship, not as an active player but as a member of the team’s front office. Such jewelry was never bequeathed to Larry Foust, who went winless in five finals appearances with three teams. After dropping the 1955 and 1956 finals with the Fort Wayne Pistons, Foust lost in three additional finals, with the Minneapolis Lakers and the St. Louis Hawks.

Max Zaslofsky, a teammate of Foust’s on the 1955 Pistons, was unsuccessful in four finals appearances, having also lost with the Chicago Stags in the Basketball Association of America and with the Knicks. A Brooklyn native, Zaslofsky was regarded by his former teammate Dick McGuire as “one of the better two-handed shooters of all time” and spent the early years of his career earning $5 to $10 a game.

James made almost $23 million in salary this season, more than $280,000 per regular-season game. But James demonstrated his value in delivering consecutive 41-point efforts in Games 5 and 6 to resuscitate the Cavaliers, before becoming only the third player in finals history to record a triple-double in Game 7. The first player to do so? West, of course, in 1969.

That year, West’s Lakers lost in the finals, but he won the first finals Most Valuable Player Award and remains the only player on a losing team to have earned that honor. There was much talk that James was going to win this year’s finals M.V.P. award, win or lose.

With his performance Sunday night, he avoided another dubious distinction with West, that familiar woebegone figure, who just happens to now work as an executive board member with the Warriors.


