


When news of the worst earthquake to strike Ecuador in four decades reached Corona, Queens, on Saturday night, the house of Assemblyman Francisco P. Moya there turned into a de facto Ecuadorean embassy.

By Sunday morning, Mr. Moya’s parents, Maria and Edgar, immigrants from that country, were serving coffee to neighbors in the heart of New York’s Ecuadorean community.

“We were talking about how devastating this is, and can we rebuild?” Mr. Moya said, adding that his cousins, aunts and uncles in Quito, the capital, were rattled but all right. “How bad is it?” he continued. “What is the infrastructural damage done and the ramifications throughout the whole country?”

The answers were scarce, even as the death toll soared above 245 on Sunday, with thousands of people injured. Mr. Moya, a Queens-born Democrat elected to the State Assembly in 2010, spent Sunday coordinating a local response with civic organizations and the consulate in Manhattan.

Ecuadoreans represent the city’s sixth-largest immigrant group, numbering more than 137,000, according to the most recent Newest New Yorkers report in 2013. Mr. Moya said the Ecuadorean population in Queens alone, including first-generation Americans like himself, seemed closer to 300,000 people.

Inevitably, the 7.8-magnitude earthquake affected some Queens residents more directly. Martha Gualotuna was trying to suppress the panic. Nobody in the family could find her brother, Cesar Augustus Gualotuna, 37, who lives in El Carmen, about 100 miles southeast of the epicenter.

“We are trying to figure out how to reach him, because it’s a disaster,” Ms. Gualotuna, 57, a mechanic, said. She stood with her daughter, Tana Quillupangui, 19, at a rally in Corona Plaza for Hillary Clinton, in advance of the state’s Democratic primary on Tuesday.

“We are scared. It was the strongest earthquake, and those provinces are very poor,” Ms. Gualotuna said. “They’re going to need money and medicine. They’re going to need a lot of help.”

Victoria Aria, 39, brought her children to the rally just to let her husband continue making calls to Biblián, about 400 miles south of the epicenter. Her husband’s brothers and mother were not responding, and they are not on Facebook, she said. That had been the prime source of news for many in the Ecuadorean community in Queens.

“He’s worried because it was so strong. He’s very sad because he doesn’t know where his mother is,” Ms. Aria said.

Even former President Bill Clinton understood the concerns of the crowd in Queens, where he was campaigning for his wife on Sunday. “Our hearts go out to Ecuador,” he said to start his remarks at the rally.

At El Pequeño Coffee Shop, a well-known Ecuadorean restaurant on Roosevelt Avenue in Jackson Heights, the buzz was muted as soccer flashed on the television screens.

“I was nervous,” Jorge Matute, 57, said. “I called my family in Azogues immediately. They told me they felt the quake very strongly there.”

Even though none of his relatives in Azogues, about 400 miles south of the epicenter, was injured, he said people in the country were frightened.

To help New York residents with Ecuadorean connections, Mr. Moya’s office and that of State Senator Jose Peralta, a Democrat, planned to provide resources for contacting relatives and information on where to direct donations.

“Right now, we’re still gathering information,” Mr. Peralta said.

The consulate general of Ecuador scheduled a public meeting at 7 p.m. on Monday for community organizations and individuals wanting to hear how they could best help.

In Ecuador, according to Linda Machuca, the consul general in New York, the most pressing need now is finding equipment and professionals to assist in rescue operations.

She acknowledged the enthusiasm of several New York-area organizations who had already expressed their desire to help, but requested patience. “One of the best qualities that Ecuadoreans have is solidarity, especially in this difficult moment,” Ms. Machuca said.


