


An 18-year-old man fired a high-powered rifle at students as they were leaving a small-town high school prom in northern Wisconsin late Saturday, injuring two young people, before he was shot and killed by a police officer, the authorities said.

The police identified the suspect on Sunday as Jakob Wagner, a graduate of Antigo High School. Officials said they believe Mr. Wagner acted alone.

It was unclear whether the two shooting victims were targeted. One of them, a female student, was treated at a hospital and released, the police said. The other, a male, was “doing well” on Monday after undergoing surgery for his injuries, according to a statement released by his family, who asked to remain anonymous.

The burst of gun violence during a teenage rite of passage has shaken Antigo, a community of about 8,000 people northwest of Green Bay, where residents say everyone knows everyone.

“It’s a sobering experience,” said Brandon Irish, a D.J. who was providing music for the event. “We’ll heal, but it’s going to be something that stays with us for a long time.”

The junior prom inside the high school’s gym had been winding down Saturday when a commotion erupted shortly after 11 p.m.

Mr. Irish said he did not hear any gunshots, but he was startled by the flash of red-and-blue police lights outside. Next, he saw person lying on the ground and an officer running with a gun drawn.

Police officers happened to have been patrolling in the school’s parking lot when they heard the gunfire, the Antigo Police Department said in a statement. “One of those officers was able to fire upon the shooter, stopping the threat to additional attendees,” it said.

Students were held in a corner of the gym until about 1:30 a.m. as police officers sought to determine whether any additional threat remained, Mr. Irish said.

Mr. Wagner, the suspect, was arrested and taken to a hospital, where he was treated. He died at about 1 a.m., the police said. Investigators executed a search warrant at the teenager’s residence on Sunday.

Donald Childs, the Antigo school district’s interim administrator, said the weaponry Mr. Wagner was carrying suggested the toll could have been much worse, especially if he had entered the gym.

“You don’t really know his intent,” he said. “But I think we inferred that that was his intent given the size of the magazine and the high-powered rifle.”

The shooting drew expressions of concern from community and political leaders across Wisconsin and seemed likely to kindle debates in the coming days and weeks about gun control.

Gov. Scott Walker on Sunday praised the response of the Antigo officers on Twitter, saying it “undoubtedly saved lives.”

The parents of the injured boy on Monday thanked the police and medical staff who helped their son and asked people to pray for all of the students affected by the shooting.

“Please also pray for the family of Jakob Wagner,” they said in a statement. “As much as we are struggling through this event, we cannot imagine the grief they are experiencing at this time.”

The Unified School District of Antigo said in a statement that it would have counselors on hand Monday for the high school’s roughly 750 students. The authorities also planned to deploy a “heightened police presence” around the school for the next few days, it said.

“We are thankful police and staff acted quickly together to prevent this incident from becoming a major tragedy,” the district said.


