


PARIS — Two rounds of French Open tennis haven’t come close to turning Marco Trungelliti of Argentina into a millionaire.

But even after taxes, the $67,000 Trungelliti earned last week in prize money for one win and one loss should cover much of his costs for the rest of the year, including travel to other tournaments and paying his coach.

“It’s the first time in my life that I have money in my pocket,” said Trungelliti, 26, who is ranked 166th.

With about $33,578 from a first-round loss, the oft-injured American Brian Baker is thinking about hiring his own physiotherapist. He won’t hire a coach, partly because of the cost.

“Do I want to spend all of my savings trying to hire a coach and physio and go all out this year and just hope that I make it big again?” said Baker, a former top-60 player whose career has been derailed by serious injuries.

He added: “If your body doesn’t hold up and you’re finished, then you’re down 150 grand or whatever.”

Big pay increases at tennis’s four major tournaments are helping lower-ranked players, allowing to them to hire help to compete on a more equal footing with the superstars and their support teams.

Still, they are hardly rolling in money like their counterparts in wealthier sports. Soccer has hundreds of players making megabucks. In tennis, you don’t have to search far down the ranks to find players for whom balancing the books is as vital as a good forehand. Just look about 50 spots below multimillionaires like Roger Federer and Serena Williams.

“In my country, so many think that I’m a freaking billionaire,” said Ricardas Berankis of Lithuania, ranked 50th. “But trust me, it’s not like that.”

Since stars like Federer leaned on Grand Slam tournaments for larger slices of revenue for the players, prize money has increased, with a particular eye on helping players who lose early. A first-round loss at this French Open is worth double what it was in 2011, and second- and third-round losses are more than double — now about $67,000 and $114,000.

The United States Open paid $19,000, $31,000 and $50,000 for Rounds 1, 2 and 3 in 2010; the amounts last year were $39,500, $68,600 and $120,200.

For Eric Butorac, a doubles player who has been on the ATP Player Council for eight years and is now its president, the increases have “helped an immense amount” and are having a noticeable effect. Many players five years ago couldn’t afford to travel with a coach. Now “almost nobody” has come to Roland Garros without one, he said.

“Our intention was never to have players necessarily rolling in the dough,” he said. “What we wanted was that a player ranked 90 in the world could have the same experience, or a similar experience, to a top player and feel like they were on somewhat of a level playing field.”

With friends in the lower ranks, Federer and others at the top “understand the struggles, they wanted to help,” Butorac said. On the men’s side, the pool of players making at least a couple of hundred thousand dollars in prizes per year has grown to about 200 — 150 in singles and 50 in doubles, he estimated. He said he pulled in $180,000 last year, and had about $75,000 in expenses.

“That’s a quality life,” he said.

Still, players see room for improvement. Roland Garros organizers say the tournament generated $220 million in 2015. The prize pot was $30 million.

For Berankis, the players’ share is “a joke.”

“They give peanuts here and there, and they are screaming, ‘We are helping them a lot,’” he said. “It’s not really fair.”

A first-round loser in Paris for the third time this year, Berankis rattled off a list of typical expenses. Stringing rackets cost $30 to $35 each, with six to eight needed per match. A coach is anywhere between $1,600 and $5,500 per week. In Paris, Berankis shared a physiotherapist with two other players to reduce costs.

“Soccer players, basketball players, they don’t pay nothing for their own expenses; everything is paid out by the club,” he said.

The Swedish player Johanna Larsson, ranked 62nd, said her expenses top $100,000 per year. She can’t afford to travel full time with a coach and this year hired a training partner for only two weeks. She books hotels and flights herself, scouring websites for cheap deals. “It’s not more glamorous than that,” she said.

Larsson, who lost in the second round, got $67,000 here. The Slams “are basically financing our tennis,” she said.

“I try to save money on most things that I can, and I think it’s pretty much the same for every player,” she added. “The players who are in the top 20 don’t have to worry that much.”

Players need a chief executive’s head on made-for-tennis shoulders. Spending too much one year could leave them short the next if wins don’t follow.

“I can’t permit myself a physio,” said Gilles Muller, ranked 42nd, from Luxembourg. “With my season last year, I could have stretched to that. But it’s too much of a risk for me. I have a family.”


