


Something strange in the neighborhood? Ever since 1984, when a giant Stay Puft Marshmallow Man menaced New Yorkers in the sci-fi comedy hit “Ghostbusters,” moviegoers have known who to call. Though there was a sequel in 1989 and there were animated TV spinoffs, all involving a New York City riddled with paranormal activity and those who battle it, fan anticipation soared when this summer’s reboot (due July 15) was announced. The biggest update — the female comedians Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, Leslie Jones and Kate McKinnon taking over from the original male stars, Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Harold Ramis and Ernie Hudson — has been dissected so much on social media that the new filmmakers wanted to be careful how they executed any other changes from the original. They knew that certain elements of the “Ghostbusters” world, like proton packs and the Ecto-1, were essential to keep for the fans, but they also wanted to add their own spin. The film’s director and co-writer, Paul Feig, and the production designer, Jefferson Sage, explain their thinking behind the updated packs and other ghostbusting gear.

Mr. Feig, a self-proclaimed “hardware geek,” and Mr. Sage consulted a particle physicist from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology about ideas for the pack, which helps contain and capture ghosts. “Even though everything we’re doing is sort of pseudoscience, I wanted it to be based on real science,” Mr. Feig said. The design of the packs is actually part of the new film’s story line: The engineer Jillian Holtzmann (Kate McKinnon) comes up with a prototype that is so large it has to be pushed around on wheels. In the end, they wind up with packs that are smaller than the ones Bill Murray and company used — now 17 pounds, compared with 50 pounds in the original. “I didn’t want my cast to be dwarfed by these enormous things,” he said. But one aspect remains the same: The packs have “a very garage band feel,” a look that says: These tools have been pieced together with very little cash.

In the original film, the Ghostbusters worked out of a disused firehouse in Manhattan. Now the place where they develop their technology shifts. The first work space is in the basement of a forgotten institute in the Bronx. It is dense with equipment and found objects. “They don’t have the money to go and get the finest materials,” Mr. Sage explained. “So something that was true in all of their labs was that they find things on the street, and they realize they can use them.” Over the course of the story, they lose the basement lab, make off with some equipment and are able to put together another one in an unexpected spot: the closed upstairs banquet room of a Chinese restaurant. “The old buffet for the restaurant becomes one of their lab tables, and they have meetings in an old booth for dining,” Mr. Sage said. “They’ve just moved in and gone to work.”

Big ghost-fighting hardware needs transportation with plenty of storage. That was the idea behind the first Ecto-1, the roomy 1959 Cadillac ambulance that took the men wherever duty called. For the women, the filmmakers ran through a number of ideas for a new Ecto-1, first aiming to change it in a major way. “At one time, we thought the Ecto would take the shape of some kind of altered minivan or a tricked-out surplus military vehicle,” Mr. Sage said. “But ultimately we thought, you know, the other one worked so well, we’re going to stay with that.” Mr. Feig wanted to update the year and style of the car, however, and made it a hearse. “The minute I saw this mid-80s Cadillac Fleetwood hearse, I thought, that’s it. I love the straight lines of those cars,” he said. To him, the vehicle “looked cool and modern, while still old.”

The Ghostbusters’ plain but functional jumpsuits became a visual stamp of the original, so the filmmakers didn’t want the updates to stray too far. In that spirit, the costume designer, Jeffrey Kurland, drew up uniforms with reflective stripes on them, much like the reflective gear worn by a transit worker — which is what one of the new Ghostbusters, Patty Tolan (Leslie Jones), happens to be. “We wanted it to be stuff they had found or was given to them,” Mr. Feig said, adding that he liked the orange stripe as a motif. “I also thought it was a flattering design that gave a nice graphic difference to ours from the original,” he said. The jumpsuits can be worn open or closed, allowing the characters to personalize their outfits. The costume staff also built in extra pockets and rings to hang and store the different gear they’ll need at the height of battle


