


GENEVA — The United Nations human rights chief urged Thailand’s military rulers on Friday to curtail “dangerously sweeping” powers that are set to be enshrined under a draft constitution. He also criticized an escalating crackdown on public debate there, including the arrest of critics.

The United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, noted in a statement that in addition to the broad powers proposed in the draft constitution, a series of orders announced on March 30 allow Thai officers to conduct searches, seize assets and detain suspects without warrants or judicial oversight. He called for the Thai military to, “as a matter of priority,” suspend the application of “these dangerously sweeping laws and orders that have bestowed more powers on the military.”

Mr. al-Hussein’s statement, released in advance of a referendum on the draft constitution scheduled for Aug. 7, joined mounting international concern that Thailand, once seen as a bastion of democracy in Southeast Asia, is sliding toward an increasingly authoritarian government under the military junta that seized power in May 2014.

Army leaders said they had to intervene to end growing violence between rival political parties and to restore stability. The draft charter, unveiled at the end of March, has drawn criticism from major Thai political parties for extending and entrenching the role of the military in politics.

The proposed constitution provides for the military to appoint members of a senate who would, in turn, choose the prime minister. It also legalizes and prolongs search-and-seizure powers announced last month.

Rights groups say the draft charter falls well short of the military’s promise to restore a democratic government, and they express concern that the military is instead tightening its grip at a time when King Bhumibol Adulyadej’s poor health has deepened uncertainty over the country’s political future.

“Extending the military’s powers is not the answer to rebuilding Thailand’s political landscape,” Mr. al-Hussein said. “Thailand has competent civilian institutions and should be looking to strengthen the rule of law and good governance, not undermine it.”

He expressed concern that a crackdown on critics would intensify, noting that a former government minister, Watana Muangsook, was arrested on Monday for posting criticism of the proposed constitution on social media. Although the minister was released on Thursday, five members of a group that had staged a protest calling for his release were also briefly detained.

At least 85 people have been summoned, detained or sent to a camp for “attitude adjustment” since the start of the year, Ravina Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the high commissioner, said at a news briefing in Geneva. Although many were released after hours or days, she said, the authorities’ actions have had “a chilling effect” on debate.

Thais had been “told, in no uncertain terms, that any criticism of this constitution will not be tolerated,” Ms. Shamdasani said. “This is not the way to adopt a new constitution.”


