


It is among the success stories of industrial New York: A warehouse that once housed a copper company was transformed into a film studio replete with stages, sound rooms and sets as the city experienced a boom in film and television production.

Eastern Effects, the company that built the studio, started in 1999 with a single employee in an apartment-size office and grew to include a small complex of buildings in the gentrifying area around the Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn. Large segments of “The Americans,” the show on FX about Cold War spies, were shot there.

But this week, the company learned that it would most likely have to leave the warehouse, home to most of its production space, within five years. The parcel, at 270 Nevins Street, was selected by the city and approved by the Environmental Protection Agency to be used in its cleanup of the area, part of an agreement that was made final on Thursday.

In its cleanup of the canal, declared a Superfund site in 2010, the E.P.A. worked with the city to find a location for an eight-million-gallon sewage tank to help curb discharge during heavy rains.

While the agency had pushed to put the tank under Thomas Greene Playground, the city and park advocates balked, warning that it would require closing parts of the playground and a pool for a decade. The tank is now planned for a parcel just north of the film studio, across the street from the park. The warehouse site is needed as a staging area to build the tank, officials say.

Scott Levy, the founder and co-owner of Eastern Effects, said he was formally notified of the plan in April.

Though the warehouse is one of four buildings his company uses in Gowanus, it is the largest. The possibility that the warehouse will be demolished, he said, will drastically affect his ability to attract large productions like “The Americans.”

“I’m distraught,” Mr. Levy said by phone on Friday. “I spent my life building this business, creating this studio and being in New York City and Brooklyn. And I feel completely unsupported.”

Mr. Levy said the loss of the building was one hurdle among many his company has faced.

He said he spent five years searching for the building and was still paying off loans related to a $5 million investment he made to renovate it after signing a 20-year lease in 2009. In 2012, Hurricane Sandy struck, flooding much of the area around the canal and requiring $100,000 worth of repairs to the building, he said.

Now, because of the terms of his lease, he is not entitled to any compensation if the property ends up being seized under eminent domain, though he could potentially receive compensation if the building’s owner agrees to sell the property to the city.

“It’s not an easy thing to find industrial space in Brooklyn,” he said.

More than 2,100 people, including the actress Edie Falco, wrote letters in support of Eastern Effects, a company spokesman said.

Elias Rodriguez, a spokesman for the E.P.A., said it was the city’s idea to use the warehouse property.

Mr. Levy identified three other parcels near his business that he believed could be viable sites. Two of them, he said, have “for sale” signs in front.

But Ted Timbers, a spokesman for the city’s Department of Environmental Protection, defended the city’s choice, though he said the department would continue to look for possible alternatives.

He said the other sites mentioned by Mr. Levy had drawbacks. One is owned by Consolidated Edison, and two others consist of multiple properties, he said.

Moreover, the warehouse’s location, immediately adjacent to the planned site of the tank, would have less impact on the area and the street, Mr. Timbers said. He said the other sites would have required the closing of Nevins Street for as long as eight years.

“The agreement with E.P.A. is good news for the residents of Gowanus, as it minimizes any disruption to one of the few playgrounds and swimming pools in the neighborhood,” a statement from the department said.

The city has until April 2020 to acquire the properties for the project, including the staging area. The warehouse would not need to be vacated until May 2021. According to the agency, the building would have to be demolished.

Mr. Levy said he had trouble squaring the decision with the city’s often-stated support for the booming film and television business.

“This is someone’s decision,” he said. “This is not a freak accident. They looked at a map and put a tack down and said, ‘It’s a good site.’”


