


The hotel consultant and historian Stanley Turkel, 90, lives in a single-family home in Flushing, Queens, with walls that are covered with photos of his family, including his wife, Rima Sokoloff, a modern dancer and professor who died in 2014, his four children and his five grandchildren. Mr. Turkel, who grew up in the Bronx and graduated from New York University, served in the Army Air Force during World War II before becoming the general manager of the Drake Hotel, now demolished, on Park Avenue. He then traveled the world for the International Telephone and Telegraph Company, overseeing development and operations on behalf of the Sheraton Corporation during its global expansion. An avid collector and writer, Mr. Turkel recently donated 670 items to the Smithsonian’s new National Museum of African-American History and Culture, and has published five books on the hotel industry.

MORNING RITUAL I wake up every day at 6:30 a.m., including Sunday. The first thing I do after washing up is to eat my breakfast. I go to the dining room where I have photos of my children and grandchildren and I turn on WQXR, the classical radio station, and say good morning to my family. Then I pour cereal, usually Heritage Flakes from Trader Joe’s, with sliced banana and nonfat milk. I also have a cup of coffee that I make from my Keurig and I sweeten with honey — not sugar or saccharine — and a little bit of skim milk. I have been eating carefully for the last 50 years, with very little red meat, very few desserts and limiting my sugar intake.

SLIP-AND-FALL RESEARCH After breakfast I go upstairs to my office. Work consists of researching my current book, which means being on the Internet most of the time. I will also do consulting work, which mostly means being an expert witness in hotel-related cases. Many times they are slip-and-fall cases that occur when someone is getting out of the shower or bath. So I read volumes of material — reports, depositions and descriptions of hotel installations.

VEGGING OUT WHILE LEARNING After working I go for Sunday brunch. There is a vegetarian restaurant that is a five-minute drive from my house called the Oneness-Fountain-Heart. I usually have a three-egg mushroom omelet with a small grain salad, no French fries or potatoes, and multigrain toast dry and with apricot or strawberry jam. And a cup of coffee with nonfat milk. I usually bring with me The New York Review of Books. That is my favorite magazine of all time. There are always so many things I don’t know, and I learn about subjects that I didn’t even know existed. It gives me exposure to new worlds.

LITERATURE WITH LEO Then I walk about a mile to visit my friend Leo Gottlieb. Leo is 103 years old. I met him two years ago when I was taking my usual walk to the Queens College campus. On the way, I kept seeing a man sitting under a tree reading a Kindle. The third time I saw him, I stopped and introduced myself. It turns out he was reading books from the best-seller list. Unbelievable. He is self-taught. He didn’t graduate from high school. He was raised on a farm in the Catskills by immigrant Russian parents and worked in the garment district his whole life. When I visit him, I bring articles that I think would interest him, usually about evolution, anthropology, astronomy and politics.

DINNER FROM SCRATCH Then I walk home and I make my dinner. Leo was very instrumental in my cooking. When my wife passed away, that was about the time I met Leo. He is big on preparing your own food. My wife used to do all that, but Leo encouraged me to buy good food, organic food, and cook. So I make either chicken or fish or maybe frozen turkey meatballs from Trader Joe’s. Then I make a green salad and maybe some rice or spaghetti. You wouldn’t hire me to be your chef, but I’ve learned enough and have confidence in myself to make a decent meal.

PROGRESSIVE POLITICS AND BALL While I eat dinner I watch television on a nice flat-screen that my kids got for me. Usually I watch MSNBC because I’m a progressive guy. I care a lot about politics. I’m also interested in professional basketball. Would you believe I used to play basketball? So I watch the N.B.A., especially the Golden State Warriors. I think they are wonderful; the New York Knicks aren’t very good. I also like professional baseball. Of course I root for the New York Yankees. Then, around 10:30 p.m. I go to bed.


