


It began with great fanfare in the spring of 2014. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio joined forces to help elect a Democratic majority in the New York State Senate, a goal to which Mr. Cuomo had paid lip service but had done little to achieve.

It did not, however, end well.

The Republicans prevailed on Election Day, weeks after the unusual alliance between the governor and the mayor ruptured amid accusations that Mr. Cuomo was sabotaging the effort. The Democratic Senate candidates were not the only losers: Eighteen months later, Mr. de Blasio and several aides, along with a number of consultants and labor union operatives, find themselves caught up in a criminal investigation focused on how they directed money into some of the contested races.

The inquiry focuses squarely on the de Blasio team’s effort to use county committees to deliver more money than would be allowed through contribution caps that apply to individual candidates.

But the Cuomo campaign was nonetheless involved in the overall effort to help the Democrats retake the Senate, at least behind the scenes, according to documents and correspondence reviewed by The New York Times, and to people briefed on the effort.

Meetings were held, plans drawn up and lawyers consulted. And perhaps most important, money was raised — in the end, well over $1 million.

A senior aide to the governor, Joseph Percoco, took part in some of the earliest organizational and planning sessions with a top de Blasio administration official and campaign lawyers for the mayor and the governor, the materials reviewed by The Times show.

Mr. Percoco also received central legal and operational documents on how the fund-raising effort would be carried out. Three weeks before the election, he corresponded with Emma Wolfe, one of the mayor’s closest advisers, about the procedures for paying for hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign advertisements and mailings for Democratic candidates in targeted races, according to the materials.

The disclosures seem to suggest that Mr. Percoco, who was one of the governor’s most trusted senior staff members until he left the administration in January, may have been aware of some of the conduct that is now under scrutiny, and that is at the heart of the fund-raising inquiry. His lawyer, Barry A. Bohrer, declined to comment.

Basil A. Smikle Jr., the executive director of the New York State Democratic Party, which took part in the effort and is controlled by Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, said that neither the state party nor the governor’s campaign took part in the fund-raising activities that are now under scrutiny.

Mr. Smikle said that Mr. Percoco, Ms. Wolfe and others were “clearly advised” by legal counsel “that fund-raising earmarking was a circumvention of the state’s campaign finance limits.” Eventually, the “coordinated effort became divided” after “internal strategic and operational disagreements,” he said. Citing published reports, Mr. Smikle added that the mayor’s group is now under investigation, suspected of using earmarked funds through the Democratic county committees of Ulster and Putnam Counties.

An election lawyer for the mayor, Laurence D. Laufer, who advised on the Senate effort, dismissed Mr. Smikle’s version of events.

“There was clear legal guidance provided to all parties that was rigorously adhered to,” he said in a statement provided by Mr. de Blasio’s campaign. “The notion that the state party had concerns about any legal issue, or backed away from the effort because of that, is patently ridiculous.”

The state party, according to correspondence reviewed by The Times, continued to pay roughly $1 million for television commercials, mailings and consultants as part of the effort up until the final weeks before the election, with most of that money raised by Mr. de Blasio.

The mayor, a Democrat, has repeatedly defended the fund-raising campaign, saying in a recent radio interview, “We specifically followed — every step along the way — legal guidance.” He and others have said political campaigns have used similar practices for decades.

The criminal investigation, by the office of the Manhattan district attorney and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, is focused on allegations that the mayor, his aides and a team of consultants and labor union representatives whom he assembled sought to use county committees and the New York State Democratic Senate Campaign Committee to evade the $10,300 limit on donations to individual candidates. County committees can receive contributions of $102,300.

It is a felony for donors to earmark contributions to the committees to be passed on to certain candidates. Prosecutors involved in the investigation interpret the statute, which has never been tested in court, to mean that it is also a felony under state election law to solicit donations in order to avoid contribution limits, people briefed on the matter have said, an interpretation that Mr. de Blasio’s campaign lawyers dispute.

No evidence has been uncovered that Mr. Percoco did anything illegal or improper as part of the fund-raising efforts, people briefed on the matter said; he is the target of an unrelated federal corruption investigation focused on the governor’s largest economic development project, known as the Buffalo Billion.

At the time of the fund-raising effort, Mr. Percoco resigned as the governor’s deputy executive secretary so he could serve as the manager of Mr. Cuomo’s 2014 re-election campaign.

Among the materials The Times reviewed was a July 16, 2014, document prepared as part of that year’s Senate campaign effort that summarized the fund-raising and spending rules that would apply to the coordinated effort. It listed the contribution limits and restrictions on funds for five “recipient committees” that could be used in the undertaking. They included the county committees, the Democratic Senate Campaign Committee and the New York State Democratic Committee, which is controlled by Mr. Cuomo.

The inclusion of another committee, the Women’s Party multicandidate political committee, also underscored the governor’s influence. That committee, created and controlled by Mr. Cuomo, would later be named the Women’s Equality Party. For reasons that are unclear, the Women’s Equality Party was apparently not used in the effort.

Mr. Percoco and a legal adviser for the State Democratic Party attended one of the fund-raising effort’s early planning meetings, on July 16 at the Lower Manhattan office of the law firm Genova Burns Giantomasi Webster, according to the documents, correspondence and people briefed on the effort.

Among others in attendance were Ms. Wolfe and Mr. Laufer, who represents Mr. de Blasio’s successful 2013 mayoral campaign, his current re-election campaign and the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit that has pushed his agenda. Mr. Laufer, who was then with the Genova firm, also represents some of the other entities involved in the 2014 fund-raising effort.

The materials reviewed by The Times also included a brief legal analysis, prepared by Mr. Laufer and dated Oct. 8, 2014, which concluded that the fund-raising effort was not engaging in earmarking; the other, dated Oct. 17, was a longer, more detailed examination of election law relating to the fund-raising operation, which said it was written to provide guidance to ensure the campaign was carried out in compliance with the law.

The investigation is one of at least five separate corruption inquiries focused on the mayor and his inner circle, people with knowledge of those inquiries have said.

The 2014 Senate materials reviewed by The Times also show that Mr. Percoco was involved until at least mid-October, when correspondence with Ms. Wolfe shows that the two were negotiating over how to track and pay some of the roughly $1 million in television advertising and mailings.

Mr. Percoco’s role in helping the Senate Democrats, elements of which were reported by Politico New York, ran counter to Mr. Cuomo’s actions in the past; despite his promises of support, he did little that year to publicly assist the Democratic candidates.

Other questions about the investigation, including whether it may expand beyond violations of election law or remain narrowly focused on those allegations, remain. Prosecutors have subpoenaed several of the mayor’s senior aides and the finance chairman of his campaign, as well as a number of consultants who worked on the effort who are very close to the mayor, according to City Hall officials and others briefed on the inquiry. Democratic candidates from the 2014 race have also received subpoenas, as have some of the county committees.

While the ultimate outcome of this particular investigation is uncertain, a number of political consultants and lawyers involved in the inquiry say one thing is clear: The investigation, along with the others swirling around the mayor, will not make fund-raising for him any easier in this election season.


