


ST. LOUIS — The San Jose Sharks have experienced as much playoff disappointment for more than a decade as any N.H.L. franchise.

But now they are one win from their first Stanley Cup finals. If that does not wipe away the frustration that came with ignominious playoff exits, it is certainly a good start.

The Sharks’ 6-3 victory over the St. Louis Blues on Monday night — a franchise-record 11th playoff victory in a single postseason — gave them a three-games-to-two series lead in the Western Conference finals. It is a terrific advantage to have, given the success of Game 5 winners. Of the 371 N.H.L. teams that have broken 2-2 series ties with Game 5 victories, 290 (78.2 percent) have gone on to win the series.

Not that the Sharks want to hear about those numbers.

“There are so many emotions throughout a playoff,” said forward Joe Pavelski, who scored the tying goal with 87 seconds left in the second period and the winning shot 16 seconds into the third. “We try not to get too high, not to get too low.”

Yet the Sharks know how difficult sealing the deal against the Blues will be. St. Louis has a 6-3 road record during these playoffs.

Game 6 will be in San Jose on Wednesday.

The Sharks have had strong chances to break down the door to the Cup finals. They have made the playoffs 11 times over the 12 seasons since Doug Wilson took over as general manager before the 2003-4 campaign. Only the Detroit Red Wings have matched that total of 11 in that span. The Sharks won six Pacific Division regular-season titles over nine years, including four straight starting in the 2007-8 season.

All that has yielded only three trips to the conference finals, and each of those experiences left much to be desired. The Sharks’ overall record in those three series: 3-12.

From the start, though, this fourth time in the West finals has been strikingly different. For one thing, the Sharks are facing another team with a bad playoff past. The Blues — whose 40 appearances in the playoffs is the most for any non-Original Six franchise — have not been to the Cup finals since 1970.

The pivotal Game 5 felt as if it could go either way, with the teams trading goals in much the same manner that they have traded momentum throughout the series.

San Jose defenseman Marc-Edouard Vlasic opened the scoring less than four minutes into the game with a high screamer from just inside the blue line, but St. Louis answered with two first-period goals that pumped the Scottrade Center crowd into a frenzy.

First, Jaden Schwartz picked the puck out of the crowd in front of Sharks goaltender Martin Jones and knocked home a rebound. Troy Brouwer — enjoying the postseason of his life — put the Blues ahead by 2-1 with a spectacular goal. Jones sent a shot soaring off his blocker, but Brouwer found it on its descent and ripped a line drive that would have made Stan Musial proud.

The second period was power-play madness. Blues defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk committed a penalty that led to Sharks forward Joel Ward tying the game with a batted shot of his own. Soon after, Sharks defenseman Roman Polak lost his temper, punching Dmitrij Jaskin repeatedly from behind. With the man advantage, Robby Fabbri blasted a one-timer from straight on for a 3-2 lead.

After another Shattenkirk penalty, Pavelski beat Jake Allen from the doorstep after a behind-the-net feed from Joe Thornton to tie the score, 3-3.

“That third goal was a killer,” Blues Coach Ken Hitchcock said.

Pavelski, now tied with his teammate Logan Couture for the playoff points lead at 21, deflected a shot from Brent Burns for a goal in the third before the Sharks added two empty-netters.


