


With a flick of her wrist, Suzanne Levinson tossed a scoopful of par-cooked French fries into a gleaming fryer on Sunday, the first test batch before her restaurant’s grand reopening. On Monday, her Belgian-style fry cafe, Pommes Frites, destroyed last year by a deadly gas explosion in the East Village, will be reborn in the West Village.

Ms. Levinson has spent the last year agonizing over the deaths of the two men in last year’s devastating blast, and trying to lose herself in the planning of a new restaurant. As the fries plunked into the oil, she allowed herself a moment of levity. “Vive Pommes Frites!” she whooped.

For 18 years, Pommes Frites stood in the East Village, offering paper cones of thick golden French fries and more than 30 special sauces late into the night. Free samples were doled out to passers-by seduced by the scent of potatoes sizzling in oil. But on March 26, 2015, an explosion ripped through the basement of the building next door — caused by gas line tampering, according to the authorities. It toppled neighboring buildings, destroying scores of apartments as well as the businesses on the street level.

Two men were crushed to death: Moises Ismael Locón Yac, 27, a busboy at a neighboring sushi restaurant, and Nicholas Figueroa, 23, who was there on a lunch date. In February, five people, including the building owner, Maria Hrynenko, 56, and her son, Michael, 30, were indicted on manslaughter charges in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, for the role they are accused of playing in tampering with gas lines to siphon gas illegally between buildings they owned.

Pommes Frites will open on Monday in its new location on Macdougal Street. The space has a medieval feel and is paneled with reclaimed timber. Under stained-glass windows are tables designed in part by Omer Shorshi, the co-owner, with holes bored in the tops to hold paper cones of fries.

Seated at one of those tables the day before opening, Ms. Levinson spoke of perfect potato varietals, and how moved she was that people had raised $26,000 in the aftermath.

Suddenly she stopped. She began to cry.

“Reopening is extremely poignant for me,” Ms. Levinson said. “But it doesn’t change what happened. The day that the building collapsed, I did not mourn the loss of my business. I haven’t mourned the loss of my business for one day. It’s just a business.” She added: “When I think about what happened to us, I don’t think about us, I think about what happened to the young men.”

She bowed her head and her shoulders heaved with sobs. The two young men, Mr. Locón and Mr. Figueroa, she said, are constantly on her mind.

“I don’t want it to be an opening with fireworks and fanfare,” she continued after a pause. “We are insignificant compared to the impact this had, compared to what happened to the families and loved ones. We’re French fries.”

But for the three employees, immigrants from the Philippines, there was a sense that the reopening and the restaurant were more than just that. None had been there during the explosion, but they felt the loss of a place that felt like home. All three are roommates, said Mariachu Odviar, the sauce maker. “We don’t have family here, so we treat each other like family,” she said.

Not everyone has been able to rebuild from the rubble. Roop Bring, the owner of Sam’s Deli, a staple of the East Village neighborhood where it was destroyed, has not reopened a shop. Reached by telephone, Mr. Bring said he had spent the last year at home with his wife, struggling with insurance companies to get what he believes he is owed. “This is good news if they are going back into business,” Mr. Bring said. “I am mentally not prepared.”

In the new shop on Macdougal on Sunday afternoon, Mr. Shorshi’s wife, Adi Smolinsky, arrived with their three young children, a family cleaning crew who were to spend the afternoon dusting the shop.

But first: fries.

Mr. Shorshi dusted them with salt, tossing them theatrically from a bowl into the air. Lightning quick, his 8-year-old son, Amitay Smolinsky-Shorshi, grabbed the first. It was better than delicious. “Taking the first bite of the first French fry, it makes it taste like — exciting!” he said.


