


With only one episode to go, a couple of things are clear:

• Tom Hiddleston looks absolutely beautiful in the golden light of an airplane cabin window.

• There is a particular sort of terror to sitting in the middle of an all-male mercenary encampment wearing a lacy négligée.

• In a physical fight to the death, the man who’s a foot and a half taller is likely to win.

• When a slick, clever bad guy starts making not-terribly artful “Apocalypse Now” references, it’s maybe time for him to retire.

This was a brutal episode. Corky’s neck snapping, and Jed’s neck being stroked with all the tenderness of the robber girl using her knife to “tickle” the neck of her reindeer in “The Snow Queen.”

Could there be anything more sinister than the words “You know I love you very much” from Richard Onslow Roper? (His “Jesus, Corky, Corky” did, however, have a certain ring of real feeling.)

It was nice to see Langbourne — interrupted in his champagne-pouring by Roper’s vulgar bark — shaken out of his habitual aristocratic torpor. Not so nice to see Frisky all playful and happy post-Corky burial. He’s downright loquacious in this episode. Making small talk! (“It’s not like ’im to mix business and pleasure” upon Jed’s arrival.) Making a joke! (“Aye, but with no mum,” to Roper’s “big happy family.” I had to replay it three times to make out the words — thought I’d save you the effort.)

I was surprised to see how readily Jonathan told Jed the truth about his identity and activities. I thought she’d sell him out, and pronto, but I was wrong. Once she finds out about her friend Corky, I fear, things could get complicated. Assuming that she stays alive long enough for complications. Now that we’re back in Cairo and Jonathan is having flashbacks outside the Hatshepsut suite, I fear we may get a bloody repeat of the Sophie affair. Especially now that Jonathan has made the fateful vow: “I’m going to get you out of here. I promise.”

Certainly, we’re in for some trouble when Jonathan comes face-to-face with Roper’s friend Freddie Hamid. Indeed, is that Roper’s plan?

“Didn’t watch the cups, you see?” he chided Jonathan, as his trucks, filled with bona fide farm equipment, passed through the United States border check while Angela and Joel looked on in disbelief. Oh dear, as Corky might have said. Did Jonathan overplay his hand?

I would like others to weigh in here with their feelings about the murderous sound and light show that Jonathan emceed for the London School of Economics-educated Mr. Barghati. On first watch, I found it painful, both in terms of its gratuitous, sadistic violence, and also in terms of its absurdity: How could this pass for normal activity in a refugee camp 200 miles from perhaps the most-watched border on the planet? But on second viewing, I thought: The gleeful cigar-chomping, the golf-playing in that garish bathrobe and boots; the eye-twitching, the sudden screaming — they’re all perhaps meant to be signifiers of crazy.

I thought, on first viewing, that Hugh Laurie was playing things up too much this week. He’d gone full villain (like Robert Downey Jr.’s “full retard” in “Tropic Thunder,” a place where an actor should never go). But now I think that this was perhaps intentional. He’s in his “kingdom.” He and “Andrew” are “emperors of Rome.”

Is Roper not just evil but certifiably insane?


