


FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the death of a Cameroonian boy who was struck by a vehicle in a convoy carrying Samantha Power, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, to meetings with West African victims of the Islamist extremist group Boko Haram referred incorrectly to Mokolo, one of the cities she visited. It is a departmental capital in Cameroon, not the national capital. (That is Yaoundé.)

INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 12 about a vote by a congressional panel in Brazil to impeach President Dilma Rousseff referred incompletely in some editions to the steps toward impeachment. Her suspension from office would only follow a Senate vote to put her on trial; a vote for impeachment by the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of Congress, does not result in her immediate suspension. (The chamber voted for impeachment on Sunday.)

•

The Kashgar Journal article on Feb. 16, about the passion for pigeon collecting among the Uighurs of Kashgar, China, referred imprecisely to Chinese control of Xinjiang, the autonomous region that is the Uighurs’ traditional homeland, and to the use of the name Xinjiang to refer to the territory. The People’s Republic of China took over the area in 1949, but it had been under the control of imperial China off and on since the mid-1750s. The People’s Republic named it the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region in 1955, but the Chinese have called the area Xinjiang since the 1750s. While the imprecise references were promptly corrected online, editors failed to follow through on this print correction.

NATIONAL

An article on Tuesday about Gov. Rick Snyder’s plan to drink Flint tap water for a month referred incorrectly to the dismissal of Michigan state employees as a result of lead contamination. One state employee — not several — has been fired.

NEW YORK

An article on Thursday about the arrest of a suspect in a series of burglaries on Staten Island misstated part of the name of the city in New York where a detective provided information that led investigators from the New York Police Department to the suspect. It is Saratoga Springs, not Sarasota Springs.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Thursday about the purchase of Lexmark, the American printing and software company, by a Chinese consortium misstated the period of time during which Chinese companies negotiated $106 billion worth of outbound deals. It was all of 2015, not just the first quarter of that year.

SPORTS

An article last Friday about an apology from the City of Philadelphia for the manner in which the Phillies treated Jackie Robinson when he began his baseball career misidentified a Philadelphia-based team that went to the Little League World Series in 2014. It was the Taney Dragons, not the Anderson Monarchs. (The two teams had several players in common, including Mo’ne Davis.)

THE ARTS

A review in the New Music column on Thursday about the album “Always Strive and Prosper” by ASAP Ferg, on which he celebrates one of his grandmothers in a song, misidentified his relative who is heard on another song, “Beautiful People.” She is his other grandmother, not his mother. Another review in the column about the band The Strumbellas referred incorrectly to the release of the group’s album “Hope.” It is coming out this week; it was not released last year in Canada.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Thursday about the basketball player Pearl Washington referred incorrectly, in some copies, to the year he was named a consensus second-team all-American. It was 1985, for his play in 1984-85, his next-to-last season at Syracuse University, not for 1985-86.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed tonytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


