


Damien Hirst has a knack for arresting attention, as he did by encrusting the platinum cast of a human skull in 2007, by pulling off a $200 million all-Hirst auction at Sotheby’s in 2008 and by leaving the Gagosian Gallery in 2012, after he had been represented there for 17 years.

Now Mr. Hirst has done it again, announcing that he is returning to Larry Gagosian, who is welcoming him back.

“He’s a great artist, and it’s exciting to reboot the relationship,” Mr. Gagosian said. “It feels very fresh to me. I know a lot of collectors remain very, very interested in Damien and are extremely curious to see what he’s doing.”

Precisely why the two parted in the first place remains unclear — “sometimes a relationship runs its course,” Mr. Gagosian said. “I think he wanted to think about the work and not think so much about the market and galleries.”

Mr. Gagosian added, “When he started feeling that he wanted to re-emerge in New York, he looked around and he realized that we were the best option.”

Mr. Hirst, who declined through the gallery to be interviewed, said in a statement, “I share a long history with Larry and am pleased we are working together once again.”

The gallery will devote its booth at Frieze New York next month to Mr. Hirst’s past work and feature it simultaneously in an installation at the gallery’s Madison Avenue location. “It will be a classical presentation — an early shark piece, instrument cabinet, medicine cabinet, butterfly painting,” said Millicent Wilner, a director at Gagosian in London, who is the gallery’s Hirst liaison. “We wanted to present him in the way most people think of Damien.”

While Mr. Hirst has been criticized as a showman whose work may not merit his level of fame, Mr. Gagosian said the “cult of the quiet artist” has been overly romanticized.

“The market seems to love artists who make very little work and don’t seem to have a life and never go out,” he said. “Warhol and Picasso are arguably the two giants of the 20th century — they were both commercially successful and both had colorful lifestyles.”

“Take Damien Hirst out of contemporary art history, and there’s an incredible void,” he added. “Great artists, like great people, have second acts.”

Duke Ellington composed many of his best-known jazz standards on a white baby grand piano — “Sophisticated Lady,” “In a Sentimental Mood,” and “It Don’t Mean a Thing (If It Ain’t Got That Swing).”

That piano ended up at the home of his sister, Ruth Ellington Boatwright, in the late 1940s; Mr. Ellington’s nephew Stephen James used to play underneath and eventually took lessons on it.

Now Mr. James has consigned the piano — expected to sell for anywhere between $50,000 to $1 million — along with about 300 other items that belonged to the jazz legend, to Guernsey’s. Ellington’s personal belongings will come up for auction on May 18 at the National Jazz Museum in Harlem.

“This is a collection of things I’ve had for most of my life,” Mr. James said. “I thought it would be good to have it out into the world instead of sitting in a storage facility.”

Because Mr. James was young when his own father left, Ellington loomed large in his life. The young Stephen spent school vacations at his uncle’s house and accompanied him out on the road, eventually becoming a member of his staff. “I was close to Duke growing up,” Mr. James said. “He was like a father to me.”

The cache includes silk jackets Ellington performed in, contracts he signed and musical manuscripts scribbled by hand. “We’re selling the real McCoy — the originals,” Arlan Ettinger, Guernsey’s president, said of the sheet music. “Songs like ‘Mood Indigo,’ ‘Lush Life,’ ‘Flamingo.’”

The auction — also online — includes Ellington’s paintings, like “Satin Doll” and “A Study for a Painting of Billy Strayhorn,” his frequent collaborator.

And there are gold dinner plates, a luggage tag, a monogrammed handkerchief and copyright renewals for pieces like “Harmony in Harlem” and “I Got It Bad (And That Ain’t Good).”

“These are part of the American Songbook,” Mr. Ettinger said, “the definition of classics.”

The painting itself offers a compelling glimpse into 17th-century mores — a dog fleeing the scene (which signified infidelity), a foot warmer (heat or passion).

But it is the back of the 1600s oil on canvas — “An Officer Paying Court to a Young Woman” by the Dutch painter Gabriel Metsu — coming up for auction on May 26 at Sotheby’s for an estimated $6 million to $8 million, that makes it especially remarkable.

Original labels chronicle the painting’s harrowing history. There is a mark indicating when the Metsu was inventoried in Baron Alphonse Mayer von Rothschild’s palace collection in 1934; another when it came into the custody of Hitler’s Kunsthistorisches Museum in 1938; another when that museum’s director, Hans Posse, selected it to hang; and another when it was stored in the Abbey at Kremsmünster.

Threatened by Allied bombing, the painting was ultimately transferred for safekeeping to the salt mines in Altaussee, along with Jan and Hubert van Eyck’s Ghent Altarpiece and Johannes Vermeer’s “The Astronomer.”

And just before the Nazis were about to destroy the mines to prevent the artwork from falling into enemy hands, local miners removed the large bombs and the Monuments Men came to the rescue.

Ultimately, the painting was returned to the Rothschild family — and displayed at the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna — and sold to a private collector in 1999.

“We can literally trace its movement across Europe during the war years — and before and after — through the marks on the back of the canvas,” said David Pollack, a Sotheby’s specialist in old master paintings. “That’s an incredibly rare thing.”


