


I’m doing it all wrong.

That’s the first thing I learned in a recent, long-overdue crash course in knife skills.

Of course, I can chop an onion. (I know adults who can’t, and that explains why some people hate to cook: When chopping an onion takes 20 minutes, producing an entire meal becomes unthinkably onerous.) But I learned by watching other home cooks.

So, my grip on the knife: Wrong.

My hold on the onion: Wrong.

The motion of my wrist: Forget about it.

In the first 10 minutes of class, it seemed a miracle that I had ever managed this task with my Pliocene-era motor skills. By the end, it seemed a miracle that chopping onions could be so fluid, that using a sharpening steel was so easy, that bell peppers could practically unfurl from their cores at the touch of a blade.

I did not master the difference between a brunoise and a macédoine, but I did extract enough useful information to improve my cooking on a daily basis. That information, along with experience from a lifetime in the kitchen, is distilled in our Knife Skills Guide.

A home cook can lead a rich, full kitchen life without ever learning to cut properly. But there are excellent reasons to learn how knives are used in a professional kitchen.

Maintain sharpness, for safety and speed. The bromide “sharp knives cut, dull knives slip” is absolutely true. And when the blade is sharp and straight, it does more of the work of cutting, which in turn makes the job go faster. “You can’t learn speed, you can only develop it,” said Sydney Willcox, an instructor at the Brooklyn Kitchen. “Chefs don’t use different cuts from home cooks, they just do it faster.”

Reduce the physical work. The classic chef’s grip has evolved for a reason: It lets you use the weight of the knife, the sharpness of its blade and your body weight to move the knife instead of the strength of your arm and hand. And chefs rarely take the extra step of peeling. “I just carve off the sides with my knife,” the chef Jesse Schenker said. “Right away I have a squared-off shape to work with, which saves time and makes for even dice.”

Make the food better. “Cutting all your pieces the same size is for cooking, not just for looking,” said Sue Gonsalves, who teaches at the Institute of Culinary Education in Manhattan. Uniformly sized and shaped pieces will cook at the same rate.

I still do it wrong most of the time. It’s difficult to unlearn decades of habit but absolutely worth it. To feel the knife as an extension of your hand, to watch its blade rock back and forth as tiny cubes or thin slices fall to the cutting board, is to experience one of the great pleasures of cooking. (Practice on a recipe like celery salad, which calls for chopping, slicing, halving and julienning.)

In time, the repetition of good knife work becomes a meditative practice — with piles of ingredients to show for it.

Learn more with our guide to basic knife skills.

Recipe: Marinated Celery Salad With Chickpeas and Parmesan


