


Some people say that bringing an animal to your wedding is as inadvisable as inviting an ex-lover with a drinking problem — trouble, if not injury, seems inevitable.

Weddings are zones of perfection, organization, cleanliness and control; many animals prefer rolling in dirt. They howl when they don’t get their way and jump on people to show their love, even if those people are wearing long white gowns.

Nevertheless, pets — especially dogs — are becoming more and more commonplace at weddings. Looking through wedding blogs like Style Me Pretty and A Practical Wedding, you can find dogs serving as the best man, ring bearer, flower girl and bridesmaid. They’re wearing signs with messages like “I loved her first,” floral wreaths, bow ties, tutus, bandannas and pearl collars.

“I bet you 50 percent of the weddings I’m going to do this summer are going to have some dog involvement,” said Jeff Woodward, a photographer in Vermont.

Including a pet in your wedding is a leap of faith, in addition to the one you are already making.

“It’s a wild card: You don’t know what’s going to happen,” said Alyssa Guilmette, 33. She married Brad Guilmette, 36, in a public park in Lexington, Mass., on Oct. 26, 2014.

They said their vows while standing on an rug placed between two trees, with their rescued mutt, Rusty, sitting nearby in a black-and-white houndstooth bow tie.

It did not go smoothly. “My uncle is trying to start the ceremony, and there’s Rusty whimpering and whining and howling, a mix of all three really,” Ms. Guilmette said. “Then he just plopped down and started chewing the fringe of the Oriental rug.

“We understood it was beyond our control and whatever happens, happens. It will add to the untraditional uniqueness of our wedding and our relationship.”

At Allie Dorsky and John Pollack’s wedding last June, their French bulldog, George, also protested loudly. “We were standing five feet away,” Ms. Dorsky said. “She cried the whole time, in this very human whine, like ‘Why am I here and you are over there?’”

Many couples say the presence of a pet takes away the pressure of having a perfect wedding, because that is probably impossible even with a well-trained animal around.

Emily Layden, 27, and Brian Woods, 30, who live in Menlo Park, Calif., brought their Border collie mix, Canfield, to their wedding in Lake Placid, N.Y. “Having Canfield at the wedding lowered the stakes rather than raised them,” she said. “I was saying, ‘I’m going to walk my dog around in six-inch heels in a floor-length wedding dress and hope for the best.’”

Dogs were part of Anne Surman and Tom Seidenberg’s love story from the beginning. Both live in Exeter, N.H., where he teaches math at Phillips Exeter Academy and she is a member of the town’s Board of Selectmen.

On their first date — a blind one — he picked her up in a snowstorm, when almost everyone in town had lost power. “I run out and put my head in the car window, and the first thing I see is this big head of Sydney, his standard poodle,” said Ms. Surman, 56. “He was bringing Sydney on the date because he didn’t want to leave him alone in the dark house.”

Since that first date, their crew of creatures has grown to four dogs and two cats. Their wedding invitation was worded as if from their pets. It read: “Sydney Seidenberg, Kady, Clipper, Joey, Bogart and Bacall Surman request the honor of your presence at the marriage of their humans.”

They were married March 12 in St. Johnsbury, Vt., at the Dog Mountain Chapel. Many churches and synagogues do not welcome animals, but this chapel has stained-glass windows and hand-carved wooden pews featuring images of dogs.

The couple’s wedding party included two humans and seven large, beautifully groomed dog “attendants” — four belonging to the couple and three to friends. “The moment they walked in, I thought, ‘My family is here,’” Ms. Surman said.

In comparison to dogs, cats can make finicky, moody, often self-centered wedding guests. Allia Zobel Nolan, the author of “Women Who Still Love Cats Too Much,” said: “Cats are really more interested in their own comfort. If you had a dog and the dog was going to carry the rings in a basket, you could train the dog to do that. It would take a very long time and a very patient person to train a cat to do that. And you never know. He might be walking up the aisle and he’d see a mouse and he’d be off.”

Nevertheless, when Allison Moore, 33, and Dakota Smith, 36, married in Austin, Tex., their cat, Meatwad, was in attendance. “We just put a bow tie on him and let him go as he pleased,” Ms. Moore said. “He’s a very social cat and he loves parties.” (Their dogs, Roxy and Sprinkles, are less well behaved so they were left at home.)

Tracey Buyce, a wedding photographer and animal lover based in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., has photographed weddings that included cows, horses, sheep, an owl and a chicken. “Our culture has made it more acceptable to truly have an animal be part of your family,” she said. “Animals make people smile. Well, most people.”

The degree to which some people treat animals as family varies widely. Carol Bryant, 47, and her wife, Darlene Bryant, 59, do not view their cocker spaniel, Dexter, as a pet. “He’s my son,” said Carol, firmly.

In their hometown, Forty Fort, Pa., Darlene surprised Carol in June 2014 with a proposal, immediately followed by a prearranged ceremony that included a minister, two human guests and Dexter.

“I would have been devastated if Dexter wasn’t there,” said Carol, who is the social media manager for BlogPaws.com, a community of pet bloggers. She has a tattoo that reads, “My Heart Beats Dog.” “He’s my heartbeat,” she said.

Linnea Sanderson, 32, thinks of her mellow Terrier, Penny, as a sister. This year, Ms. Sanderson married Robert Davidson, 42, in a pair of wedding ceremonies in Gloucester, Mass. Penny attended both. For the first, she wore a collar of bells and lace snowflakes, and for the second, a magenta leash. “I like to go everywhere with her, on a walk in the morning and on a walk down the aisle,” Ms. Sanderson said.

Leah Fielding, 30, and Whit Boucher, 29, who live in Aspen, Colo., are almost always with Bromley, a mutt named after the ski area in Vermont where Mr. Boucher grew up skiing. On the save-the-date cards for their coming wedding, Bromley is front and center and wearing a sign that reads: “My Mom & Dad are finally gettin’ hitched. 9/16/16.”

Ms. Fielding said, “We do very little without him by our side, so getting married without him there would be a strange thing for us.”

Before Leslee Wieseneck, 33, started dating a fellow Google employee, Noah Wieseneck, 34, she lived alone in Manhattan with Cooper, a large German shepherd mix she adopted. “I was single, and he was my best friend and the love of my life,” she said. “My friends joked that I was never going to find anyone to date because all I did was hang out with my dog.”

When they started dating, Mr. Wieseneck was somewhat taken aback by Cooper. “When Noah and I hugged or kissed, Cooper would get upset and cry and jump,” she said. “He was doing the screening for me, if you will, like, ‘Is this guy going to work for us?’”

Last summer, the couple were married in Saratoga Springs, where Mr. Wieseneck walked down the aisle with Cooper, who wore a corsage of white and coral-colored flowers.

Cooper leapt onto Mrs. Wieseneck at the end of the ceremony, just as the three were about to walk back down the aisle together. “I didn’t care,” she said. “I was so happy. It was such a special moment, I wouldn’t have cared if he ripped my dress.”

Sometimes, if a pet is not likely to be happy at a wedding full of noise and strangers, brides and grooms will include it in other ways. “There was one couple who knew they couldn’t have their cat attend because of the cat’s demeanor, so they made all these buttons with their cat’s face and passed them out,” said Zachary Hunt, a wedding photographer based in Austin.

If there is an animal at a wedding, the photographs will probably be more amusing when viewed years later. When Hilary Cooper and Chris Crowley were married 23 years ago in Old Lyme, Conn., Angus, their Weimaraner, stood loyally by their sides. Mr. Crowley said a dog helps relieve the tension in getting married. “They change the ambience,” he said. “A dog tells you: ‘Hey, look, we’re all mammals here. Take it easy. Chill.’”

During the reception, however, Angus was bitten on the nose by a wolfhound belonging to a guest. “There’s a picture of all the groomsmen with Angus with a bloody nose,” Ms. Cooper said. “We called the vet and the vet said, ‘Is this a show dog?’ We said, ‘No.’ So, he said, ‘Deal with the scar and have a nice wedding.’”


