


Say “seafood restaurant” and many Long Islanders will think of Flynn’s Fire Island, a mainstay in Ocean Bay Park since 1937. About three months ago, the Flynn family opened a very different spot in Bay Shore. Salt & Barrel Oyster and Craft Cocktail Bar is not a rustic, by-the-water, keep-it-casual place like Flynn’s. It is much more upscale, has a New American, seafood-based menu, and is within a brand-new apartment complex on West Main Street.

There is nothing nostalgic about Salt & Barrel. Sleek and stylish, with French doors and a pressed-tin ceiling in the bar area, the spot draws quite the crowd.

In it, there is a U-shaped bar with 24 bar stools, while other stools are scattered around the room and a few couches sit in front of a two-sided gas fire.

The fire can be seen from the dining room, a space that is less striking than the bar. Its décor includes stylized paintings of sea creatures and macramé-like hangings that hint at waves. Tables are bare wood with place mats and cloth napkins.

In a telephone conversation after my two visits, Ryan Flynn, one of the owners, said that the salt in the restaurant’s name referred to oysters, and the barrel to bourbon, of which 40 brands are on offer.

Start the meal with raw oysters. Most are $3 each, and there is usually a selection of six from the East Coast and six from the West Coast. My oysters arrived on a bed of ice with lemon and two sauces. The baked bacon and bourbon oysters were not as satisfying. Similar to oysters Rockefeller, with creamed spinach and chunks of house-made cured bacon atop the bivalves, three of the six served were gritty.

At Flynn’s, a bowl of New England clam chowder is just that. At the fancier Salt & Barrel, a similar chowder is laced with leeks and the plate includes a split marrow bone and a slab of toasted bread.

Enjoy that bread; the restaurant does not offer it for free. There are house-made tarragon biscuits on the menu ($2.25 for two, $4 for four or $6 for six). They were warm and tasty but I hate paying for bread.

We liked the chowder and also gave high marks to the crispy rock shrimp, served with a sinus-clearing spicy mayonnaise.

The bar menu is not automatically presented to diners but graciously provided upon request. It has casual fare like deviled eggs, burgers and a warm lobster roll. That lobster roll was truly a disappointment; the meat was mushy.

On the regular menu, which changes frequently, there are several non-seafood dishes, as well as a vegetarian selection. The braised short ribs were appropriately tender but I kept thinking I was eating dessert. They had been braised in ginger beer, and the parsnip purée on the plate was flavored with vanilla. The organic chicken read like a dream on the menu: “confit of thigh, duck fat roasted cabbage, pearl onion, caramelized apple.” But alas, the meat was not as meltingly tender as confit should be, and the cabbage was overwhelmed by the sweet apples.

An ever-changing item on the menu called “dock to table” featured soft shell crabs on both my visits. They were a success. So, too, was the lightly cooked salmon, although its accompanying saffron fennel purée clashed rather than complemented the fish.

Desserts, like the rest of the meal, were sometimes fussy. The buttery goodness of butterscotch pudding was diminished by “coffee soil, chocolate pearls and toasted cashews,” which were listed as accompaniments. The tangy lemon curd parfait was a better bet.

Salt & Barrel is a stylish new spot with an impressive raw bar and good service. Many of the dishes, though, are overorchestrated. Sometimes less is more.


