


CHICAGO — Jake Arrieta lost this week’s shot at a no-hitter on just his fifth pitch of the game Thursday.

Five innings later, on a dank spring afternoon, the Milwaukee Brewers ended Arrieta’s home field scoreless streak at 522/3 innings, the second-longest such streak of zeros since the turn of the century before the last one, and the Cubs’ manager yanked him from the game.

Arrieta sat afterward in the Cubs’ interview room, his piercing eyes, erect posture and thick black beard calling to mind a fierce Mennonite hurler. “I kind of backed myself into a corner,” he said of his performance. “It just wasn’t good from start to finish.”

Before we panic, let’s keep in mind that this slacker Arrieta gave up all of three hits and a single run and struck out six men. The Cubs won, 7-2. His worst outing of the year pushed his E.R.A. from 0.77 to 1.00 per game.

Oh, and Arrieta tossed a no-hitter in his previous start. He is — with apologies to parochial devotees of the blond-tressed Noah Syndergaard — the best pitcher in baseball, with no peer.

“He’s 5-0,” noted his catcher, David Ross. “I think he’ll be O.K.”

Arrieta’s modest attack of mortality Thursday might have a beneficial side effect, in that it might tamp down rumblings that his epic pitching run must be fed by steroids, EPO, human growth hormone or some chemistry combinations too obscure to name. Such rumblings come accompanied by not a shred of evidence, not an iota, nada, that Arrieta has used anything artificial.

Arrieta says the accusations are laughable. He says he favors suspending for life players who are found guilty of using performance-enhancing drugs.

A shortage of fact was no bar for television’s hot air balloons. Stephen A. Smith and Skip Bayless, the Moe and Larry of ESPN, engaged in a one-plus-one-equals-five exercise this week. “I’m not going to accuuuse you of using performance-enhancing supplements, drugs,” Smith said of Arrieta, who was not on that show. “But you shouldn’t just be laughing at those who are looking at you and saying, Excuse me, what the hell is going on here?”

Bayless nodded gravely. “I have no sympathy for him.”

Let me back up. Ours is a suspicious age, and not without reason. We clap too hard for great athletes and we risk playing the fool. The path through the past decades is littered with writers who disabled their frontal lobes and defended the Popeye bodies and improbable accomplishments of Barry Bonds, Rafael Palmeiro, Mark McGwire, Roger Clemens, Alex Rodriguez, and the cyclist Lance Armstrong, not to mention hundreds of professional football players, sprinters, marathon runners and racewalkers.

Just Friday, the National League’s reigning batting champ, Dee Gordon of the Miami Marlins, was suspended for 80 games for using steroids.

That said, let’s return to the case at hand: No one has said Arrieta is anything other than a brilliant artisan of a pitcher, who mows lineups like a farmer wielding a scythe on tall grasses.

Many suggest that Arrieta “came from nowhere,” a no-account shuffler become Tom Seaver. That oversimplifies. Arrieta was a top college pitcher and his first team, the Baltimore Orioles, considered him a potential ace, with a smoker of a fastball and a heartbreaking curveball.

His control, however, was miserable, and his pitches ran when they should have cut. His E.R.A. scaled unsightly peaks. By 2014, the sharp-eyed crowd at Baseball Prospectus had all but given up. “Running Arrieta out every fifth day is just setting him up to fail,” the Prospectus opined. “The Cubs would be wise to find out if his stuff will play up in the bullpen.”

As it happened, in 2015, Arrieta mastered his pitches and soared into the baseball troposphere. He won 22 games with a 1.77 E.R.A. He did this not by throwing five miles per hour faster. According to a FanGraphs analysis, his fastball this year is six-tenths of a mile per hour faster than it was in his last year in Baltimore. (Syndergaard of the Mets throws quite a bit faster than Arrieta).

He returned to his old pitching motion, in which he uses his left shoulder to hide his pitch. “I used to bat against him in Baltimore,” Ross, the catcher, said. “He’s a different pitcher. His confidence is incredible.”

Joe Maddon, the Cub manager and a beatnik of a baseball lifer, walked into the pregame conference wearing a T-shirt that read: “Do Simple Better.” (After the game, he wore a new T-shirt: “Try Not to Suck.”)

If Arrieta were on the opposing team, I asked Maddon, how would you instruct your hitters? He wagged his head with the sympathy reserved for the soon to be executed. “Honestly, I have lots of thoughts but I’m not sure if any of the thoughts would work,” he said.

The previous evening, I put that question to Ryan Braun, the star outfielder for the Brewers. He rolled his eyes. “The wind is blowing in, it’s raining and 45 degrees,” he said. “There are no circumstances under which I want to face Arrieta. I’m praying for a rainout.”

The Gods cooperated, although the weather was little better the next afternoon. The Cubs claimed 32,734 attended that game, which was accurate only if ten thousand fans were hiding beneath the seats in this ancient stadium.

The Brewers more or less surrendered. Their pitchers walked 11 men; their fumble-fingered fielders dropped pickoff attempts and double-play balls. The Cubs pounced like a lion on a lame antelope.

Ross, a graying, 39-year-old journeyman, took a mighty swing and sent the ball bouncing into the streets beyond the bleachers. (“I was thinking: If that one doesn’t go out, that’s a sign I’ve got to retire,” he said). In the bottom of the first inning, Ben Zobrist, once a Kansas City Royal and now a Cub, stepped to the plate with the bases loaded.

At this point, I invoke my privilege as a Mets fan who witnessed this man break the spirits of friends and family last autumn. Zobrist had a deeply annoying Royals-like at-bat, in which he fouled off many pitches before slapping a deeply annoying bleeder of a single to right field, knocking in two runs.

Even with a mortal Arrieta on the mound, that was that. “We are in a spot,” Arrieta noted, “where we feel pretty good.”

Even a few wild accusations aren’t going to change that.


