


PHILADELPHIA — A night after the Mets watched Noah Syndergaard shut down the Phillies, striking out eight batters in seven innings, they were prepared for a little taste of their own medicine when the Phillies’ own flamethrower, Vince Velasquez, took the mound.

Velasquez was looking to build on his first two starts, in which he struck out 25 batters and gave up no runs in 15 innings — six of those against the Mets at Citi Field.

With a fastball that reaches 96 miles per hour and a mix of off-speed pitches that can be almost 20 miles an hour slower, Velasquez surprised the National League after being acquired by the Phillies as part of the deal that sent closer Ken Giles to the Houston Astros.

But the Mets had the benefit of having seen Velasquez, and they took advantage of that experience from the outset, knocking him out in the fifth inning as they cruised to an 11-1 win for their fifth victory in their past six games.

In the first inning, David Wright roped a double into the left-field corner. Then Michael Conforto, who has been on a tear since being moved to the third spot in the order, golfed an 0-2 curveball into the right-field stands to give the Mets a 2-0 lead.

They were the first runs Velasquez surrendered this season.

The home run was also the 12th that the Mets had hit in the last five games, and it was a portent: The Mets hit six home runs in the game, two short of the club-record barrage of eight that they managed in a game here last August. The 17 home runs they have hit in the last five games have set a club record.

The home run tally rose in the third inning. Starting pitcher Logan Verrett reached first on a throwing error by first baseman Ryan Howard and advanced to second on a single by Conforto. Yoenis Cespedes then hit a line drive into the left-field bleachers, putting the Mets up, 5-0.

While Velasquez looked shaky, Verrett settled in. He scattered six singles over six innings, striking out four and walking one. He also induced Phillies catcher Cameron Rupp to ground into a double play.

“I didn’t feel as sharp as I did in my last game, so I had to work for it,” Verrett said. “I’m just happy to help the team win some ballgames.”

Even Verrett seemed to solve Velasquez. In the fifth inning, Verrett sliced a double into the right-field corner for his first major league hit.

“I just closed my eyes and swung as hard as I could,” Verrett said.

Curtis Granderson was then hit by a pitch. Wright struck out looking, but with Conforto coming up, Phillies Manager Pete Mackanin pulled Velasquez after only 74 pitches and replaced him with Elvis Araujo, who finished the inning.

In a game when Velasquez got bounced, Verrett shined. But it is unclear how long he will have these opportunities. Before the game, Manager Terry Collins said that Jacob deGrom, who had been sidelined with a stiff back, would return to the team this weekend and start in the series against the Braves that begins on Friday in Atlanta.

The Mets will have to make room on their roster for deGrom, but Verrett has pitched well in two starts filling his spot in the rotation and is unlikely to be sent back to the minors. Pitcher Rafael Montero or infielder Eric Campbell might be shipped down.

If the Mets keep hitting home runs, they won’t miss either of those players. Neil Walker hit solo home runs in sixth and seventh innings, and Lucas Duda hit his second home run in as many games, also in the seventh. The next inning, Granderson hit his second home run of the season into the second deck.

“Hitting is contagious, just like anything else,” Walker said. “There’s a calmness about this group on the offensive side of things even when things aren’t going well.”

Verrett nearly gave up a home run of his own when Howard hit a towering fly ball to left field. But with the wind blowing in, Conforto caught the ball at the warning track. The Mets, it seems, have the wind at their backs these days.

INSIDE PITCH

Jacob deGrom threw well in a simulated game in Port St. Lucie, Fla., clearing the way for him to start against the Braves in Atlanta on Sunday. DeGrom has been sidelined with a stiff back since his only start of the season, on April 8, when he gave up one run in six innings against the Phillies. Compounding matters, deGrom and his wife have been dealing with a medical issue with their first child, a son, who was born last week, although the baby has since been sent home. Terry Collins said Monday that he wanted to see how deGrom performed in the simulated game before deciding when he would rejoin the team. DeGrom threw 71 pitches at the Mets’ spring training facility and appeared to have no problem with his back or with handling the workload.


