


After one game was in the books in each of the N.B.A. first-round playoff series, there were few surprises. Seven of the eight home teams won, many by comfortable margins.

The exception was the Toronto Raptors. Again.

This season was supposed to be different for Toronto. Behind big seasons from Kyle Lowry and DeMar DeRozan, the Raptors won 56 games, a franchise record by seven games. They threatened the mighty Cleveland Cavaliers for the top seed in the East, falling short by just one game.

But in Game 1 of their series with the seventh-seeded Indiana Pacers, the Raptors were bulldozed by 33 points from Paul George and lost, 100-90, on Saturday. Lowry was 3 of 13 and DeRozan 5 of 19.

It was the third year in a row that the Raptors had lost their playoff opener at home. Last season, they were also the only home team to lose Game 1, falling to the Wizards.

They wound up losing that series in an ugly sweep. In 2014, they lost their opener to the Nets, and eventually the series, blowing a 3-2 lead to lose in seven games.

The Raptors fan Drake was on hand for the game. For those who believe in curses, that may not have been a good thing. Shortly after he started spending time with Serena Williams, she lost the United States Open, ending her bid for a Grand Slam.

Drake has also been blamed over the years for the struggles of Kentucky men’s basketball, the Liverpool soccer club and Johnny Manziel.

You have to go back a ways to find any playoff glory for Toronto. In 2001, the Raptors beat the Knicks, three games to two, in a first-round playoff series. Vince Carter averaged 23 points a game for Toronto, while the Knicks were led by Allan Houston and Latrell Sprewell.

That is still the only series the Raptors have won. The Raptors are 1-7 in playoff series, and 14-29 in games.

It has not been a golden age for Toronto sports in general.

The Blue Jays returned to the baseball playoffs last year for the first time since 1993. At the time, it was the longest playoff drought in the major North American leagues.

The Maple Leafs have made the N.H.L. playoffs just once since 2004, a one-round cameo in 2013. Their last title was in 1967. This season, they had the worst record in the league.

Toronto F.C. finally made its first M.L.S. playoffs last season in its ninth year of existence, but lost ignominiously, 3-0, to the rival Montreal Impact.

The most glory in recent years has come from the Argonauts of Canadian football, league champions in 2012 and 2004.

The Raptors tried to start burying that history on Monday night in Game 2.


