


Because Tuesday was going to be a big day, Jahangir Alam quit work an hour early and was home in Queens by 4 a.m. He slept fitfully, estimating later that he’d gotten an hour before his daughter, Mehrin, stirred for school. She is in sixth grade. Mehrin and the rest of the family — her brother, Tanveer, and Mr. Alam and his wife, Monira Alam — live in a one-bedroom apartment in Woodside, $1,700 a month.

Tanveer, 19, had a full day ahead at Hunter College, where he is studying computer science and completing his first year.

The parents were going to Flushing. Mr. Alam, who finished fifth grade in Bangladesh and has driven a yellow cab in New York for the past 20 years, was graduating from an adult learning program with a high school equivalency certificate.

Mr. Alam, 50, said that for decades he had felt the weight of its absence.

“Somehow, I couldn’t get it done in my country,” he said. “My son is the one who got me here. He went to Bronx Science for high school. He encouraged me every day. My wife, too.”

So on Tuesday, to the benedictional strains of “Pomp and Circumstance” in an auditorium at a branch of the Queens Library, Mr. Alam marched in a line with about 50 other adults who had also earned the certificates. In every conversation, they praised their teachers.

Rowdy jubilation is common enough at the graduations of young people from high school and college; it is a shadow of the full-bodied joy that lights up people who have come to their education later in life, even if it did not include beer-pong tournaments.

One woman from Guyana had stopped attending school to raise her children; another dropped out to help her parents, immigrants from Mexico. Afrania Gonzalez, 72, of Rego Park, Queens, said she had grown up on a farm in rural Colombia, where she went to work in a candle factory when she was 11. In New York, she worked as a cleaning lady and raised three children. After four years of study, she said, she planned to help friends and relatives as a translator.

For all of them, finishing high school meant taking classes at learning centers in library branches or community colleges, in between running their lives.

Mr. Alam said he was one of 12 children. Their mother died when he was very young. At school in the district of Narail, he moved in lock step with a brother. “My father said, ‘We don’t need two sets of books,’” Mr. Alam said. Around age 12, he found work in a department store. “I spoke English with the customers in the store,” he said.

In 1995, he and Ms. Alam moved to the United States. He took classes at commercial schools in Jackson Heights, but did not stick with them. Their son was on the way. “All this time, I asked: Why did I quit?” he said. “My wife was encouraging me to go back.”

He has worked a 12-hour shift, 5 p.m. to 5 a.m., five or six days a week for 20 years, he said, honing his English as a devoted public radio listener. “My education was WNYC radio, Leonard Lopate and BBC at night,” Ms. Alam said. “Brian Lehrer during the day. I get a lot of information from them. I give a little donation.”

As his son was getting ready for college, the endless nights, the drunk and disorderly passengers, were making Mr. Alam weary. He took Civil Service tests. He also found adult learning classes at LaGuardia Community College and at the Long Island City branch of the library. The schedule was brutal: all night driving the cab, then school during the day. His wife, who had two years of college in Bangladesh, and his son were his cheerleaders.

“She still feeds my son every day by hand,” Mr. Alam said. “He had a chance to go to university on Long Island. Stony Brook. We didn’t send him there because we want to live together. We’re not like you guys, age 17, you separate. She will feed him.”

In turn, the son, Tanveer, helped him. “I fell a little short on the math test,” Mr. Alam said. “Now I’m learning the basics of computer science.”

The moment would be celebrated by the four people in the little apartment in Woodside, and beyond.

“All my friends went to university,” Mr. Alam said. “Nobody understands how they’re educated and I’m not. They will be proud, too.”


