


DALLAS — Heavy metal and hip-hop music blasted through American Airlines Center on Saturday during Game 5 of the Western Conference semifinal series between the St. Louis Blues and the Dallas Stars. But if you think country songs by Shania Twain would be too genteel for the playlist of the D.J. known as Grubes, then you do not know these smitten Stars, who gave her some credit for their overtime victory in Game 4.

Still, a question lingered. Could her music keep them winning?

Watching the game with the score tied at 1-1 in the first period, Tom Gaglardi, the Stars’ owner, said of Twain: “I’m proud of her. She’s a good Canadian and a great artist.”

Gaglardi, who is from Vancouver, added of the Stars, “They listen to country music more often than not in the locker room and practice facility.”

Even among country stars, though, Twain holds a special place in the Stars’ hearts.

Before Game 4 on Thursday, members of the Dallas news media waiting to speak to the team were held at bay by center Jason Spezza until the end of Twain’s song “You’re Still the One,” The Dallas Morning News reported. The team’s captain, Jamie Benn, pumped up the volume.

Did the lyrics remind the Stars of the team’s only Stanley Cup championship, in 1999? “Looks like we made it/Look how far we’ve come, my baby/We might’ve took the long way/We knew we’d get there someday.”

When the Stars beat the Blues, 3-2, in overtime of Thursday’s game, Spezza suggested Twain had had an influence. Amalie Benjamin of NHL.com wrote on Twitter, “First thing Jason Spezza said to me when I walked in the Stars room: ‘Shania.’ Grin.”

Alerted to her apparent impact on the Stars’ tying the series, Twain responded on Twitter. “Heard @dallasstars have amazing taste in pre game music,” she wrote. “ Must have helped them to the win?! Incredible game guys!”

Benn then responded, writing that “we only listen to the best!”

Defenseman Jason Demers added: “OMG shania knows who we are!!!”

Sports teams sometimes cannot resist a connection to a celebrity, including ownership by one (as with Jay Z’s former sliver of a stake in the Nets). This season, the Florida Panthers inexplicably began awarding a “Spacey in Space” hoodie to the most valuable player of each game. The actor Kevin Spacey learned of the ritual and began exchanging messages on Twitter with the players. When he attended a game, the team handed out Spacey Faceys — cardboard cutouts of his head.

Twain did not show up on Saturday, and maybe she should have. Her music was playing to the full arena. But “You’re Still the One” (used for the kiss cam) and “Man! I Feel Like a Woman!” did not have a victorious effect. Dallas lost, 4-1.

There were too many missed scoring opportunities — the Stars lacked what Coach Lindy Ruff called “puck luck.”

Afterward, the Stars’ locker room was subdued as players quietly explained their losing effort and discussed whether they could win the next two games to move into the conference finals. Twain’s music was by then a memory of inspiration past.

But it offered a moment of jest for Blues Coach Ken Hitchcock. Asked if he knew about the Twain-Stars musical romance and if he was able to counter it, he instead responded that he was also inspired by Twain.

“So what’s the difference?” he said, smiling. “Really inspired. So we’re even.”

The Blues later posted on Twitter a picture of Twain in a Blues jersey, accompanied by the message “It’s not too late, @ShaniaTwain — come on over!”

The Twain incident would probably not have mattered, or occurred, if the Stars were not in the midst of a revival. The team had been weakened by the debt woes of the former owner Tom Hicks; in 2011, Gaglardi acquired the team through bankruptcy court, the same route Hicks had taken in selling the Texas Rangers a year earlier.

“We had become somewhat irrelevant in the market,” Gaglardi said. “Our season-ticket base had hit the lowest point ever, and we had to rebuild it. That’s not easy. It’s one ticket, one fan at a time. There’s no magic to it.”

Now, he said, the season ticket base has risen to between 13,000 and 14,000.

Gaglardi, a large man wearing an untucked pinstriped shirt, was sitting on a deep sofa in his luxury suite filled with guests, mainly local business executives.

“I’m a normal Canadian,” he said. “I grew up with hockey. I’ve played it since I’m 5 years old. My kids play. I coach back home. It’s just a wonderful sport. Several years ago, when the Canucks came on the market, I’m me, so I tried to buy them, but I ended up with a great franchise here.”

How great may depend on if the team can start a comeback in St. Louis on Monday night.

And if Twain’s musical magic returns.


