


PARIS — Out on Court 3 in the gloaming, Serena and Venus Williams were playing ferocious doubles: ripping returns and passing shots with unmistakable intent; finishing each serve with a bit of extra venom.

“They are thinking Olympics with every stroke of the ball,” said Patrick Mouratoglou, Serena’s coach. “Serena’s got the desire here, doubles and singles.”

A great deal has changed since the Williamses first arrived at Roland Garros: Venus, the older sister, in 1997; Serena in 1998.

Back then, there were no skycams zipping along overhead and no digital scoreboards glowing in the fading light. Back then nobody in the sisters’ entourage was getting distracted by a smartphone during their matches, and their parents — Richard Williams and Oracene Price — were still together and still fixtures at courtside.

On Saturday evening, the sisters’ new day-to-day tennis mentors were sitting side-by-side in the stands: Mouratoglou and Venus’s de facto coach, David Witt. But what has not changed is the sisters’ elemental connection and their taste for competition and for solving tennis conundrums with an often irresistible burst of power.

It was quite a sight back in the late 1990s, and so it remains nearly 20 years later with Serena now 34 years old and Venus about to turn 36.

“In my view, they were technically ahead of the others 15 or 20 years ago,” said Georges Goven, the former French player and longtime coach. “They were ahead with their style of play, the open-stance method of transferring the weight and all the rest. They, in some fashion, invented a tennis that was more economical in terms of the footwork while being more effective.”

Goven noted that others had imitated this style of play, which he said the Williamses have been able to maintain at a high level in part because they did not play a lot of tournaments each year.

“They are like older-model cars without many kilometers on the odometer,” Goven said. “So that has given them a certain freshness, and that plus their talent tells the story.”

It was and remains one of the most unlikely and remarkable tales in sports, and in this very latest installment of their long-running reality show, the sisters are both back in the fourth round of the French Open in singles for the first time since 2010.

Before playing doubles, they played the home team on this rain-interrupted Saturday: Serena facing Kristina Mladenovic of France on center court and Venus facing another Frenchwoman, Alizé Cornet, across the concourse on the Suzanne Lenglen Court.

Both sisters prevailed with difficulty: Serena finishing off Mladenovic on her fifth match point, 6-4, 7-6 (10), and Venus roaring back from a rough second set to win, 7-6 (5), 1-6, 6-0.

They have both played better in their lives, but they played well enough. In the round of 16, Serena will face Elina Svitolina of Ukraine while Venus will take on the quick and crafty Swiss player Timea Bacsinszky, a semifinalist here last year before Serena defeated her in three sets on her way to the title.

Svitolina has hired Justine Henin as a coaching consultant this season — one more reminder of the Williamses’ staying power in a sport that can grind down its champions.

Henin, who won four French Opens, remains one of the precious few to have had a true rivalry with Serena. Younger than both sisters at 33, she has been retired now for more than five years and is also working at Roland Garros as a television analyst. So is the former Williams rival Amélie Mauresmo, who, at 36, is less than a year older than Venus.

Witt said Venus could be five years younger, as far as he was concerned.

“She’s still looking to do the same thing, get deep in tournaments and play good matches,” Witt said. “She and Serena love the tennis and love getting out there and enjoying the battle, and there’s no talk of retirement. She loves being in the stadium; loves playing front of people and loves just getting out there in the battle. The rest of it, she’s not into all that. She’s not into the drama.”

There was some on Saturday, however, as Venus was given a warning in the third set of her match against Cornet by the chair umpire, Carlos Ramos, for receiving coaching. She did not take it lightly.

“Honestly, at 36 years old, I have never had a coaching violation,” she said to the officials on court. “Don’t even go there. I play fair. I play the game with honesty. I would never tell anyone to do that, just F.Y.I.”

The drama in Serena’s match peaked in the second-set tiebreaker, delayed for nearly three hours by rain immediately after Mladenovic, who was living very dangerously on her service games, evened the set at 6-6.

After the break, Mladenovic jumped out to a 5-2 lead but missed an inside-out forehand that would have put her up by 6-2. Serena rallied from there yet still struggled to close, shanking an overhead on her first match point and requiring four more match points before winning.

“I think today in general I didn’t play my usual game,” she said. “Some of those break points, most of them, I should have won. And I didn’t. And lately I have been really converting those break points, but I have got to focus on the positives, I guess.”

The positives include sweeping to the title on clay in Rome before Roland Garros after a difficult, by her standards, start to the season.

“If you judge her from today, you’d say her game is poor, because she was not moving well and was hitting her shots with her weight too far back,” Mouratoglou said. “She was hitting short and not finding the angles, but if you look at it through the lens of what she’s done for the last few weeks, her level of play is comfortably high enough to win the title here.”

Mouratoglou attributes Serena’s failure to win a title this year until Rome to the lingering disappointment over her upset losses in the 2015 United States Open semifinals (to Roberta Vinci) and in the 2016 Australian Open final (to Angelique Kerber).

“Lots of disillusionment and a small loss of motivation,” he said. “But the desire is there now. She came to Rome to win the tournament. She’s got it back. You feel it in the matches.”

An all-Williams singles semifinal in Paris is still a possibility, though not likely considering Bacsinszky’s form and Venus’s struggles in recent years on red clay.

There is also doubles, where the sisters, who had not played together since 2014 until losing in the first round in Rome, are trying to get their groove back in time for Rio. Both are committed to the Olympics even though there are concerns about the Zika virus.

“It’s something that’s been on my mind,” Serena said. “I’m really just going to have to go superprotected, maybe.”

For now, they are still in the second round in Paris after their match with Vitalia Diatchenko and Galina Voskoboeva was suspended for darkness, with the Williamses saving two set points to take a 7-6 (8) lead into the locker room.

They will be back for more on Sunday, back at Roland Garros, one of the tennis playgrounds they know best.


