


VIENNA — Alexander Van der Bellen, a 72-year-old economics professor and former Green Party leader, won Austria’s cliffhanger presidential election on Monday, defeating his far-right rival by the slimmest of margins and pledging to unite the divided country.

Austria had to wait almost 24 hours after polls closed on Sunday for the authorities to count almost 700,000 valid mail-in ballots. In the end, Mr. Van der Bellen won 50.3 percent of the vote, and his far-right rival, Norbert Hofer, 49.7 percent, a difference of just over 30,000 votes, the Interior Ministry said.

Mr. Hofer conceded defeat on his Facebook page, writing: “Of course I am sad today. I would so gladly have taken care of our wonderful country for you as president.” He added, “The effort for this campaign is not lost, but an investment in the future.”

The result averted the prospect of the first right-wing populist head of state in post-Nazi Europe taking office in a democratic election. Yet the close result illustrated how deeply divided Austria is between left and right, and how thoroughly the centrist elites who have run the country since 1945 have fallen from public grace.

The narrowness of the victory also reflected the big strides into the mainstream the far right has made not only in Austria, but in much of Europe — from neighboring Hungary and Poland, where it already holds sway, to France and Germany, where rightist movements are polling strongly before national elections next year.

In Britain, voters are scheduled to decide next month whether their country will stay in the European Union. That vote could turn on issues like migrants and a rejection of European unity and the Continent’s centrist elites — issues that also figured significantly in Austria’s vote.

In his first speech as president-elect, Mr. Van der Bellen emphasized his pro-European stance, welcoming foreign reporters in English, and promised Mr. Hofer’s voters that their grievances and views would be heard.

“We have quite clearly got a lot of work to do,” Mr. Van der Bellen said. “Obviously, people do not feel sufficiently seen or heard, or both,” even if the five-month campaign proved that Austrians were ready to discuss politics at length — something their new president said was “a good sign.”

Polling experts said Mr. Van der Bellen had won the election with support from city dwellers — particularly in Vienna, which voted 61 percent for him — women and the highly educated. He promised on Sunday night that he would try to heal the rifts that had opened along these and other lines as establishment politics stagnated.

Mr. Hofer’s showing is the first time the Freedom Party, which has its roots in the 1950s, when it was founded by former Nazis and Teutonic nationalists, has gained close to 50 percent of the popular vote. That alone signals that it is a factor to be reckoned with as Austria, a generally prosperous country of 8.4 million, grapples to find its place in a globalized world, and in a Europe whose unity is under question.

The disruptions of globalization and last year’s wave of one million migrants — most of whom only passed through Austria en route to Germany or Sweden — were central themes of the election.

Despite Austria’s outward prosperity, wrote Rainer Nowak, the editor of Die Presse, the leading center-right daily, “people fear that it won’t go so well for much longer.”

The parties of the center left and center right that governed for most of the past 30 years in ever-duller grand coalitions were trounced in the first round of the presidential elections last month, when Mr. Hofer stunned rivals by reaping 35.1 percent, well ahead of Mr. Van der Bellen with 21 percent.

Sunday’s runoff turned into a cliffhanger as the popular vote was counted and showed an ever-narrowing lead for Mr. Hofer. The Austrian public broadcaster ORF projected that Mr. Van der Bellen would win by just 3,000 votes when the record number of requested mail-in ballots was counted on Monday.

That projection — and the tone of some of the ORF reporting on the election — was heavily criticized by the Freedom Party. It was not clear if there would be legal consequences, but the party’s attitude illustrated the country’s deep divisions.

Doron Rabinovici, a writer who was among several prominent intellectuals supporting Mr. Van der Bellen, noted that “the 50-50 vote is not in itself a split; that’s democracy.” But how one proceeds is what matters.

“We do have a problem in this country, that politics has been conducted not in discussing substance but at the level of the tabloid press,” he said.

In Mr. Rabinovici’s view, that was particularly true of the last chancellor, the Social Democrat Werner Faymann, who resigned on May 9 after the rightward lurch in the first round of the presidential vote.

Mr. Faymann had, at first, supported the welcoming stance of Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany to the hundreds of thousands of refugees who poured in from the Balkans last year. Although most moved on to Germany and Sweden, roughly 90,000 sought asylum in Austria.

The Freedom Party, which has for decades campaigned to keep out foreigners, saw its support soar, with opinion polls consistently showing that it would win a nationwide election.

That apparently prompted Mr. Faymann and his center-right partners in government to reverse course on its approach to migrants, shutting Austria’s borders and persuading Balkan nations along the refugee trail to Central Europe from Greece to do the same.

Hopes are now pinned on his successor as chancellor, the leader of the Social Democrats: Christian Kern, 50, the former head of Austria’s state rail system, got off to a vigorous start last week, talking of a “New Deal” that would allay people’s worries and overhaul Austria’s moribund state structures.

The last time the outside world paid such attention to the election of an Austrian president was in 1986, when Austrians defied international fears and elected Kurt Waldheim, a former United Nations secretary general, as president, despite revelations that he had served in the Wehrmacht close to the site of Nazi atrocities in the Balkans.

Mr. Waldheim’s six-year tenure was scarred by almost complete diplomatic isolation.

“Very little will change in the real world” as a result of Sunday’s vote, said Charles Grant of the Center for European Reform, a London think tank.

Nevertheless, he said, it was clearly a protest vote, cast as “trade, migrants and globalization are increasingly unpopular” and “inequality is growing” across Europe and the United States.

Mr. Grant compared the outcome to the showing of the U.K. Independence Party, which received almost 28 percent in European elections in 2014 but just 12.6 percent in Britain’s general election last year.

In France, the center-right daily Le Figaro wrote on Monday that “Europe’s leaders should not be too pleased if Alexander Van der Bellen spares them the shock of an anti-European president in Vienna.”

The very narrow vote contains a lesson, the French daily added: “Across the whole Continent, people are expressing more or less the same rejection of a Europe that lacks both a plan, and a head.”


