


A judge on Thursday dismissed the charges against a mail carrier who was handcuffed and arrested in March during an altercation with plainclothes police officers in Brooklyn.

The district attorney’s office had been reviewing the circumstances of the arrest — which was recorded on video — and prosecutors decided to recommend that the charges be dismissed.

The mail carrier, Glen Grays, said he was making his rounds in the Crown Heights neighborhood when he shouted at the driver of a car that almost sideswiped him on President Street. The unmarked car held four plainclothes officers. Mr. Grays said the officers quickly put the car into reverse, got out and handcuffed him, telling him at one point to stop resisting when, it appears, he would not put his arms behind his back so officers could handcuff him.

Mr. Grays, whose fiancée is a New York City police officer, was eventually taken to the 71st Precinct station house, where he was issued a summons for disorderly conduct and released.

In a statement released on Thursday, Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, said that he had asked Judge Rosemarie Montalbano to dismiss the charges against Mr. Grays “in the interest of justice.” Several postal workers appeared at the dismissal hearing in Brooklyn Criminal Court in show of support for Mr. Grays.

Kenneth E. Ramseur, the lawyer representing Mr. Grays, praised the dismissal of the charges and said he was encouraged that Mr. Thompson had “taken the bull by the horns.” Mr. Ramseur added that Mr. Grays did not want the officers involved in the arrest to lose their jobs.

The case against Mr. Grays, who is black, had drawn the attention of Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president and a former police officer. Mr. Adams released the video at a news conference, expressing outrage over the apparent violation of the civil rights of yet another black man by the police. In a statement on Thursday, Mr. Adams thanked the court and Mr. Thompson for “righting a key piece of the wrong that this young man experienced.”

A few days after the episode, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton opened an investigation, citing “strong concerns” about the arrest of Mr. Grays. In early April, the supervisor who oversaw the arrest, Lt. Luis D. Machado, was placed on administrative duty and stripped of his gun and badge. The other officers involved were removed from their assignment with a specialized neighborhood troubleshooting unit and put back on regular patrol.

Stephen Davis, a spokesman for the Police Department, said on Thursday that Lieutenant Machado would be served with departmental charges and the other officers would face discipline from their commanders.


