


FRONT PAGE

An article on Wednesday about the identities of the service members in an iconic photograph of American patriotism, depicting their heroism in raising the flag over Iwo Jima during World War II, which inspired the book and the movie “Flags of Our Fathers,” omitted the name of one of the authors of the book. Besides James Bradley, Ron Powers also wrote it.

•

An article on April 7 about Mossack Fonseca, the Panamanian law firm that became a powerhouse of secretive offshore banking for the world’s elite, misstated the surname of the secretary general of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, who said Panama has been reluctant to follow an international banking transparency initiative started by the organization in 2009. He is Ángel Gurría, not Gerri.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 25 about a new humanitarian prize created in memory of the Armenian genocide misstated, in some editions, George Clooney’s connection to the award, which he presented at a ceremony in Yerevan, Armenia. Mr. Clooney was co-chairman of the prize selection committee, not master of ceremonies. The article also referred incorrectly to Vartan Gregorian, the American philanthropist and scholar of Armenian descent. While Mr. Gregorian helped create the prize and helped lead the selection committee’s deliberations, he was not the chairman or a co-chairman.

•

The Saturday Profile article on March 12, about Alain Finkielkraut, a French intellectual whose argument that much of Islam is incompatible with French society has won a larger audience after the terrorist attacks of 2015, imprecisely translated the French word “beur.” It refers to French children of North African Muslim immigrants, not simply “Muslims.” A reader alerted The Times to the imprecision shortly after publication, but editors failed to follow up with a correction.

•

Because of editing errors, a picture caption on March 6 with the Milan Journal article, about a restaurant inside a penitentiary near Milan that is staffed by inmates and winning rave reviews, misspelled the name of the restaurant and the prison. As noted correctly in the article and in an earlier reference in the caption, the restaurant is InGalera, not InGelara; the prison is Bollate, not Bellate. The errors were corrected online shortly after the article was published, but editors failed to follow through on this print correction.

NEW YORK

An article on Tuesday about an agreement by the developer Aby Rosen to pay $7 million in a settlement with the New York State attorney general’s office over unpaid taxes on art misidentified the owner of the Picasso curtain, “Le Tricorne,” which Mr. Rosen had sought to remove from the Seagram Building. It is now owned by the New-York Historical Society, no longer the New York Landmarks Conservancy. (The article also misspelled Landmarks as Landmark.)

SPORTS

Because of an editing error, the Sports of The Times column last Friday, about social-media abuse faced by female sports journalists, misidentified the publication for which Julie DiCaro is a reporter. It is The Cauldron — not Sports Illustrated, a partner of The Cauldron.

•

The Sports of The Times column on Monday, about Baron Davis’s Showtime documentary, “The Drew,” on a summer basketball league in the heart of South Central Los Angeles, misstated part of the name of the school that hosts the games. It is Charles Drew Middle School, not Charles Drew High.

THE ARTS

An article on Thursday about art fairs in New York City this week omitted part of the name of one. It is the 1:54 Contemporary African Art Fair, not the Contemporary African Art Fair.

SPECIAL SECTION: MEN’S STYLE

An article on Page D6 about the author Mychal Denzel Smith misstates the publication date of his coming memoir, “Invisible Man, Got the Whole World Watching.” It is June 14, not June 16.

•

The Life as a Runway column on Page D8, a photo essay featuring the executives and employees of the advertising agency Droga5, misstates the agency’s relationship with three brands. Android, Coke Zero and Spotify are former clients, not current ones.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Thursday about the photographer Charles Gatewood misstated the date of his death. He died on Thursday, April 28 — not on Friday, April 29.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


