


The Mets had been cruising through inferior competition, but on Friday, they had to jump up in weight class when the San Francisco Giants arrived at Citi Field.

By capturing last year’s National League pennant, the Mets seized the title formerly owned by the Giants, who won World Series in 2010, 2012 and 2014.

The teams opened the game like nervous prizefighters, with both feeling each other out — no crushing blows were landed. But after the first time through the order, the Mets spotted a weakness and bludgeoned the Giants in the third inning.

By the time Yoenis Cespedes’s grand slam cleared the left-field fence, the Mets had landed their knockout punch, scoring a franchise-record 12 runs in one inning on the way to a 13-1 romp over the Giants.

When the teams met at Citi Field for their first game of last season, on June 9, Chris Heston threw a no-hitter.

Cespedes’s laser shot over the left-field wall marked several milestones. Aside from the single inning-run total, Cespedes helped set franchise records for most R.B.I. in an inning (six), and consecutive games with an extra-base hit (nine).

“I’m very happy, honored to have achieved this,” Cespedes said through a translator.

The Mets’ previous one-inning run record was 11, set in the sixth inning against the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field on July 16, 2006.

“When we signed him it was a huge, huge move for us,” Manager Terry Collins said of Cespedes. “He puts that legitimate big-time bat in the middle of our lineup that every good team needs to have. For me, what he does is he just takes the load off so many guys.”   

Despite a persistent light rain, Giants starter Jake Peavy coasted through the first two innings, allowing only one hit, a bunt single by Neil Walker. But he also had two walks, and the Mets later took advantage of his lack of control to begin their romp.

Leading off the third, Curtis Granderson and David Wright walked before Michael Conforto doubled into the left-center field gap for the first run. With Wright on third and Conforto on second, Cespedes picked up his first hit of the inning, lining a single to center field and bringing home both runners.

“What happened today, that was the last thing on my mind,” Cespedes said of breaking the team record for R.B.I. in an inning.

After Lucas Duda walked, Walker hit a towering double that faded right like a hooking tee shot. The fans stood and craned their necks, looking to see if it would land inside the right-field foul pole, but it dropped just short at the base of the wall, good enough to score Cespedes. The Giants pulled Peavy after only 70 pitches. He was charged with 6 of the 12 runs.

Reliever Mike Broadway entered and immediately gave up a double to Asdrubal Cabrera, scoring Duda and Walker. Kevin Plawecki walked and Steven Matz, the ninth batter of the inning, recorded the first out after missing a bunt attempt with two strikes.

Back at the top of the order, Granderson aired a deep fly ball to right field forcing Hunter Pence to backpedal. As Pence contorted his body in an attempt to make the catch, the ball popped out of his glove. Granderson was credited with a single, and Cabrera crossed the plate. Wright followed with a single to load the bases.

Conforto added another R.B.I., a single to score Plawecki, setting up Cespedes to drive in the most runs in an inning for a Met since Butch Huskey had five R.B.I. in an inning May 26, 1998.

The Mets sent 15 batters to the plate. When Walker grounded to second for the third out, the crowd stood and gave a rousing ovation.

Steven Matz pitched six scoreless innings, although the Giants picked up seven hits and three walks off him. Matz, while picking up four strikeouts, was able to provide the Mets important length as they begin a stretch of 17 games without a day off.

Before Friday, the Mets slate of April games against National League teams had not been sated with clubs expected to play past the first weekend in October. Before the game, Collins was fully aware of this imbalance, and at first tried to puff up the credentials of teams like the Miami Marlins and Philadelphia Phillies, before acknowledging the Giants residency in a different class.

“This is going to be a great test for us this weekend,” Collins said.

With one record-shattering inning, the Mets passed the first part of that test.


