


“You don’t want the baby to fall on the floor,” says Dr. Paulo Alves, a medical director for MedAire, which provides 136 airlines with medical training, logistics and a telephone service that connects flight attendants all over the world to emer­gency-room doctors in Phoenix. If a woman goes into labor somewhere far from a hospital — 37,000 feet above the Pacific Ocean, say — ask if anyone in the vicinity has medical training. If not, help her into a comfortable place. On a plane, that’s usually a reclining first-class seat or the galley floor. Make sure blankets support her body so that when the baby arrives, it lands gently. “Babies are slippery when they’re born,” Alves warns.

Don’t try any improvised exams or procedures. “Don’t do what you’re not trained to do,” Alves says. Time the woman’s contractions; intense contractions at short intervals signal impending birth. Wash your hands and gather clean towels or blankets. Maintain outward calm; distress tends to spread between people. Don’t tell the woman when to push or what to do. Trust her instincts and impulses.

“Let the process flow,” Alves says.

When the baby begins to emerge, do not try to pull on the body or the umbilical cord. Do not push on the mother’s abdomen. Position yourself with a blanket to help catch the baby. Wipe or suction its nose and mouth to ensure clear airways. To cut the umbilical cord, place two clamps, or tie two strings, an inch apart, a little more than an inch out from the baby’s navel. Slice between the two with sterilized scissors. If possible, place the baby on the mother’s chest. Wait for the mother to expel the placenta and monitor her for bleeding. Get medical attention as soon as possible.

Remember, birth is dramatic but ordinary. Worldwide, more than 250 women give birth every minute. Airborne deliveries are rare, ill-advised and, Alves says, “not medically recommended.” Of the 192,000 in-flight calls MedAire received last year, just three cases resulted in in-flight babies. (Twelve more cases involved women going into labor, but those planes landed before delivery.) “The sky is a suspended city,” Alves says. “Anything that can happen in a city can happen in flight.”


