


The removal of 11 words in an amended N.C.A.A. complaint against the University of North Carolina hints that the men’s basketball team could receive comparatively lenient sentencing for its part in a nearly two-decade scandal in which thousands of students who were disproportionately major-sport athletes took fraudulent “paper classes.” In some cases, a university investigation acknowledged, the athletes who took the fake classes were steered there by athletic department advisers.

The 11 words, which had pointed an accusatory finger at the university’s most prominent teams, appeared in a notice of allegations sent by the N.C.A.A. to North Carolina last year but are not in the new one, which was released Monday afternoon and which, an N.C.A.A. spokeswoman confirmed, has superseded the old one. The words that were removed are “particularly in the sports of football, men’s basketball and women’s basketball.”

Where the original notice of allegations said that the classes gave athletic department academic advisers ways to keep academically at-risk students eligible especially in those sports, the new notice of allegations implies that those sports did not benefit unusually. The change potentially erases the justification for the kind of allegation of impermissible benefits in those sports that can lead to penalties like vacated titles and postseason bans.

It is not yet clear how the N.C.A.A.’s understanding of events squares with the so-called Wainstein report, the university-commissioned investigation by the former federal prosecutor Kenneth L. Wainstein released in 2014. The report found that more than 3,000 undergraduates took more than 100 fraudulent classes in the African and Afro-American Studies Department and that nearly a quarter of those students — a strikingly disproportionate share — were football or basketball players.

“These paper classes were taken by students of all types, but were especially popular among student-athletes, particularly those who played the ‘revenue’ sports of football and men’s basketball,” the report said.

The classes had been the brainchild of Deborah Crowder, a longtime university employee who was the African and Afro-American Studies Department’s nonacademic administrator, and was eventually abetted by the department chairman at the time, Julius Nyang’oro.

Several sources familiar with the North Carolina scandal and the N.C.A.A. enforcement process cautioned that it was impossible to predict the outcome of the continuing investigation. Even after the changes to the notice of allegations, there are still Level 1 infractions charges — the most serious tier — leveled at the university.

One of the remaining charges, accusing North Carolina of failing to possess institutional control, “leaves a back door open to penalties that could affect athletics across the board,” said Tyrone Thomas, a lawyer at Mintz Levin who advises universities in N.C.A.A. cases.

In a statement and subsequent conference call with reporters Monday, Bubba Cunningham, North Carolina’s athletic director, said it was premature to speculate on how the wording in the new notice of allegations, which also significantly shortened the relevant time frame and seemed to place much of the blame on an academic adviser to the women’s basketball team, could affect future punishments.

“We are carefully reviewing the amended notice of allegations resulting from our joint investigation with the N.C.A.A. and will respond with facts and evidence that present a full picture of our case,” Cunningham said. “The university takes these allegations extremely seriously.”

North Carolina has 90 days to respond to the N.C.A.A. At some point, it said, it will release the “factual information” the N.C.A.A. provided to justify the allegations. But the N.C.A.A. Committee on Infractions may not release its full findings (along with any sanctions) until next year.

But on Monday, there was consensus that the new notice of allegations was good news for those who hoped the Tar Heels’ most prominent and lucrative teams would escape the harshest of punishments: vacated wins and titles; postseason bans; severe scholarship and recruiting restrictions; and action against the longtime men’s basketball coach, Roy Williams, who led his team to the national title game three weeks ago.

In particular, the 2005 national men’s basketball title appears safe. That championship team featured several players who took the paper classes, including Rashad McCants, who has maintained in interviews on ESPN that he and his teammates benefited from and knew about the phony classes. Williams has disputed this, and the Wainstein report found that all other players insisted that tutors’ input into their work was appropriate.

If one Tar Heels team continues to seem a likely candidate for severe sanctions, it is women’s basketball. A former academic counselor for that team, Jan Boxill, remains accused of providing extra benefits — writing papers, for example, and lobbying professors about grades — for members of the team from 2003 to 2010.

The Wainstein report made similar allegations against Boxill, but it also reserved strong words for academic advisers to the football team, who, according to the report, “grew dependent on the paper classes.” It also said that one men’s basketball adviser steered players to the classes.

The revelation that university personnel subverted the educations of hundreds of athletes at first seemed to be the equivalent of the bat signal for the N.C.A.A., whose core principle states that players are students first, with sports forming a part of their larger educations. Arguably more than some of the eye-popping fodder of recent college sports scandals — the Rutgers football coach urging a professor to allow a struggling athlete to complete extra-credit coursework to stay eligible, a Louisville men’s basketball assistant accused of paying prostitutes to entertain recruits in university housing — the North Carolina case appeared to strike at the heart of the N.C.A.A.’s fundamental mission.

But after reopening its investigation in 2014, the N.C.A.A. has publicly questioned whether it ought to pass judgment on the merits of classes at individual member universities.

Asked about the N.C.A.A.’s responsibility for athletes’ educations, the organization’s president, Mark Emmert, told reporters last year, “It’s ultimately up to universities to determine whether or not the courses for which they’re giving credit, the degrees for which they’re passing out diplomas, live up to the academic standards of higher education.”

Kirk Schulz, the chairman of the N.C.A.A. Board of Governors, who will soon become president of Washington State but at the time served the same role at Kansas State, added, “I have no desire at Kansas State University to have the N.C.A.A. more involved in our academic enterprise.”


