


In 2010, when Bill de Blasio was the public advocate for New York City, he started an investigation into how a primary election had gone so horribly wrong for voters.

Polling stations opened late, many barely functioning, with untrained workers struggling to cope with the chaos that resulted when voting machines malfunctioned.

On Monday, Mr. de Blasio, now the mayor, once again grappled with an election, the presidential primary last week, that seemed to have been bungled by a bureaucracy whose problems were well known, frequently bemoaned and stubbornly beyond repair.

Although his office cannot mandate repairs to the voting system, Mr. de Blasio announced that the city would spend $20 million to improve the Board of Elections, provided it would agree to a series of changes aimed at addressing the problems with last week’s primary.

“The Board of Elections is an outdated organization in dire need of modernization — and we need to make these changes now,” Mr. de Blasio said in a statement.

“We cannot allow a single voter to be disenfranchised because of the Board of Elections’ outdated operations,” he said. “These common-sense reforms will bring much-needed transparency, modernize practices and help ensure we do not experience an Election Day like last week’s again.”

Among the problems in the April 19 primary contest: More than 125,000 Democratic voters were dropped from the rolls in Brooklyn without any explanation from election officials.

In response, the board suspended Diane Haslett-Rudiano, the chief clerk at the Brooklyn office and a Republican appointee, over concerns that she had failed to follow proper procedures in what was supposed to be a routine purging of voter registration lists.

After the primary last week, the city comptroller, Scott Stringer, announced his own audit of the elections board, and the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, said his office had received hundreds of complaints.

But for all the public consternation, voting day problems hardly come as a surprise.

Every election seems to raise some new concern that the ability of New York City residents to carry out their most basic civic duty has been impeded.

Three years ago, an inquiry into the board by the city’s Investigation Department found a wide range of problems, including hiring practices marred by nepotism and political influence, and a lack of voter privacy. Investigators found “more than 15 instances during the 2013 general election where poll workers instructed voters to ‘vote down the line’ on the ballot for candidates on a particular party line.”

Problems in other elections have also been well chronicled. In 2010, for instance, it took one month for election officials to discover that some 200,000 votes had been missed on election night.

The dysfunction of the city’s elections process has long been laid at the feet of the board, which is made up of 10 commissioners appointed by the City Council, based upon recommendations from the political parties. The board’s budget in the 2016 fiscal year totals $111.2 million, including $46 million in personal services funding to support 355 positions and over 30,000 poll workers.

As part of the plan outlined by Mr. de Blasio, the board must agree to make the changes by June 1 before it is granted any additional funding. Once the agreement is signed, the plan calls for a consultant to review the April election and draw up a plan to correct systemic problems. The city would provide $1.5 million for this review and analysis.

Another $10 million would be spent on improving hiring practices, bolstering pay and enhancing training for poll workers. Finally, $8.5 million would be spent on other improvements, including greater voter outreach and more effective logistical operations.


