


Joey Logano, 26, pulled away to win the FireKeepers Casino 400 on Sunday and was followed by Chase Elliott, 20, and Kyle Larson, 23, making up the youngest top three in history for a race on Nascar’s top series, now known as the Sprint Cup.

The three’s average age, 23, was lower than the 24.7 of the top three finishers at a race in 1951 and two races the previous year.

“The future of Nascar is present,” Logano said. “It’s going to be big. It’s amazing to see.”

Logano, the pole-sitter at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich., passed Elliott on Lap 153 and stayed ahead for the 15th Sprint Cup Series victory of his career. Elliott finished a career-best second, but he was not in the mood to celebrate, blaming himself for poor restarts.

“I definitely messed up,” he said. “Putting it in the correct gear would be a good start.”

Brad Keselowski was fourth, and Kevin Harvick, the points leader, finished fifth.

HAMILTON NARROWS GAP Lewis Hamilton took advantage of Sebastian Vettel’s pit-stop strategy to earn his 45th career Formula One win, capturing the Canadian Grand Prix for the fifth time. Vettel took the early lead in Montreal with an audacious move at the start, but he gave it back for good when he went to the pits — for the second time — on Lap 37.

With the victory, Hamilton cut the series lead of his teammate Nico Rosberg to 9 points, from 24, at 116-107. Vettel moved into third in the points race, with 78.

INDYCAR RACE RESCHEDULED The IndyCar driver Josef Newgarden broke his right collarbone in a scary crash in the Firestone 600 after his car was slammed to its side and slid along the frontstretch wall with the top of the cockpit exposed. Only 71 of the scheduled 248 laps in Fort Worth were completed before rain from an approaching thunderstorm hit the track, so IndyCar rescheduled the race for Aug. 27.

Andy Murray said he was reuniting with his former coach Ivan Lendl, who helped Murray win his two Grand Slam titles, at the United States Open in 2012 and Wimbledon in 2013. Since splitting with Lendl in March 2014, Murray has lost three Grand Slam finals, all to Novak Djokovic.

Murray and Lendl parted ways after Lendl, an eight-time Grand Slam singles champion, decided he no longer wanted to spend 20-plus weeks a year traveling. Murray replaced Lendl with Amélie Mauresmo, who helped him climb back up the rankings after he had back surgery, but the partnership ended last month.

AROUND TENNIS CoCo Vandeweghe beat Kristina Mladenovic, 7-5, 7-5, to win her second Ricoh Open title in The Hague, Netherlands. Vandeweghe also won the grass-court tournament in 2014 — her only two titles on the WTA Tour. Heavy rain forced organizers to push back until Monday the Mercedes Cup final between Dominic Thiem and Philipp Kohlschreiber with the first set tied, 6-6, in Stuttgart, Germany.

Chicago Cubs Manager Joe Maddon is intrigued by the idea of pitchers, including his ace, Jake Arrieta, competing in the Home Run Derby.

Maddon said he would not be worried that Arrieta would be hurt but stopped short of endorsing the idea on behalf of the team.

“That’s above my pay grade, right there,” he said.

Still, Maddon became more enthused about the idea as he mentioned the Diamondbacks’ Zack Greinke, the Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw, and the Mets’ Jacob deGrom and Bartolo Colon as other National League pitchers who could compete.

“I think it would be interesting,” Maddon said. “It might even be more interesting than the regulars.”

The Giants’ Madison Bumgarner has said he would like to participate in the event, set for July 11 in San Diego during the All-Star break. On Saturday, Arrieta said he would want to match his home run power against Bumgarner’s.

Arrieta said swinging for the fences in the Home Run Derby spotlight “would probably be the most adrenaline I would ever have.”

Milestone for Hamels Cole Hamels became the seventh active pitcher to reach 2,000 strikeouts in the Texas Rangers’ 6-4 win against the host Seattle Mariners, joining C.C. Sabathia, Bartolo Colon, Felix Hernandez, Jake Peavy, John Lackey and Justin Verlander. Hamels struck out five and allowed one run on four hits in seven innings.

AROUND THE MAJORS Dallas Keuchel, the reigning American League Cy Young Award winner, became the first major league pitcher to lose nine games this season as the visiting Houston Astros fell to the Tampa Bay Rays, 5-0. Russell Martin hit a three-run homer, and the host Toronto Blue Jays used a season-high seven doubles to beat the Baltimore Orioles, 10-9. Max Kepler’s first major league homer, a three-run shot in the 10th, gave the host Minnesota Twins a 7-4 victory over the Boston Red Sox. Jon Lester earned his fourth straight win, allowing no earned runs in seven innings as the visiting Chicago Cubs beat the Atlanta Braves, 13-2.

Bernhard Langer won the Constellation Senior Players Championship for the third straight year, making a 12-foot birdie putt on the final hole for a one-stroke victory at windy Philadelphia Cricket Club in Flourtown, Pa.

Langer, a 58-year-old German, won his seventh senior major title — his fifth in the last 11 — to tie Hale Irwin for second on the career list, one victory behind Jack Nicklaus.

AROUND GOLF Daniel Berger won the FedEx St. Jude Classic in Memphis for his first P.G.A. Tour title, shooting a three-under-par 67 to hold off Phil Mickelson, Steve Stricker and Brooks Koepka by three strokes. Wu Ashun rallied to win the Lyoness Open in Atzenbrugg, Austria, for his second European Tour victory, improving his chances of playing for China in the Rio Olympics. Wu closed with a three-under 69 for a one-stroke win over Adrian Otaegui. Bronte Law became the second player in Curtis Cup history to go 5-0, doing so in Britain and Ireland’s 11 ½-8 ½ victory over the United States in Dublin.

Chris Froome warmed up for the Tour de France by winning the Critérium du Dauphiné stage race for the third time. Froome’s other Dauphiné wins were in 2013 and 2015 — the years he also won the Tour, which starts July 2. Froome finished with a winning margin of 12 seconds over Romain Bardet. Alberto Contador finished fifth.


