


This article originally appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 25, 1964.

Once upon a time, a loud and charming young heavyweight contender named Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. had a recurring daydream. He would win the championship, the richest single prize in all sport, and immediately grow a beard, put on a pair of tattered bluejeans, and saunter down a country lane until he found a pretty little girl. They would dance in the meadows and splash through the brooks, and fall in love. Then he would reveal himself as the heavyweight king in disguise, and carry her back to his $250,000 home, his Cadillacs, his world fame, and say, “This is all yours, because you love me for what I am.”

Eight months ago, Cassius X, a newly avowed disciple of the separatist movement called the Black Muslims, won the championship. His seventh-round technical knockout of Sonny Liston amazed the public (especially at odds of 7 to 1), initiated a Senate investigation and provoked several boxing groups to a flurry of charges and threats. On Nov. 16, in Boston, a subdued and often wearyingly dogmatic Muhammad Ali (the name was bestowed on him by the Muslim leadership a few days after his fight with Liston) will defend his championship in a rematch with Liston. Whether he wins the fight or not (again, the betting odds are against him), Ali will probably remain, for a long time, the most controversial and complex figure in modern American sports history. He has long since passed the brash Cassius Clay who burst upon boxing on the wings of bad poetry and brilliant publicity; he has even passed the convert Cassius X who could only say of his new religion’s leader: “If every tree was full of ink, you couldn’t write all that Elijah Muhammad knows.”

He is married now, to a woman with a child by a previous marriage; he has been rejected by the Army for reasons not fully explained; he has traveled to Africa and returned to state: “I’m not an American. I’m a black man.” And he has sweepingly denounced American Negroes in the civil rights movement as people who secretly think: “I’m gonna get me a light-skinned girl, nearest to white I can find, and a long cigarette and a fancy car and I won’t associate with those blacks.”

But somewhere among these Cassius Clays — the lovable clown; Cassius X, the troubled and searching man; Muhammad Ali, the sociopolitical spokesman — is the 6-foot-3-inch, 220-pound, cherubically handsome 22-year-old paradox who, within minutes, can be clown, thinker, spokesman, or any combination of his public roles.

There was a day in September, for example, at a Boston motel, when Ali walked into a battery of television lights for the signing ceremony of the second fight with Liston. In sports, the public signing of contracts is merely a publicity gimmick. Everybody smiles, does a little verbal soft-shoe if he can, and hopes that no sudden international crisis will push the footage out of the evening news programs. Ali was surrounded by half a dozen tight-lipped, roving-eyed members of the Boston Muslim temple, and his full lower lip hung sulkily. “Hey, Cassius!” yelled a television cameraman. “The name is Muhammad Ali,” mumbled the champion, tiredly. “O.K., Ollie, O.K., how about a little ‘I’m the greatest, I’ll beat the Bear in two,’ huh?” Ali stared at the cameraman and he mumbled: “Most of my campaigning was not really me. Now, I don’t have to talk like that. I see Robert Kennedy walking through the streets meeting everybody, shaking everybody’s hands, and when he gets into office you gonna need a necktie to go and see him.”

There was a day last July, when he was riding through Harlem in his chauffeur-driven, air-conditioned limousine, speaking with the pompous sobriety of an elder statesman about his recent tour of Africa as an Ambassador of the American branch of Islam. He spoke softly of his meetings with Nasser and Nkrumah, of his tumultuous welcome in Ghana of the 2,500-pound block of a 4,000-year-old Egyptian pyramid he had been given. Suddenly his eyes lit up, and he began to talk faster.

“The world watches me now, hey, you know what happened on the way to Egypt? I sat with the pilot, that’s right, the pilot of a big jet plane, and he talked to me about boxing while he drove the plane, and I sat behind a wheel, too, and whenever he turned his wheel, my wheel turned, too, and I could sit there and pretend I was driving the plane. Then it was time to land, and that’s a crucial time, and I stayed in the pilot’s room, but went to another seat, and I was right there when we landed in a place where most people don’t even get a chance to peek.”

There was a day in March, in a suite at the Hotel Theresa littered with cardboard containers from Chock Full o’ Nuts and the bodies of hangers-on, that Ali sat for seven hours and spoke methodically about his religion. “It’s natural that the American Negro should have a Muslim nature. Those bombings, and they never caught the people who did it. The Civil Rights Bill having all that trouble and all those people talking so it don’t come to a vote, and Kennedy did so much for the Negro and he died. Things die on out and our people forget. Three hundred and ten years of physical slavery, the faithful slave I see on a corner in Harlem and he has to ask for a dollar ’cause he’s hungry. All our lives we learn that black is evil, it’s dirty, they even call black cake devil’s food cake, and now we learn in our Muslim temples that the richest dirt and the strongest coffee is black. So Muslim fits us like a glove.”

There was Feb. 26, the day after he beat Liston, and he turned coldly on a public waiting to watch him bounce with the new joy of being the best of the biggest prizefighters in the world. “I don’t have to be what you want me to be,” he said. “I’m free to be who I want.”

Speaking almost by rote, he told an uncomfortable, frequently argumentative and wholly unprepared news conference that “I want to be with my own kind.”

“In the jungle, lions are with lions, and tigers with tigers, and redbirds with redbirds, and bluebirds with bluebirds. That’s human nature, too. I don’t want to go where I’m not wanted.” There all the days when he petulantly snaps, “I know what I’m doing,” at someone who questions him, and later will say, “I’m just living from day to day, preparing for the hereafter – no, I don’t know where I’m going next.”

And, of course, there were all the days back in Louisville, Ky., when he ran alongside the school bus so that people would notice him, and all the Sundays when, quiet, humble and a Christian, he walked out of church and flinched because “the white people still looked at me like I was dirty.”

“The champ is an individualist, there’s no cycle or pattern in what he does,” says Angelo Dundee, his trainer and the white man who has spent the most time with him. “But I’ll say this — he’s one of the most dedicated and hardest-working fighters I’ve ever seen. He’s still growing and he could wind up being one of the greatest heavyweights that ever lived.”

Dundee first saw Clay in Louisville in 1959. Dundee had brought one of his many fighters to town for a bout, and the two men were lounging in their hotel room when the phone rang. “This is Cassius Clay, the next heavyweight champion, talking. I’m gonna win the Olympics and be heavyweight champ. I’m in the lobby. Can I come up?”

Even at 15 he was big and fast and strong. He would work out with Dundee’s fighters when they came through town., and according to Willie Pastrano, now the light-heavyweight champion, the young Clay often made him “look bad” in sparring sessions. An indifferent high school student, Clay was a superb diplomat. Sometimes he would spar with the opponent of Dundee’s fighter as well, and tell both boxers they were going to win.

In 1960, Clay won the national Golden Gloves heavyweight title in Madison Square Garden, and the light-heavyweight championship at the Rome Olympics. Swelling with pride for himself and for his newfound belonging within a team of Americans, he returned to Louisville. “When I got there I found nothing had changed,” he says vaguely, refusing to pursue the subject because he doesn’t want to “name names or embarrass people.” But according to someone who was close to him, there was at least one incident that pricked at his newfound manhood. He was walking down a Louisville street when a large car pulled alongside and a white man leaned out. “Hey boy, hey, you boy, get on over heah,” the man shouted. “Ah want yoah autograph.”

Under the sponsorship of 11 local businessmen-sportsmen who guaranteed him expenses and a salary, Cassius turned professional in 1960. Dundee felt that Clay had not only the potential to become a heavyweight champion, but natural instincts of extroversion and love of attention that would produce ballyhoo all along the way to the top. The first few years of the Louisville Lip are documented by thousands of pictures of a bright-eyed youngster with his mouth wide open, and millions of words of which “I am the greatest, no, I’m the double-greatest” are among the more compelling.

Dundee had had years of experience with colorless fighters who said, “I’ll do my talking in the ring,” and he encouraged and even prodded the river-mouth to keep flowing. A lot of it was conscious promotion, and most of the poetry was awful, but every bit was fun, for Cassius and for an amused public. There was attention from adults, adulation from children (with whom he has that special rapport of the extravagantly absurd) and many, many girls (the desirable ones were classified, in descending order, as queens, princesses and foxes).

Even as the clown grew famous, there were incidents to hasten the growth of the potential convert to Islam. He marched in a civil-rights demonstration, and someone in the crowd threw hot water on him. “I saw people marching for freedom and they come back with knots on their heads. They go into a restaurant and beg for a cup of coffee and not get it, and sit there, and know they’re not wanted, and don’t know what’s going to happen to them, and sit there and not even like the music on the jukebox.”

Boxing was in bad shape, even worse than usual. Floyd Patterson, a moody, sensitive introvert, was the champion, and his challengers included an amateur, an inadequate Texas hillbilly, a human windmill who lost the power to defend himself and a Swede who beat Patterson once, lost twice and went home with his money. Most of the other boxers around had no real drawing appeal, were banned in one state or another for alleged racket affiliations or were considered too tough for Patterson, by his manager. Liston was banned in some states and was too tough, but he was the only fighter who might bring a big gate. Clay, meanwhile, was coming along, winning every professional fight, and often predicting the round he would knock out an opponent. His credentials as a possible contender were excellent: he was not taken seriously as a fighter, and the most antisocial things he did were sketching rocket ships on restaurant linen and leaping out of closets yelling, “Boo!” at Dundee.

It was not until Nov. 15, 1962, in his 16th professional bout, that Clay registered his first important victory. He knocked out Archie Moore, fading but still glamorous, in the fourth round, as he had predicted in doggerel. Wherever he went, Clay filled the arena. People came to see the braggart knocked out (said Clay), or because they hoped this handsome, honest youngster would win and save the sport (said his management) or because he had brought back personal “color” to boxing (said the promoters).

During this period, everyone who came in contact with him, socially or through business, said – without qualification – that he liked Clay. Liston won the title from Patterson, and the pace of Clay’s preparation for a title shot was quickened. In 1963, he fought and won three times, each adding immeasurably to the Clay legend. At the weigh-in for the Charlie Powell fight, Clay became unmanageable, challenged Powell to a fight at the scales, started screaming, “You wait and see, you’ll go in three,” and had to be restrained. It was a carefully conceived dress rehearsal for a similar mad scene staged at the weigh-in for the Liston fight. Powell went in three.

Malcolm X was in Miami before the fight, and Clay shared his free time between the Muslim leader and his own entourage at a rambling house filled with laughter, pranks and rented Hollywood movies. The rumor grew that Clay was Muslim. Later, he said: “The pressure didn’t really start until I flew up to be with Malcolm a few weeks before the fight, and then he came to Miami, and into the gym, and the trainers and everybody was shook up. Even the fight was threatened. They told me they would cancel the fight if I didn’t renounce my religion. I got my X four weeks before the fight. …”

The “they” has never been identified, although it was reported at the time that the promoters felt that Miami’s largely Jewish population would stay away from a fight involving a Muslim. It was partly true, and partly an alibi: the tickets were terribly overpriced, and badly scaled. Right up until the moment Cassius X stepped into the ring, rumors flew that he had left the country. At the weigh-in, during which Cassius raved and ranted and practically foamed, a commission doctor reported his pulse at an abnormally high 120 and irresponsibly said that the fighter was “scared to death.”

This was generally accepted, and when Cassius was nowhere to be found an hour before the fight, it was assumed he was either catatonic or gone. Actually, he was standing very quietly in a corner of the arena, watching his brother Rudy win his first professional fight. Then Cassius went out and won his 20th. Clay’s victory in Miami Beach was also his first tangible defeat as an appealing public image, in this country at least. The anger toward Liston for “quitting” with an injured shoulder muscle was the expression of a public that wanted Clay to lose.

“I can’t understand it,” said Ali, sometime later. “I didn’t go with white women, I don’t smoke, I don’t go where I’m not wanted. And still I catch all this hell. Why? I can go to a Roman Catholic church and bow to all their idols and statues, and I can go into the Holy Roller and pound the drums and yell, and nobody’ll say nothing. But as soon as I go to the Muslim meeting, where everybody is clean and righteous, everyone else is jumping. Why?”

Part of the reason must be the traditional role that the sporting world demands a hero to play. Clay violated the code. As long as he was amusing, his immodesties could be tolerated. Once he started to jerk fans back to the problems of the real world he became a spoiler of the daydream that sports is a never-never land where motivation is uncomplicated and a result is final and pure. Who, after all, was Cassius Clay if he could be Cassius X? And what’s in a name like Muhammad Ali? “Ahmed Mali, Mamud Wally, who’s that?” taunted Liston on that contract signing day last month in Boston. “I met you as Cassius Clay and I’ll leave you as Cassius Clay.”

And for the first time that afternoon, today’s heavyweight champion of the world grinned. First his eyes lit up, and then they closed, and he rested his head on his shoulder, which shook slightly with laughter as he snored as loudly as he could.


