


LOS ANGELES — Two years of waiting for redemption came down to one moment for the San Jose Sharks.

They blew a three-games-to-none series lead to the Los Angeles Kings in the N.H.L. playoffs in 2014, losing in seven games. Last Friday, leading the Kings in a first-round series by three games to one, San Jose blew a 3-0 lead in the second period of Game 5.

As the Sharks awaited the third period, suddenly tied at 3-3, an unlikely voice emerged in the locker room of a team known for struggling to win big games.

“Just get the next one, boys.”

The words came from Martin Jones, a goaltender relishing his chance to shine with the Sharks after five years of climbing the Kings’ organizational ranks.

Since being acquired by San Jose last summer in a trade, the soft-spoken Jones had hardly said a word between periods all season.

“Joner usually doesn’t say much,” forward Logan Couture said. “You knew that he was going to shut the door. To have that sense of confidence in your goalie is big.”

About four minutes into the third, Couture set up Joonas Donskoi’s goal to give the Sharks a 4-3 lead. They went on to win, 6-3, and eliminate the Kings, who had won the Stanley Cup in two of the past four seasons. San Jose will face the Nashville Predators in the second round, beginning Friday.

By helping eliminate the Kings, his former team, Jones, 26, officially arrived as a No. 1 goaltender.

His road to the N.H.L. playoffs has been plenty long.

An undrafted free agent out of the Western Hockey League, Jones was signed by the Kings in 2010 and reported to their American Hockey League affiliate, the Manchester Monarchs. From the moment he arrived, he was thrust into the N.H.L.’s most competitive goaltending logjam.

The Kings already had the emerging franchise goaltender Jonathan Quick, and Jonathan Bernier, a former first-round draft pick. Jones competed for A.H.L. playing time with other young goaltenders like Jeff Zatkoff, who had inherited the starter’s role after backing up Bernier in Manchester the previous season, and Jean-Francois Berube, a 2009 draft pick also being watched closely by the Kings.

The best Jones could hope for would be to earn playing time in the A.H.L. and, if he was lucky, one day back up Quick in Los Angeles.

“It’s kind of expected with goaltenders,” Jones said. “You tend to play a few years in the minors. I thought it was good for my development, those years, getting to play in the American League. I think I handled it pretty well.”

Quick’s value was cemented when he won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the playoffs’ most valuable player in 2012, after which he signed a 10-year contract extension.

Riding the A.H.L. rails, Jones simply waited. He split the crease for two seasons before taking over after Zatkoff signed a contract with the Pittsburgh Penguins in 2012.

With Jones following on the heels of Quick and Bernier, Mark Morris, the Manchester coach at that time, said, “I guess I got spoiled.”

Quick, Jones, Zatkoff and Berube were all on playoff rosters this spring. Zatkoff started two games for the Penguins against the Rangers, while Berube served as the Islanders’ backup goalie.

Morris saw something special in Jones.

“He has the potential to be as good, or better, than anybody that preceded him,” Morris said.

When Bernier was traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs in 2013, it appeared an N.H.L. roster spot might finally open for Jones. But the trade brought the Kings another goaltender, Ben Scrivens, who shined as Quick’s backup. After Quick sustained an early-season injury in 2013-14, Scrivens responded with four straight wins, including two shutouts.

But as he had learned to do much of his career, Jones made the most of opportunities when they came.

“It’s not really something I can worry about,” he said. “All I can do is play well when I get the net. The rest is out of my control.”

Given a chance to start in December 2013, Jones tied an N.H.L. record by winning his first eight starts.

Scrivens, proven expendable, was traded to the Edmonton Oilers shortly after Quick had returned to the lineup. Jones made just 10 regular-season and playoff appearances the rest of the season. Although the Kings won the 2014 Stanley Cup, at least one person felt Jones was capable of more.

“It’s hard to justify pulling Quick out of the net,” Morris said, “but now that he’s got the net himself, you can see the results.”

Jones appeared headed for another backup job when the Kings traded him to the Boston Bruins during the draft last summer. But the Bruins traded Jones four days later to the Sharks, one of the Kings’ biggest rivals.

Finally an undisputed starter, Jones set personal bests this season with 65 games and 37 wins, which ranked third in the N.H.L.

Yet he remained a quiet figure.

“It’s just kind of the way I am,” he said.

In a sport of emotional highs and lows, particularly in the playoffs, “it’s kind of important you stay even,” he said.

When the series against the Kings appeared to be turning in Game 5, a franchise plagued by bitter disappointment found an anchor in its goalie.

“I think if you spend any time with Martin Jones, you realize that nothing rattles this guy,” Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer said.

“He was composed at the right time for us and made the big saves at the right time.”


