


For years, Opening Ceremony, the pioneering New York concept store, has produced special collections for LGBT Pride Month. This year’s collection, a celebration of New York’s historic gay bars, was well underway when the June 12 terrorist attack at Pulse, an Orlando, Fla., gay club, provided a chilling reminder of how crucial such clubs are as all-too-rare and fragile safe spaces for generations of gay men and women.

“For this Pride, I thought it would be a really good time to celebrate a lot of these founding places,” said Humberto Leon, Opening Ceremony’s co-founder, speaking by phone from Paris, where he will show the new Kenzo men’s collection next week. “As a gay man, these are all really important places.”

For Opening Ceremony’s Pride capsule collection, Mr. Leon teamed with landmarks like the Stonewall Inn, favorites like the Eagle and the Monster, and the once-great, since-departed lesbian bars Meow Mix and Cattyshack on a limited collection of T-shirts, sweatshirts and caps. They are available at Opening Ceremony stores in New York and Los Angeles and online; prices range from $25 for a tank top to $60 for a hoodie. (All of the profits from the collection’s sales will go to a fund to benefit Pulse victims and their families.)

In the days since the massacre, tributes to gay bars as havens have proliferated. But in recent years, many people have lamented the fading interest among younger generations in gay bars, scores of which have wilted in the digital glare of meet-ups-by-app. Mr. Leon, who spent early nights in New York at Julius and Barracuda, employs a young staff at Opening Ceremony and has witnessed the phenomenon firsthand.

But where others see cause for complaint, Mr. Leon sees opportunity.

“More than half my store doesn’t know what Julius is, doesn’t know what the Monster is,” he said. “For me it’s exciting. Instead of thinking, ‘How do you not know about that?’ it’s exciting to say, ‘You have to check it out.’ This is my way of saying, ‘Let’s go.’”

“‘Discovery’ is one of the key words that we always try to think about at Opening Ceremony,” he said. “And rediscovering is as important as discovering something that’s brand new.”


