


When the jazz pianist Chick Corea celebrates a milestone birthday, he doesn’t hold back. In 2001, when he turned 60, he played a three-week career retrospective at the Blue Note Jazz Club. He did it again at 70, with an even broader array of partners.

And this year, for his 75th, Mr. Corea will preside over a marathon celebration at the club from Oct. 19 to Dec. 12 — eight weeks, with more than a dozen bands. Among them are two reconstituted versions of Return to Forever: an acoustic combo with Hubert Laws on flute and Ravi Coltrane on tenor saxophone, and a fusion powerhouse with John McLaughlin on guitar, Victor Wooten on bass and Lenny White on drums.

Mr. Corea will also connect with a longtime partner, the vibraphonist Gary Burton, and pay tribute to a former mentor, Miles Davis (with fellow Davis alumni like the bassist Marcus Miller and the alto saxophonist Kenny Garrett). He’ll play several nights of piano duos, including one with Brad Mehldau. And he’ll revisit his 1976 album “The Leprechaun” and his 1981 LP “Three Quartets,” with groups featuring Steve Gadd on drums. (Full details are at bluenote.net, with a presale starting on Wednesday.)

Along with giving Mr. Corea an excuse to convene some of his favorite collaborators, the series underscores the variety and versatility of his musical interests. He has won 22 Grammy Awards — most recently last year, for the double album “Trilogy” — and been recognized as a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master. He called from his home in Clearwater, Fla. These are excerpts from the conversation.

How do you prepare for something like this? It’s a staggering amount of material, and many different states of mind.

The states of mind are the easy part, actually. When this idea arose for my 60th birthday, I thought, “Wow, how am I going to do all of that?” But then I realized that mostly everyone I’m playing with are my dear friends and musical compatriots. If I approach it really as a party, and I’m not so serious about having everything be perfect, then I can relax.

You’ll be working with flamenco musicians like the guitarist Niño Josele. Your history with that music suggests a two-way influence. Is that something you think about?

Very much so, man. The recording I made in the ’70s called “My Spanish Heart” was really where that was at. Something got turned on when I met Paco de Lucía. Then I started meeting other flamencos and got turned on to their music and their history and seeing how that connected to my universe. When I get with those guys, it brings out something in me that I take with me even after I leave them.

Part of the residency is called “Experiments in Electronica.” What can we expect there?

Some of the stuff that I’m messing with has to do with loops and sequences — but improvising with them. Marcus Gilmore, the drummer, is a partner I like collaborating with, and he’s able to really create in that atmosphere. I have a recording project with electronics, which I’m hoping to finish this year. It’s a solo project, but Marcus is on some of it. I played a track for Swizz Beatz when we did some stuff together at Alicia Keys’s studio. I thought, “I’ll take this opportunity to play this electronic stuff for a guy who is one of the kings of production.” He and all his guys were blown away. And I was blown away that they were blown away, because it’s definitely not hip-hop.

What is your instinct when you’re the focus of such a grand event? Do you try to deflect some of the attention, or just bask in it?

Basking is definitely the way to go. With this list of amazing musicians, it’s time to bask. That’s why I don’t feel that stressed by it, because there’s so much trust. It’s the pay I get for living, at all; the thrill I get from working with musicians that just give of themselves like that.

The celebration will be in the fall, but your actual birthday is June 12. How will you be spending it?

I’m actually going to be out on a ship called the Freewinds, doing an event that we do yearly in Scientology called the Maiden Voyage. A while back I did two recordings — one called “To the Stars,” and the other called “The Ultimate Adventure” — based on fiction works by L. Ron Hubbard, who is my favorite fiction writer. So one thing I’m going to do onboard is keyboard improvisations to go along with the text of those books. That’s where I’ll be on my birthday.


