


A Bahamian man pleaded guilty on Monday to charges that he had hacked into the email accounts of celebrities and others and gained access to a trove of unreleased movie and television scripts, which he then tried to sell for thousands of dollars.

The defendant, Alonzo Knowles, 24, was arrested in December after he flew to New York and tried to sell the scripts to an undercover agent, who was posing as a potential buyer and had handed him $80,000 in cash, according to a criminal complaint filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Mr. Knowles also gave the agent the Social Security numbers of three professional athletes and a movie actress, for which Mr. Knowles had agreed to be paid in the future, the complaint said.

His arrest drew attention because it followed a widely publicized breach in which hackers stole confidential information from Sony Pictures Entertainment and released it online, about a year before.

Mr. Knowles, in a conversation with the undercover agent, described a process he called “social engineering,” which involved doing “research on a target,” according to the complaint, which was signed by Michael MacDonald, a special agent with Homeland Security Investigations, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security.

Mr. Knowles said that it was difficult to go after “a high profile celebrity,” so he would begin by going after friends found in photographs with them. He would then hack the friends’ accounts to find the celebrities’ telephone numbers and other personal information.

“It boils down to the weakest link in the chain,” a former official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Austin P. Berglas, told The New York Times in December, after the charges were announced.

At one point, the complaint said, Mr. Knowles showed the undercover agent a list of names, with phone numbers or email addresses of about 130 celebrities.

Mr. Knowles, in court, apologized to the judge, Paul A. Engelmayer, and acknowledged that he knew his actions had been wrong and illegal.

He pleaded guilty to both of the counts charged in a federal indictment against him: criminal copyright infringement and identity theft.

He could face a total of 10 years in prison when he is sentenced on Aug. 25. The federal sentencing guidelines, which are only advisory, suggested a sentence of 27 to 33 months, according to the plea agreement in the case.

The plea includes a provision under which Mr. Knowles will forfeit, among other things, all copies of 25 unpublished television and movie scripts, as well as unpublished music, the plea agreement said.

Mr. Knowles’s lawyer, Clay Kaminsky, declined to comment after the hearing.

The plea comes two months after a prosecutor, Kristy J. Greenberg, told Judge Engelmayer in court that the investigation had turned up potential new victims of Mr. Knowles’s scheme, and evidence of how he had been using the information he was stealing.

In one case, she told the judge, there was evidence that Mr. Knowles had made credit card purchases “using financial information of new victims that we hadn’t known about.”


