


ST.-ÉTIENNE, France — It began in Marseille, a little more than a week ago, with bitterness followed by bellicosity. Then, in Lens on Thursday, there was epic frustration followed by spastic jubilation. Finally, here on Monday night, came strength and speed and, ultimately, the sort of emotional dissatisfaction one might take from a rigorous round of shadowboxing: authority, domination even, but never the hope of a true knockout.

It has been a strange group stage for England at these European Championships, a preliminary stanza that promised much, delivered somewhat less and, after an exasperating 0-0 draw with Slovakia at Stade Geoffroy-Guichard on Monday, leaves the Three Lions in a relative identity crisis. Are they the team that crumbled late against Russia? The one that surged against Wales? Or the squad that could not close against Slovakia?

At present, this much is clear: Wales, and not England, was the best team in Group B, and with Gareth Bale scoring for a third straight game in a 3-0 victory over Russia, the Welsh deservedly finished in first, advancing to a round-of-16 game in Paris on Saturday. England, meanwhile, placed second in the group and will travel to Nice for its next game, on June 27.

The opponent is yet to be determined — Hungary, Portugal and Iceland are among the possibilities — but the biggest issue facing England could be internal. Yet again on Monday, the English created chance after chance after chance only to see passing moves fizzle or crosses fly yards beyond their targets or a shot carom off the leg of a sliding defender.

It was a familiar scene. Against Russia, England controlled long periods of the match and pushed forward more insistently, recording 16 attempts on goal to Russia’s six. A defensive lapse in stoppage time allowed Russia to escape with a 1-1 tie — a result that was immediately overshadowed by ugly fan violence in the stands — but England came away feeling as if it should have won.

Against Wales, it was much of the same. Fourteen more attempts on goal. Eight shots blocked. An advantage of nearly 300 in passes completed. And still, it took a frantic Daniel Sturridge goal in stoppage time to secure a 2-1 victory that left Wales crushed and England soaring.

After that game, England players talked of a liftoff, a spike from such a dramatic finish. Wales Coach Chris Coleman described the defeat as one of the worst of his career, and his team’s fans fretted over a hangover they feared would push Wales to the brink.

It turned out to be the exact opposite. England Coach Roy Hodgson made six changes to his lineup for the Slovakia game — a combination of resting some players and rewarding others — but little difference resulted. The Three Lions had 27 attempts on goal to Slovakia’s four and 11 corner kicks to none for Slovakia, and they recorded about 200 more passes — all of which added up to a zero on the scoreboard.

“Yet again, this is a game we should have won,” Hodgson said. “Everything we did on the field led to us being able to win. But we didn’t take our chances. We didn’t use all that possession and all those corner kicks and all those free kicks to score the goal we needed to win it. And that’s a frustration I’ll have to live with and the players will have to live with, too.”

All night, the England fans rose as the players poked and prodded and peppered the goal, but Slovakia goalkeeper Matus Kozacik, who made six saves and was named man of the match, never broke.

“They pressed us, but we managed to hold on,” Kozacik said. “They made some changes in the lineup, but they didn’t really change anything about their style of play. They can be successful with this kind of play, and I think they will get further than just the last 16.”

That remains to be seen. The lack of a cutting edge, a striker — or two — who can finish the simpler chances and convert the more difficult ones, has already left nervous England fans worrying about the possibility of another draw and a subsequent penalty-kick shootout in the knockout rounds.

Hodgson was even asked — half-seriously — about how the team’s penalty kicks in practice were progressing because England has historically had a woeful track record in shootouts.

“First of all, let’s wait and see — we’re not doomed to penalties,” Hodgson said through a grin. “I think we’re capable of winning a game in normal time.”

He added: “All I can say is this: I think the time will come when we will take those chances, and I think some team may be on the end of that fairly soon.”

Certainly there is potential. Hodgson already has shifted his captain, the longtime forward Wayne Rooney, back into the midfield, and Jack Wilshere did little to impress there. But newer players like Jamie Vardy, who scored against Wales, and Dele Alli and Harry Kane have shown their abilities in front of the goal in the past.

Whoever is on the field, though, the finishing must be crisper. The England players maintained that a change was coming. There is too much skill and there are too many goals on their team sheet for the squibs to continue. On Monday, the misses came in all varieties: Vardy blasted straight at the keeper after breaking in alone; Adam Lallana had a powerful shot palmed away; Alli had a shot saved off the line and blasted another over the bar.

It did not help matters that while this was going on, Bale and Aaron Ramsey and Wales were clinical, finishing group play with wins over Russia and Slovakia — two opponents England failed to beat.

Nonetheless, England may yet loom largest. Slovakia Coach Jan Kozak was asked afterward to compare his British group-stage foes. After only the slightest of pauses, he answered frankly, perhaps belying his belief that at some point, the Three Lions will break through.

“I think that regarding the football qualities,” he said, “England are better than Wales.”


