


HANOI, Vietnam — Officially, the top world leaders who gather Thursday at the Group of 7 summit meeting will talk about shared concerns, like global trade or the Islamic State. But their private discussions are likely to cover a topic that is not on the agenda: Donald J. Trump.

President Obama now hears questions in his meetings with world leaders about whether Mr. Trump has a realistic shot at becoming president.

For months, Mr. Obama has answered those questions with an emphatic “no.”

“I continue to believe Mr. Trump will not be president,” Mr. Obama said in February at the end of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations summit meeting in California.

But this week’s summit meeting in Japan is the first among major allies since Mr. Trump moved decisively toward securing the Republican nomination, and Mr. Obama’s counterparts are likely to want more detail in his explanations of an election that has prompted fascination and apprehension overseas.

Mr. Obama’s Japanese hosts are particularly alarmed at the prospect of a Trump presidency because the real estate developer has been bashing Japan for decades. Mr. Trump’s criticisms have a distinctly 1980s flavor, when Japanese cars were flooding American markets and Japanese businesses were buying premier American properties like Rockefeller Center in New York.

“You have to see the trade imbalance between Japan and the United States — it’s unbelievable,” Mr. Trump said in a recent interview. “They sell to us, and we practically give them back nothing by comparison.”

He added, “It’s a very unfair situation.”

Mr. Trump has criticized the military alliance between Japan and the United States as being one-sided, and he suggested in a March interview that Japan and South Korea should have their own nuclear arsenals so they would be less reliant on the security umbrella provided by the United States.

Hosting an April summit meeting intended to limit the proliferation of nuclear weapons, Mr. Obama lashed out.

“The person who made the statements doesn’t know much about foreign policy, nuclear policy or the Korean Peninsula, or the world generally,” he said, not mentioning Mr. Trump by name. But he acknowledged that foreign leaders had questioned him about the presumptive Republican nominee.

“It came up on the sidelines, I’ve said before, that people pay attention to American elections,” Mr. Obama said. “Even in those countries that are used to a carnival atmosphere in their own politics want sobriety and clarity when it comes to U.S. elections.”

More recently, Mr. Trump suggested that he would be willing to hold direct negotiations with Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, in yet another challenge to a core Japanese security priority.

Mr. Trump’s March comments led to an almost immediate response from Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan. “Whoever will become the next president of the United States, the Japan-U.S. alliance is the cornerstone of Japan’s diplomacy,” Mr. Abe said.

Other Japanese officials have been even more forceful. The first week in May is generally regarded as a holiday in Japan, and top Japanese officials flood Washington for meetings. This year, many of those meetings focused on anxieties over Mr. Trump’s remarks.

At one such meeting, Kenichiro Sasae, Japan’s ambassador to the United States, joked that he was looking forward to hearing experts “explain how Emperor Qin Shi Huang built the Great Wall of China and made the Mexicans pay for it,” a reference to Mr. Trump’s promise to build a wall at the Mexican border at Mexico’s expense.

In a more serious vein, Mr. Sasae said he was disappointed by the isolationism expressed by some presidential candidates, another clear reference to Mr. Trump.

“I don’t want to see that kind of United States,” Mr. Sasae said. “I know that you know there has to be a debate about how to make the United States this strong, but the question is not whether you can be strong without a proper role in the rest of the world.”

At another recent meeting, Itsunori Onodera, a former defense minister and a member of the Japanese House of Representatives, gave a lengthy list of what he characterized as Mr. Trump’s misstatements. “I don’t think there are any Trump supporters present here,” he joked.

Mr. Onodera emphasized the ways that Japan supported Washington’s priorities in the region and helped pay American expenses.

“Nothing is more important than the stability of East Asia,” he said. “We don’t want the U.S. political leaders to send out the wrong message.”

Even so, some Japanese officials have been concerned that the Obama administration is too solicitous of China, Tokyo’s great Asian rival.

“Whatever concerns there were about the Obama administration sometimes tilting toward China, those have been overwhelmed with what Trump is saying about Japan and our alliances,” said Michael J. Green, who served as a senior adviser on Asia during the George W. Bush administration. “They’re really worried.”

In private conversations, Japanese officials have said their only solace is that Mr. Trump is even more critical of China than he is of Japan.

Even if Mr. Trump loses, his ascent has led world leaders to worry that his “America first” platform is a harbinger of pressure for allies to pay up or make trade concessions in return for military protection.

Mr. Obama has himself insisted that allies share more of the burdens of military efforts in places like Libya and Syria, and has openly complained that even some European allies are “free riders.” But Mr. Obama still accepts that the United States is an indispensable nation without whose leadership global problems fester and intensify. Administration officials do say that sometimes the United States must act solely for the security of other nations, a message they hope will reassure the Japanese.


