


AUSTIN, Tex. — Norman Lear, his signature white canvas hat firmly in place, sat in an emptying theater here on Friday, marveling at the embarrassment of artistic riches his once maligned medium has become.

“It awes me how much great television there is, and great performances,” the veteran writer and producer said. “The women in ‘Orange Is the New Black,’ there’s more talent there than used to grace three networks, back when there were just three networks.”

Mr. Lear, 93, who practically invented the notion that television could amount to more than mere diversion with his boundary-pushing sitcoms like “All in the Family” and “Maude,” was here for the ATX Television Festival. The emerging confab, now in its fifth year, is intended to celebrate, market and critically examine an exponentially expanding medium whose extraordinary creative fertility is now taken for granted.

The festival, which concluded on Sunday, has grown considerably, drawing 2,500 attendees, up from roughly 700 in its first year, as well as ever more rarefied TV luminaries like Mr. Lear and Aaron Sorkin, who presided over a raucous 10-year reunion of his landmark political drama, “The West Wing.”

The goal, say the ATX founders Caitlin McFarland and Emily Gipson, is to connect fans and TV professionals to both celebrate beloved series and their showrunners — “the rock stars of this festival,” Ms. McFarland said — and discuss issues facing the industry. “To us it seemed that more than any other medium, television was a community [whose members] needed to talk to one another,” she added.

The festival’s rapid growth is the latest sign of television’s pop cultural ubiquity, both in the broader conversation and in sheer volume. More than 400 scripted series ran in 2015 — with hundreds more reality shows and docu-series — and some of the most popular, like “Game of Thrones” and “The Walking Dead,” are among the most discussed topics of any sort online.

In its focus on series past and present and the increasingly activist nature of TV fandom, ATX is both an outgrowth of and a real-world analog to the contemporary viewing experience, when new series sit alongside still-popular old ones in streaming queues. At the packed “West Wing” reunion filling the 1,200-seat Paramount Theater here, Mr. Sorkin marveled at the large numbers of younger fans “who would have been in kindergarten” when the show ran on NBC.

“The thing about television is, you never get to see the audience,” he said. “It’s great to finally meet you.”

While established festivals like South by Southwest, Sundance and the Toronto International Film Festival have added television programming in recent years, events devoted to the medium are relatively rare. The Paley Center has its long-running PaleyFest and New York magazine’s newer Vulture Festival is heavily focused on TV. Others, like the New York Television Festival, are dedicated to promoting smaller, independent works or, like the Festival de Télévision de Monte-Carlo, marketing international ones.

In ATX, Ms. McFarland and Ms. Gipson sought to split the difference between industry events like the annual Upfronts, in which networks present new shows to advertisers, and sprawling fan extravaganzas like Comic-Con, but with the mingling and general summer-camp feel of many film conferences. But unlike film festivals, intended largely to build buzz and secure distribution deals for new offerings, the idea was to blend nostalgia for old series with excitement about current and future ones.

Ms. McFarland, a former assistant to directors like Betty Thomas and Nora Ephron, was working in retail when she mentioned the idea to Ms. Gipson in 2011, roughly a year before the first ATX festival. (Ms. Gipson was an assistant at Discovery Communications at the time.) Soon they reached out to industry people, whose enthusiasm led to discussions with potential sponsors and a Kickstarter campaign that exceeded their $25,000 goal. Still, it wasn’t until the final day of the first festival, when various attendees announced their intentions to return the following year, “when it was like O.K., this is going to work,” Ms. McFarland said. “And oh, we’re doing this again.”

ATX’s mix of fan service with more substantive discussions offers a glimpse at the deep ties viewers form with beloved shows, across the emotional spectrum. At an old football field outside Austin, where “Friday Night Lights” was shot, former Dillon Panthers braved the heat and posed for dozens of pictures. “We have new fans finding us every year and the old fans continue to talk about it,” said Scott Porter, who played the paralyzed former quarterback Jason Street.

A panel on the representation of gay characters, on the other hand, sprang from fan outrage, specifically over television’s tendency to kill them off at a disproportionate rate. The deaths of such characters in the past year on shows like “Empire,” “The Walking Dead” and the CW science fiction series “The 100,” especially, enraged and galvanized many viewers, leading to renewed calls on Twitter and elsewhere to end the trope. The issue took on terrible new relevance when, hours after the panel, a gunman killed 49 people at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla. (The festival canceled a panel on violence on television after the shooting.)

The discussion brought up the challenges of making provocative shows that viewers want while also respecting historically marginalized fans. “Every L.G.B.T. person has that character that you first saw who you were like, ‘Oh, this is me, and this is my story,’” said Megan Townsend, a representative of Glaad, a lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender advocacy group.

Mr. Lear was on hand to accept an award and discuss “Norman Lear: Just Another Version of You,” a new documentary based on his 2014 autobiography. Currently producing a Cuban-American version of his family sitcom “One Day at a Time” for Netflix, he finds himself a patron saint of modern TV trends, as well as a participant.

But “even though I’m a professional in the field, I’m an audience member first,” he said. “My experience is the same at 93 that it was when I was a kid.”


