


Hell apparently has a heck of an agent. It’s all over television these days, and Cinemax gives it yet another foothold on Friday with “Outcast,” a new series based on Robert Kirkman and Paul Azaceta’s comic books.

The show centers on Kyle Barnes (Patrick Fugit), who lives in a part of West Virginia that apparently has a demonic-possession problem. But it’s an 8-year-old named Joshua (Gabriel Bateman) who initially grabs your attention, thanks to a shocking scene in the first three minutes of the premiere.

That scene, simple yet gruesome, sets the bar very high very early, which turns out to be a problem: In the first three episodes, at least, “Outcast” never comes close to reaching it again. That’s partly the show’s fault and partly the fault of the subject matter. Hell, as a plot device, has its limits.

Kyle teams with a minister, Anderson (Philip Glenister), to confront assorted demons and to explore Kyle’s past, since he has a family history of possession that has branded him a social outcast. The nature of that history is revealed in frequent flashbacks — too many, really; they’re intriguing at first but eventually grow annoying.

Kyle is a brooding character, and who can blame him, given his childhood traumas, which are gradually revealed. But it makes him a tough sell as the anchor of the show. He does have an ex-wife (Kate Lyn Sheil) and an adoptive sister (Wrenn Schmidt) who help give him dimension, but still, warming to him isn’t easy.

Anderson is more interesting. He takes hell mighty seriously and is determined to prod the reluctant Kyle into joining him in the fight.

“There’s a house like this one in every town in every country in this whole wide world,” he tells him after their first battle.

At least one authority figure in town understands that Anderson is vital to keeping the dark side in check: the police chief (Reg E. Cathey).

“He keeps the peace in this town in ways our badges and guns can’t,” the chief explains to his deputy.

The problem for this series, besides making Kyle someone we care enough about to keep watching, will be finding original ways to cast out demons. By the end of the premiere, we’ve already had an “Exorcist” scene, and as the show goes along, Anderson does the cross-and-scripture thing we’ve seen a zillion times.

It also doesn’t help that the underworld has been well-represented on TV lately, with “Damien” on A&E, “Lucifer” and “Sleepy Hollow” on Fox, and all those zombie and witchcraft shows. (Mr. Kirkman is one of the main brains behind “The Walking Dead.”) The medical world has yet to recognize “Satan fatigue” as an official syndrome, but some TV watchers might be feeling it nonetheless.


