


If you think New York City has a varied population, just consider its surrounding waters. According to Jon Forrest Dohlin, vice president of the Wildlife Conservation Society and director of the New York Aquarium in Brooklyn, more than 300 species of fish inhabit those depths. Diving offshore is like plunging into an aquatic Queens.

“One of the things that makes New York waters so diverse is that we’re a migratory corridor up and down the coast,” Mr. Dohlin said. “It adds up to a great opportunity for kids to understand that issues of marine conservation are not just important around the world, but they’re important close to home.”

The aquarium will deliver that message, along with fun and surprises, on Saturday and Sunday, when it presents World Oceans Weekend. An extension of World Oceans Day — June 8 — the celebration will comprise seven activity stations from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., including one outdoors, “Sea Life at the Beach,” which will let young visitors handle materials like skate egg cases, real shark teeth and skull models, and shells.

Inside, children can learn about coral reefs and play a reef matching game, build simple binoculars and imitate tagging and tracking sharks. “Build a Nest,” by the penguin exhibit, will invite them to copy the birds’ behavior, and while there are no downward otter poses, “Animal Yoga,” by the otter display, will encourage some mimicry, too.

“Otters are incredibly nimble,” Mr. Dohlin explained. “Kids can learn to do different yoga poses and try being as flexible as an otter.” (The stations will continue on weekends through July 4, and daily thereafter through Labor Day.)

Families can also sign a pledge to help protect forage fish (small species near the bottom of the food chain) and write letters supporting that effort to the Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council. Creative young conservationists will contribute drawings and poems to a Pledge Wall and create sea-themed crafts. (One favorite: an octopus made from a paper plate and recycled plastic bags.)

At 10 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., children can also interact with some of the aquarium tanks’ regular occupants: not the fish, but the divers who help care for them. In addition to swimming and showing off their gear, these volunteers will explain the importance of saving coral reefs, a vital ocean habitat.

All the activities will reinforce that the city is more than an urban jungle. “When you’re on a beach in New York,” Mr. Dohlin said, “you’re looking at an ocean wilderness.”

(Surf Avenue and West Eighth Street, Coney Island, 718-265-3474, nyaquarium.com.)


