


A gun owner was fatally shot in an Arlington drugstore parking lot on Monday after intervening in a dispute in which a woman was wounded, police said. The unidentified man who was killed was shopping when he saw a female employee who had been shot in the leg near the store entrance, the Arlington police said. The man retrieved a weapon from his vehicle and confronted the gunman, who was trying to flee in a car, Lt. Christopher Cook said. The suspect left his vehicle, shot the man in the head and fled, police said. The suspect, Ricci Bradden, 22, later surrendered and was in custody on a homicide charge, the police said. (REUTERS)

A bill allowing staff members and faculty at Tennessee’s public colleges and universities to be armed on campus became law on Monday without Gov. Bill Haslam’s signature. Mr. Haslam, a Republican, said he disagreed with the bill for not allowing campus leaders “to make their own decisions regarding security issues on campus.” But he acknowledged that the final version of the measure had addressed concerns raised by college administrators, with provisions protecting colleges from liability and a requirement to notify law enforcement about who is armed on campus. The law will keep gun bans in place in some areas, including stadiums or gymnasiums during school-sponsored events and meetings where disciplinary or tenure issues are being discussed. (AP)

A judge on Monday temporarily barred Louisville from removing a 70-foot-tall Confederate monument near the University of Louisville. Mayor Greg Fischer and James Ramsey, the university president, announced Friday that they would remove the monument, the latest government effort to reconsider displaying Confederate symbols. Judge Judith McDonald-Burkman of Jefferson County granted a restraining order sought by the Sons of Confederate Veterans and Everett Corley, a Republican running for Congress. (AP)

Legislators have approved a plan to dump most of the work of balancing the state’s budget on Gov. Sam Brownback while telling him that he cannot cut aid to public schools. The measure, passed early Monday by Republican supermajorities in both chambers, assumes that the governor, a Republican, follows through on plans to delay major highway projects and cut higher-education spending. It also anticipates his making $92 million in further cuts during the next fiscal year, beginning July 1, that could touch state Medicaid health coverage for the poor and disabled and other social services. The state would delay $96 million in contributions to public employee pensions. Mr. Brownback’s spokeswoman has said the governor believes he can sign the measure. Kansas has struggled to balance its budget since the Republican lawmakers slashed personal income taxes in 2012 and 2013 at Mr. Brownback’s urging. (AP)


