


ISE, Japan — Eleven United States presidents have served since President Harry S. Truman decided to drop an atomic weapon on Hiroshima, and none has set foot in that traumatized city in the 71 years since, at least not while in office.

President Obama intends to end that streak with his visit on Friday, a decision that speaks volumes not only about his presidency but also about the increasingly worrisome struggle among powers great and small in East Asia.

Mr. Obama’s predecessors had good reasons to avoid Hiroshima. None wanted to be seen by American voters as apologizing for a decision that many historians even today believe, on balance, saved lives. And there were worries about how such a visit would be viewed in China, South Korea and other countries in Asia that suffered from the brutal World War II killing machine that was Imperial Japan.

But Mr. Obama and his closest aides have become increasingly disdainful of what they view as Washington’s conventional wisdom.

No American president had visited Cuba in nearly 90 years. Mr. Obama did. None had visited Myanmar. He has gone twice. Few saw merit in negotiating with Iran’s autocratic mullahs. Mr. Obama struck a nuclear deal with the Iranians that he ranks among his greatest accomplishments. And in Vietnam this week, he lifted a decades-old embargo on military sales.

Mr. Obama has made clear that he will not apologize for the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, but with no election left for himself he cares far less that any remorse he expresses might be included in what opponents have caricatured as an “apology tour” of foreign cities.

Mr. Obama also hopes a visit to Hiroshima will further his efforts to curb the world’s stockpile of nuclear weapons, a signature issue for him and an important reason he won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize.

“As the only nuclear power to have used a nuclear weapon, the United States has a moral responsibility to act,” he said in Prague just 10 weeks after becoming president.

In a recent interview with Japanese TV, Mr. Obama admitted that his efforts to reduce the world’s nuclear risks had resulted in only “modest progress in at least not seeing a huge increase in nuclear stockpiles.” His record on nuclear nonproliferation is mixed.

With Russia, he struck a deal ratified in 2010 to limit weapons, but President Vladimir V. Putin has shown no signs of wanting to go further. Under the 2015 deal with Iran, the government there surrendered nearly all of its nuclear material. And Mr. Obama’s annual Nuclear Security Summit meetings and other efforts succeeded in pulling bomb-grade nuclear fuel out of countries like Ukraine and Chile. But his push to modernize the American nuclear weapons stockpile could cause a new arms race, and nuclear weapons programs in North Korea and Pakistan have arguably made the world less safe during his tenure.

“North Korea is the worst example, but we also have other parts of the world where you’re still seeing the development of new nuclear technologies that could be very dangerous,” Mr. Obama said this week.

The calculus about how a visit to Hiroshima would be seen elsewhere in Asia has changed. Although an estimated 40,000 to 50,000 Koreans were killed in the two bombings in 1945 — more than any non-Japanese ethnic group — Koreans have long been wary of a presidential trip to Hiroshima, fearing it could be interpreted as an apology for a war that ended Japan’s occupation of Korea.

More broadly, there is unease in South Korea, China and other Asian countries that Mr. Obama’s visit will amount to an endorsement of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s campaign to move Japan beyond guilt over its militarist past and toward his vision of a “normal country” with a larger role in global affairs.

Mr. Abe has promoted a version of history that plays down Japan’s wartime transgressions, and has moved to give the military limited powers to fight in foreign conflicts, shedding pacifist constraints in place since World War II.

Pressed by Washington, Mr. Abe issued an apology in December on the issue of “comfort women,” sex slaves taken by the Japanese military from Korea and other nations, long seen as an open wound to Koreans. Many in South Korea criticized the apology as insufficient, but President Park Geun-hye accepted it and Mr. Abe appeared to win credit in Washington.

“We will acknowledge the Korean experience when we have opportunities, but we don’t think we have to choose between different people’s histories,” Benjamin Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser, said in an interview.

South Korea has not issued a formal statement either for or against Mr. Obama’s visit to Hiroshima. Ms. Park left Wednesday on a tour of Africa.

As disputes with China mount, the White House has also become less concerned about how the visit will be received in Beijing. One of Washington’s great parlor games involves whether Tokyo or Beijing has the president’s favor. For the first years of Mr. Obama’s presidency, many Japan hands were convinced that the Obama team favored China, seeing it as the only indispensable Asian nation and crucial to a climate-change pact.

But with a climate agreement in Paris concluded and mounting concern about China’s territorial claims in the South China and East China seas, many in Washington see a turn torward Tokyo.

“I think the debate tipped last year in Japan’s favor after China built airfields in the South China Sea,” said Michael J. Green, who served as a senior adviser on Asia during the George W. Bush administration.

Mr. Abe, meanwhile, has worked diligently to tighten Japan’s already close embrace of the United States. New guidelines written last year will further integrate the two militaries, and an unpopular state-secrets law passed in 2014 was intended, in part, to make intelligence sharing easier. Along with new security laws that allow Japanese forces to engage in combat missions overseas, these moves have won Mr. Abe plaudits in Washington.

The visit to Hiroshima “is a gesture of respect for the Japanese people,” Mr. Rhodes said, adding: “It’s always been evident that it would be meaningful for the Japanese people to pay this kind of visit, and insofar as it helps us to advance this alliance, that’s important.”

China has criticized the visit as an opportunity for Japan to recast itself as a victim rather than aggressor in World War II, and for the United States to cozy up to Japan, which the official Communist Party newspaper, People’s Daily, derided as Mr. Obama’s “right-hand man” in East Asia.

“We hope that when inviting other state leaders to visit Hiroshima, Japan bears one thing in mind,” Lu Kang, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, said this month. “That is, it will never tread on the path of militarism again, as it once brought unspeakable suffering to its people and people of Asia and around the world.”

Even in Tokyo, there is some ambivalence about Mr. Obama’s visit. Mr. Abe is expected to get a political lift, and ordinary Japanese have embraced Mr. Obama’s support for nuclear disarmament.

But the policy establishment is not keen to be drawn into a new debate over history, and some worry that Mr. Abe may come under pressure to visit Pearl Harbor in return. And while Japan is publicly committed to the abolition of nuclear weapons, it is also anxious about the potential threat from North Korea, and to a lesser extent, China.


