


The New Museum — one of the smallest and in many ways still the scrappiest sibling in the bursting family of contemporary art museums in New York City — will expand into the building it owns next door to its Bowery home, doubling its space as it prepares for its 40th birthday next year.

The museum announced on Tuesday that it had raised $43 million toward an $80 million capital campaign designed to pay not only for the expansion but also for tripling the size of its endowment. The money would also fund more experimental programs, like the business incubator and the urban-policy think tank that the museum runs.

At a time when the Whitney Museum of American Art has opened a sleek new building and the Museum of Modern Art is also expanding, having just announced a $100 million gift from a single donor, David Geffen, the New Museum’s initiative might seem almost modest. But for an institution that began in 1977 in a single room and now has an annual operating budget of only $13 million (MoMA’s budget is $147 million a year), the campaign is a turning point, the largest fund-raising effort in its history.

The collector and philanthropist Toby Devan Lewis, one of the museum’s longtime supporters, provided a gift to begin the effort, the biggest single donation in the institution’s history, though the museum is not disclosing the amount, at Ms. Lewis’s request. Lisa Phillips, its director, said that while a physical expansion was sorely needed — given the increase in annual attendance from 60,000 to more than 400,000 since its move from SoHo in 2007 — the money was important primarily to give the museum the ability to try new programs and ideas.

“We’ve known for a long time that we wanted an expansion, but we’ve been thinking about what an expansion means for a museum like this,” said Ms. Phillips, who has overseen the institution for 17 years. “We own the building next door, and it just makes sense to use it. But it was also about thinking about ways to create a parallel structure there, to make something that’s different and a counterpoint to this building.”

In the short term, the museum plans to renovate its neighbor at 231 Bowery — which once housed a restaurant supply company but before that was raw studio space for seminal New York artists like James Rosenquist and Tom Wesselmann — and to break through to connect to its current building, at 235 Bowery, designed by the Japanese firm Sanaa. Joining those buildings would increase the museum’s footprint for exhibition space, storage and offices to a little more than 100,000 square feet, from 58,000 square feet now.

“Our building is just too small for what we’re doing,” James-Keith Brown, president of the museum’s board, said. Asked if eventual plans to demolish the next-door building and erect something more ambitious in its place were on the table, Mr. Brown said: “I wouldn’t say that yet. It’s not not on the table, but it’s not something that we’re pursuing right now.”

The museum is unusual among New York contemporary institutions in that it does not have a permanent collection, beyond a small number of works that it has kept, a decision that its founder, Marcia Tucker, believed would keep it creatively and philosophically nimble. Especially since its move to the Bowery, the museum has focused on artists and works not widely seen in New York, such as contemporary art from the Middle East, from former Soviet republics and from self-taught artists. It has also emphasized art by women. (The six exhibitions now on view are all by female artists.)

The building at 231 Bowery currently houses a business incubator, New INC, founded by the museum in 2014, the first such entrepreneur-meets-artist venture by a visual art institution. That project was created partly as a way to explore the growing connections between technology and contemporary art. The museum also needs more room to house support staff for Ideas City, a program begun in 2011 that brings together urban planners, artists, political leaders and others to think creatively about the future of cities. (This year the program is focusing on Detroit and Athens.)

Ms. Phillips said that the museum needed to improve the circulation in its building, which can feel at times like navigating a stack of cubes, with traffic jams at elevators and stairs. There is also a need for more space so exhibitions can be kept in place during turnaround periods, allowing the museum to remain open as one big show leaves and another is installed. “It’s hard for an audience — and we have a loyal local and international audience — that expects to come to us and can’t because we’re down for a while,” Ms. Phillips said.

Massimiliano Gioni, the museum’s artistic director, said: “I think on one hand we’re in an interesting position, because clearly we’ve demonstrated that size doesn’t really matter. The specificity of our limits has really almost defined who we are. We’re not going out there and saying that we want to be like all the others.”

Ms. Phillips said that it would take at least a year for the museum to plot specifically how it would use the expansion. “I don’t have it completely laid out,” she said, “but it’s about trying to do things that museums haven’t done yet or maybe even imagined.”


