


LONDON — Rejection can be the spur that prompts gifted men to show just how good they can be.

On Saturday, Kevin De Bruyne returned to Chelsea, which discarded him two years ago without giving him a fair chance to play, and he was the energetic force behind Manchester City’s 3-0 win.

De Bruyne ran miles and miles, covering every blade of grass at Stamford Bridge. His surging runs turned defense into attack, covering distances of 70 yards or more. His awareness of his colleagues and his ability to find them with subtle passes allowed Sergio Agüero to score three goals.

And for once, the man who enabled the hat trick deserves to be credited just as much as the man who scored the goals.

De Bruyne is coming back into peak form after missing more than two months from a knee injury suffered in late January.

How important is he to the team? City has won 22 of the 36 games that De Bruyne has played this season, but lost eight of the 16 games he missed.

During that time, Agüero and others also found it a lot harder to score. When De Bruyne has played, City has amassed 79 goals, but the club scored only 26 when he was out.

De Bruyne is far from a one-man team; in fact, he may not be the best player on the squad. Manchester City’s coach, Manuel Pellegrini, rates Agüero the best striker in the Premier League, by far.

But De Bruyne scores goals, too. His fine goals, both home and away, were instrumental in City’s beating Paris St.-Germain in the Champions League quarterfinals.

If there is a manager who understands how the feeling of being unwanted can be turned into a positive force, it is Pellegrini.

The 62-year-old Chilean has known since the turn of the year that Manchester City has hired Pep Guardiola to replace him after this season. Pellegrini suffered the same indignity when he was coach at Real Madrid, when Madrid gave his job to José Mourinho despite the team’s racking up a record number of wins and points under Pellegrini.

There is a perception among club owners and presidents that winning — even winning stylishly, as Pellegrini’s teams generally do — is not enough. Madrid went for Mourinho, and City now is going for Guardiola as it looks for that extra dimension.

It has to do with making good players play. It also has to do with charisma. Guardiola and Mourinho are as good in front of the TV cameras as they are in the locker room.

In Mourinho’s case, that is in question right now because it was Chelsea — coached by Mourinho — that imploded this season after winning the Premier League last year. And it was Mourinho who discarded De Bruyne.

In two years as a Chelsea player, De Bruyne made only three starts in the league. Mourinho had an embarrassment of riches, a surfeit of midfield talents, and the coach said at the time, “If you have a player knocking on your door and crying every day that he wants to leave, you have to make a decision.”

De Bruyne corrected that version of the story before Saturday’s game. He told reporters that Mourinho had called in all the attacking midfield players, showed them the statistics and said that De Bruyne was last in assists, goals, passing percentage and dribbles.

“I said that wasn’t logical. I’d played less games than the others; how could you compare me to them?”

Within a month, Chelsea had sold De Bruyne to Wolfsburg in the German league. He was 22 at the time, and Chelsea received more than double the fee it had paid two years earlier to get De Bruyne from Genk, a club in his home country of Belgium.

After a spectacular season in which De Bruyne was voted the Bundesliga’s top player, the fee for him tripled, with Manchester City spending about $78 million to acquire him.

The returns on the field are still coming. De Bruyne is more of a player and more of an adult than he was in his Chelsea days. He recently became a father, and he certainly doesn’t “cry” in the manager’s office.

But he makes others cry, at least metaphorically. It was breathtaking to see him on Saturday when, after a corner kick against City, he burst with the ball past one, two, three of the Chelsea players who were preferred over him during his time in London.

The run kept on going until De Bruyne spotted Samir Nasri, another City player who has just come back from injury. De Bruyne slipped the ball to Nasri, who almost instantly passed it between the two remaining Chelsea defenders.

And there, making space with his movement as he so often does, was Agüero. The dynamic play of De Bruyne, the sharp stiletto pass of Nasri and the cool chip past the goalkeeper unraveled whatever defense Chelsea possessed.

“They outplayed us on 60- to 70-yard counters,” said Guus Hiddink, filling in as Chelsea coach until the Italian Antonio Conte arrives to rebuild the team in July.

Agüero’s economy defines him as a born striker. The Argentine had four attempts on goal and scored on three of them. In 492 games for his three clubs — Independiente in Argentina, Atlético Madrid and Manchester City — he has scored 257 goals.

If Agüero stays sharp, De Bruyne stays strong and David Silva is fit, Manchester City will be quite a test for Real Madrid in the Champions League this month.


