


This article originally appeared in The New York Times on March 9, 1971.

In a classic 15-round battle, Joe Frazier broke the wings of the butterfly and smashed the stinger of the bee last night in winning a unanimous 15-round decision over Muhammad Ali at Madison Square Garden.

Defying an anonymous “lose or else” death threat, Frazier settled the controversy over the world heavyweight championship by handing Ali his first defeat with a savage attack that culminated in a thudding knockdown of the deposed titleholder from a hammerlike left hook in the final round.

During the classic brawl, one man in the sellout throng of 20,455 died of a heart attack.

When the verdict was announced, Ali, also known as Cassius Clay, accepted it stoically.

Hurried to his dressing room rather than the postfight interview area, Ali remained there for about half an hour. Suddenly, he departed for Flower-Fifth Avenue Hospital for X-rays of the severely swollen jaw. He was released from the hospital after 40 minutes and left unbandaged.

But even before Ali’s jaw began to bloat, the unbeaten Frazier had dulled the vaunted weapons of his revival in recording his 27th victory, although he failed in his quest for his 24th knockout. Ali’s defeat ended his winning streak after 31 triumphs, with 25 knockouts.

“I always knew who the champion was,” Frazier, his brow swollen above each eye, said with a smile.

The officials agreed with the Philadelphia slugger. Judge Bill Recht awarded him 11 rounds to four for Ali, while the other judge, Artie Aidala, had Frazier ahead by 9-6. Referee Arthur Mercante had it the closest, 8-6 for Frazier with one round even. During his uncharacteristic postfight silence, Ali sent this word to newsmen through Drew (Bundini) Brown, his assistant trainer: “Don’t worry, we’ll be back, we ain’t through yet.” But regarding a possible return bout, Frazier said, “I don’t think Clay will want one.”

Ali had predicted Frazier would fall “in six rounds” and he had maintained that there was “no way” the recognized champion could outpoint him. But the swarming Philadelphia brawler, battering his Cherry Hill, N.J., neighbor, ended the 29-year-old Ali’s credibility as a prophet.

At the age of 27, Frazier justified his reign for all the world to see on a television network with an audience estimated at 300 million. Each fighter will receive $2.5 million from a possible $25 million in total worldwide receipts. The $1,352,951 gate at the Garden was a record for an indoor bout.

Ali remained unscratched, except for a slightly bloodied nose, but his jaw began to swell on both sides in the late rounds from Frazier’s persistent hammering.

In the final round, Frazier landed a wild left hook that sent Ali sprawling onto his back in a corner. But the 6-to-5 betting underdog was up almost instantly and took the mandatory eight-count on unsteady feet. Moments later, Frazier jolted his 215-pound rival with another left hook.

With a minute remaining, Ali desperately tried for a knockout, but his punches had virtually no effect. With the crowd roaring in the final seconds, the bell rang and Frazier playfully cuffed Ali across his head, bowed in apparent defeat.

Ali’s strategy obviously had been to let Frazier grow arm-weary while pummeling him. But the chunky champion, despite a 6 ½-inch disadvantage in reach, defied Ali’s tiring jab and moved in under to convince the Garden audience he deserved the decision.

When the decision was announced, a patter of boos erupted, but the cheers soon thundered above them.

Except for the first round, when the red tassels on Ali’s high white shoes flopped in rhythm to his ballerina moves, the deposed titleholder primarily used a flat-footed stance, a radical departure from his floating, stinging style prior to his 3 ½ -year exile that ended last year.

While his exile matured Ali’s physique, it sabotaged his speed. But in red velvet trunks, he was as arrogant as ever even before the midring instructions. Twice he shouldered Frazier, in green-and-gold brocade trunks, as he whirled around the ring. And twice Frazier glared in contempt.

During the early rounds, Frazier pounded his left hook into Ali’s midsection, but several times the deposed champion shook his head in the clinch as if to reassure his idolators.

At the end of the second round, Ali waved his right glove in derision at Frazier as they walked to their corners. And during that intermission, he showed his disdain by refusing to rest on his stool and moving threateningly to the center of the ring before the bell rang for the third.

Moments later, Ali’s voice could be heard through the microphone hanging over the ring. Mercante warned Ali that “no talking” would be tolerated.

Soon, Ali wasn’t talking anymore. Near the end of the fourth, Frazier’s left hook bloodied Ali’s nose. And in the fifth, Frazier strayed from his taciturn character.

Frazier was literally laughing in Ali’s face now and he was in command. When the bell ended the fifth round, Frazier cuffed Ali across the top of the head.

In the tremendous tempo, Frazier was fulfilling his strategy to “kill the body and the head will die.” But somehow, Ali’s head remained alive through the middle rounds as his sixth-round prediction was unfulfilled. But before the eighth round, a chant of “Ali, Ali, Ali” began.

Momentarily inspired, Ali waved to the crowd and pointed to them as if to show Frazier it was his audience. But after the round, a roar of “Joe, Joe, Joe” disputed Ali’s confidence.

More willing to trade punches, Ali slowed Frazier’s pace. The champion’s legs were weaving instead of churning. Sensing a knockout opportunity, Ali pounced but Frazier, in his typical fury, fought him off. In the 10th, Ali glanced at the ringside and shouted, “He’s out,” in a reference to Frazier’s weariness.

In the 11th, Ali slipped to the canvas momentarily. Near the end of the round, he was made wobbly by a left hook. Frazier’s savage flurry sent him stumbling into the ropes. He flopped around the ring on rubber legs, but appeared to be playing possum, perhaps to frustrate Frazier further.

But in the 12th, Frazier, strengthened by the surging of joy he receives from punishing an opponent, resumed his frantic pace — but soon it slowed. Each boxer was moving securely, but slowly, until Frazier uncoiled the left hook that dropped Ali in the final round.

It was only the third time Ali had been knocked down in his decade of competition. Sonny Banks floored him in 1962 during his 11th bout and Henry Cooper flattened him in 1963 during his 19th bout.

But the knockdown by Frazier was the final embarrassment for the deposed champion, the sixth ex-heavyweight champion to fail in an attempt to regain his title. The others were Joe Louis, Jack Dempsey, Jim Jeffries, Bob Fitzsimmons and James J. Corbett. Only Floyd Patterson has succeeded in regaining it.

In his failure, Ali not only lost, but more embarrassing, he was silenced.


