


NEW ORLEANS

WHAT: A Greek Revival with five bedrooms and five and a half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $3,050,000

SIZE: 5,150 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $592

SETTING: This 1850 Greek Revival is on a corner lot in the Touro Bouligny section of Uptown New Orleans, a block from the city’s historic Garden District. St. Charles Avenue, a picturesque thoroughfare of live oaks and early-20th-century mansions traversed by streetcar, is four blocks north; restaurants, bars, cafes and boutiques are one block south, along Magazine Street. The Mardi Gras parade route runs nearby, too. The city’s Central Business District and adjoining French Quarter are a few miles away.

INDOORS: The center-hall house has been updated over the last eight years, inside and out. The renovations were a collaboration between Davis Lee Jahncke Jr., an architect, and Grace W. Kaynor, an interior designer and an owner of Sotre, a furnishings store.

The interior retains its original wide-plank pine floors and marble fireplaces, as well as floor-to-ceiling guillotine or double-hung windows in most of the common areas. Room proportions are grand, with ceilings measuring up to 13 feet, complemented by chandelier lighting and plaster ceiling medallions. Switch plates are by Forbes & Lomax, while doorknobs are vintage amethyst glass, all part of what Mrs. Kaynor calls “jewelry for the house.” Molding is a mix of plaster and wood; most of the interior doors are salvage.

In addition to formal living and dining rooms, common areas include a library, a family room and a latticework sitting room with a checkered marble floor. A glass door under an arched transom opens to the garden. All of the common rooms are wired for sound, with built-in ceiling speakers.

The kitchen is a bright, open space with a colorful patterned concrete tile floor, custom-designed. The stainless-steel appliances are by Viking and GE Profile.

The master suite is on the main level. Its barrier-free bathroom has a walk-in shower. The other bedrooms are upstairs, each with an en-suite bathroom, one with two walk-in closets. One of the bedrooms is in a guest suite with a separate kitchen, a living area and a private entrance. The guest suite may be legally rented.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about a quarter-acre, with a saltwater pool, a gazebo and a trellised sitting area surrounded by herb and vegetable beds.

TAXES: Approximately $14,000 a year

CONTACT: Janet Favrot, Coldwell Banker TEC Realtors, (504) 615-0813; coldwellbankerpreviews.com

•

BIG SKY, MONT.

WHAT: A contemporary with five bedrooms and five and a half baths on 37 acres

HOW MUCH: $2,950,000

SIZE: 6,572 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $449

SETTING: Big Sky is an unincorporated rural area in southwestern Montana, surrounded by the Gallatin National Forest and not far from Yellowstone National Park. Known for its wilderness, the area is crisscrossed with trails for hiking, biking and horseback riding. There are blue-ribbon trout fishing in the Gallatin River and skiing at Big Sky Resort, which is about eight miles from this house. The area has a few small markets and a new hospital. Bozeman is about 44 miles away.

INDOORS: The two-story house was built in 1984. A wood, stone and glass structure with rough-cut rock walls and walls of windows facing Lone Peak, the design is a contemporary riff on a Western lodge.

The great room has a wood-burning rock fireplace, a pitched ceiling and a wall of glass rising nearly 20 feet, facing Lone Peak. It opens to a deck. The sleek kitchen features a built-in toaster in the countertop. The view here faces east, for morning sun. The refrigerator is a Sub-Zero. Floors throughout are either a light-colored wood or slate, while the walls are covered in woven grass, making it easier to hang and change artwork.

Three bedrooms are on the main level and two are downstairs on the walkout lower level. All have en-suite bathrooms, and four open to private porches or patios. The master has two bathrooms joined by a steam shower. The suite also has a cedar-paneled room with a hot tub.

The lower level also has a family room with a wet bar, a large rock-wall fireplace and a wall of windows. A tower rising from the entry level contains a darkroom, as well as an upstairs office overlooking the countryside.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The 37-acre property is mostly meadow and sagebrush. It has a riding ring and about 1,500 feet of frontage on the west fork of the Gallatin River. Regular visitors include elk, bighorn sheep and moose.

TAXES: $14,920 a year

CONTACT: Tallie Lancey, Big Sky Sotheby’s International Realty, (406) 600-8081; reallybigsky.com

•

LENOX, MASS.

WHAT: A compound with a converted 19th-century carriage house and a guesthouse, for a total of nine bedrooms, five full bathrooms and two half-baths

HOW MUCH: $2,500,000

SIZE: 7,258 square feet total, with 5,670 square feet in the main house

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $344

SETTING: Lenox is a town in the hilly, wooded Berkshires region of western Massachusetts, about two and a half hours west of Boston. The area is known both as an arts colony and a place for high-end relaxation, home to the Berkshire Theater Group, Shakespeare & Company and the Tanglewood music festival, as well as the Kripalu Center for Yoga & Health, a Canyon Ranch spa and the Cranwell Spa & Golf Resort. This compound is on nearly 22 acres, about a mile from the center of town.

INDOORS: The main house was once the carriage house for a much larger estate. A stone and brick structure with a shingled roof, it dates to 1894 and was converted to a residence in the 1970s, with the last updates done within the past 10 years.

The structure is built into a slope, with a great room on the entry level and a guest suite on the lower level with a separate entrance. The great room has a soaring wood ceiling, a wide brick fireplace and walls of glass reaching about 20 feet. Stairs lead to a small loft with skylights. Most interior wood is original, including floors and structural posts throughout.

Running the length of the great room is a greenhouse-like room with a pitched glass ceiling and a hexagonal tiled floor, reached via glass doors. The kitchen’s stainless-steel appliances were updated during renovations.

Three of the bedrooms are on the entry level. The master is part of a suite with a dressing room and a full bathroom; one of the other bedrooms is a suite, too. Three more bedrooms are on the lower level, which has a living area, a kitchen, and in a former horse stall, a dining room.

The guesthouse has three bedrooms and is of the same vintage as the carriage house. It has front and back porches. There’s also a free-standing studio with a loft, once used as a storage barn.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is 21.86 level acres. It has a tennis court and a half-basketball court, as well as a pond.

TAXES: Approximately $20,450 a year

CONTACT: Patrice Melluzzo and Dawn Farley, William Pitt Sotheby’s International Realty, (413) 446-1146 / (413) 429-7133; williampitt.com


