


Nearly six months after a United States cargo ship sank off the coast of the Bahamas during a hurricane, the National Transportation and Safety Board has found the vessel’s “black box,” which investigators hope will provide evidence that will help them understand why the vessel sank. The 790-foot vessel, El Faro, sank Oct. 1 during Hurricane Joaquin on trip from Jacksonville, Fla., to San Juan, P.R., killing all 33 crew members. A previous effort to find the ship’s voyage data recorder, which records conversations and sounds on the navigation bridge, had failed. Investigators and scientists using remotely operated undersea search equipment found the device early Tuesday in 15,000 feet of water, about 41 miles northeast of Acklins and Crooked Islands. FRANCES ROBLES

Republican leaders of the General Assembly are calling on Gov. Terry McAuliffe, a Democrat, to convene a special legislative session to discuss his recent restoration of voting and other civil rights to more than 200,000 convicted felons. Speaker William J. Howell of the House and the Senate majority leader, Thomas K. Norment Jr., said the governor’s actions last week to restore certain civil rights to convicted felons was a “matter of great consequence” to Virginians that deserves a thorough debate. Mr. McAuliffe issued an order restoring the rights of 206,000 felons to vote, saying the move would help undo Virginia’s long history of trying to suppress the black vote. (AP)

Seven of eight relatives who were found dead in their southern Ohio homes last week had been shot multiple times, including one who was shot nine times, according to autopsy results released Tuesday. The Hamilton County coroner said the victims — three women, four men and a 16-year-old boy — had wounds to their heads, torso and other parts of the body. Six of the victims had three or more wounds. Attorney General Mike DeWine has called the deaths carefully planned slayings carried out at four locations in rural Piketon. He has also said there were marijuana growing operations at three of the locations. The authorities have said members of the Rhoden family were targeted in the slayings. (AP)

A man who got into a fight with a boxer outside a Philadelphia club went to the boxer’s home in the city later that night with friends and threw gasoline bombs at it, igniting a fire that killed the boxer and four relatives, police said Tuesday in announcing an arrest in the 2003 case. The man, Abdu Rivera, 32, was arrested Monday on five counts of murder, arson and related offenses. Capt. James Clark of the Philadelphia police said the boxer, John David Santiago, had gotten into a fight with Mr. Rivera and others in the early evening. Mr. Rivera and his friends tracked down Mr. Santiago’s address and used accelerants to set fire to the home, he said. “This is over a bar fight and pride,” Captain Clark said. Mr. Santiago, 23, a four-time Pennsylvania Golden Gloves state champion, was killed with four others. Captain Clark said two detectives reopened the case in 2014. (AP)


