


A 16-year-old girl died after a fight with other students in a high school restroom in Delaware, spurring an outpouring of grief and soul-searching on social media on Thursday.

The victim, a 10th grader from New Castle, Del., who attended the Howard High School of Technology in Wilmington, was in a girls’ restroom on the main floor about 8:15 a.m., just as classes began, the school said in a statement.

“A few female students were involved in a physical altercation,” and the victim was seriously hurt, the school said. She was taken by helicopter to Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, where she died. No weapons were involved in the fight, officials said.

On Friday, the police identified the victim as Amy Joyner-Francis and said they were still investigating. No additional details about what happened or why were available.

Kayla Wilson, a student, said she was in a stall in the restroom when the fight began.

“She was fighting a girl, and then that’s when all these other girls started banking her — like, jumping her — and she hit her head on the sink,” Ms. Wilson told a Philadelphia television station, WPVI, according to The Associated Press.

City and school officials were visibly shaken at a news conference about the episode.

“This is a tragic time that we come before you,” Dennis P. Williams, the mayor of Wilmington, said, his voice cracking. “My heart is broken.”

After pausing, he continued: “I am so upset that a young lady lost her life today. Things like this shouldn’t happen. My heart bleeds for the family, the kids who go to this school, and the administrators and our city.”

Although the authorities did not initially identify the victim, her name and photos were widely disseminated on Twitter and Facebook, where a memorial page was created; by late Thursday night, more than 2,700 people had liked it.

On Twitter, a hashtag with “RIP” and the girl’s first name spread with numerous comments, many asking how something like this could happen.

Councilwoman Sherry Dorsey Walker of Wilmington said she had known the victim and her family for some time, The Associated Press reported. Ms. Walker said the family was asking the public to “be calm and pray for them.”

Students were kept in their classrooms after the fight, and classes were dismissed at 10:15 a.m. on Thursday.

“This is not only an unspeakable tragedy for her family, but also for the school, and the entire community,” the school’s statement said.

“We are shaken but stand ready to provide support and care to the family, to Howard students and staff, and to all of those affected by this senseless act. We ask that you do the same.”


