


A federal investigation into corruption in Suffolk County, N.Y., law enforcement has expanded, as the Justice Department examines at least a half-dozen cases to determine whether political considerations influenced decisions made by the Suffolk district attorney’s office, according to two people in law enforcement and three who have been questioned by the Justice Department.

Though few aspects of the investigation have become public, it has already upended politics in the Long Island county and led to public denunciations among erstwhile Democratic allies. Last month, Steve Bellone, the county executive, called for the district attorney, Thomas J. Spota, to step down, saying that he headed a “criminal enterprise.” Mr. Spota quickly lashed back at Mr. Bellone and said that there were “other reasons he wants me out of office,” suggesting that Mr. Bellone would prefer a less zealous prosecutor in office.

The half-dozen cases that are now part of the investigation, which began in 2013 and has already claimed a county police chief, were all handled by Mr. Spota’s top anticorruption prosecutor, Christopher McPartland. The highest-profile case being scrutinized involves Mr. McPartland’s investigation of a former county executive. Other cases include Mr. McPartland’s decision to order surveillance of the county press secretary and two lengthy wiretap investigations, which involved eavesdropping on a detective and a politically connected lawyer.

The New York Times identified the cases through interviews with two law enforcement officials and three people who have been questioned by the Justice Department or are aware of subpoenas. The five people spoke on the condition of anonymity either because they were not authorized to speak publicly about an active inquiry or because they feared the district attorney’s office would retaliate against them.

The federal investigation, overseen by the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, has placed Mr. Spota, who is in his fourth term, on the defensive as investigators pore over his cases.

“I have spent 14 years doing what I think was right,” Mr. Spota said at a news conference he had arranged last month to reject Mr. Bellone’s call for his resignation. At the news conference, he acknowledged that the Justice Department was reviewing the wiretap investigation involving the lawyer.

In recent months, federal investigators have also explored whether Mr. Spota’s office crossed any lines in pursuing Steve Levy, the former Suffolk County executive and onetime candidate for governor. Mr. Levy’s political career ended abruptly in 2011 when, under the cloud of an investigation by Mr. Spota’s office, he agreed not to seek another term as county executive as part of a deal with Mr. Spota, although details of the deal were never disclosed.

Federal prosecutors recently interviewed an official in the Levy administration, Christine Malafi, about what Mr. McPartland, the anticorruption prosecutor, said to her while he tried to secure her testimony against Mr. Levy, one of the people said. Ms. Malafi declined to comment when reached by phone.

Also under investigation is a decision by Mr. Spota’s office to have detectives covertly follow Justin Meyers, a press secretary for Mr. Bellone, two of the people said.

After a brief period of surveillance, prosecutors assigned a female undercover agent to strike up a conversation about politics with Mr. Meyers at a bar, one of the two people said. But there is no indication it ever occurred.

“It is shocking, but at the same time I can’t say I’m totally surprised,” Mr. Meyers said of the surveillance. “After spending the last two years watching the district attorney’s office abuse power in a fashion normally reserved for John Grisham novels, the fact that they would try to frame someone seems strangely normal here.”

A spokesman for the district attorney, Robert Clifford, said that the office had received a complaint that Mr. Meyers was working on political campaigns while on the clock as a Suffolk County employee. “The matter was investigated and found to be untrue,” Mr. Clifford said.

The federal scrutiny of the district attorney’s office has its roots in a 2013 inquiry into a violent outburst by the former chief in the Suffolk County Police Department, James Burke, after a duffel bag was stolen from his vehicle. When a suspect was arrested, Mr. Burke barged into the room where he was being held and struck the man several times and threatened to kill him. He persuaded several detectives and officers, whom he referred to as his “palace guard,” to cover up the episode.

The cover-up frustrated federal agents for some two years, as they investigated whether Mr. Burke obstructed justice and violated the suspect’s civil rights. In the end at least 10 officers and detectives cooperated, and Mr. Burke pleaded guilty to the charges in February.

The revelations along the way have been lurid. The stolen duffel bag contained pornography, sex toys and cigars, federal prosecutors have said. And in investigating the cover-up, the Federal Bureau of Investigation found not only a blue wall of silence, but also a nasty departmental culture, typified by retribution and surveillance, with Mr. Burke at its center. One federal prosecutor, James Miskiewicz, called it “something out of the K.G.B.” at a court hearing.

The revelations have at times proved unsettling for the Justice Department. At one point, the United States attorney’s office learned that a wiretap by Mr. Spota’s office had been intercepting phone calls involving F.B.I. agents and federal prosecutors. At another point, the United States attorney’s office worried that the targets of its investigation had a mole who was leaking F.B.I. interview reports, revealing who was cooperating.

Even word that federal agents were preparing to arrest Mr. Burke somehow leaked to Suffolk County power brokers ahead of time, according to two of the people.

Since Mr. Burke was arrested, investigators have been looking into whether he received help or advice from the district attorney’s office during the cover-up, three of the people said. The prosecutors are particularly focused on determining whether Mr. McPartland, a longtime friend of Mr. Burke, had any role, the three people said.

The connections between Mr. Burke and the district attorney’s office run deep. Mr. Spota has long been Mr. Burke’s mentor: The two met more than 35 years ago, when Mr. Spota was an up-and-coming prosecutor and Mr. Burke was his teenage witness in a murder case. Decades later, Mr. Burke became the district attorney’s top investigator, often working with Mr. McPartland. By 2012, Mr. Burke was the most senior uniformed chief at the Police Department, a job he landed with Mr. Spota’s recommendation.

One case being reviewed includes the district attorney’s wiretapping of a detective’s phone in 2014, according to two of the people. Mr. Spota has said the investigation was an urgent action in a leak case. But the detective whose phone was tapped had been assigned to a federal task force, so federal prosecutors are examining whether the wiretap, which Mr. McPartland oversaw, was intended to keep tabs on the investigation into Mr. Burke, according to the two people.

Another case being reviewed by federal prosecutors involves Mr. McPartland’s 2014 prosecution of the Suffolk County technology commissioner, Donald Rodgers, on charges that included the rarely invoked offense of lying to the County Legislature.

The case came shortly after Mr. Rodgers had begun work on improving how the Police Department monitored internal misconduct cases. At the time, it was not uncommon for internal investigations to languish until the statute of limitations had expired.

Mr. Bellone, the county executive, said that he believed Mr. Rodgers had been prosecuted for trying to bring greater oversight to the Police Department, Mr. Burke’s turf.

“I’m trying to do reforms and they’re not happy about it,” Mr. Bellone said of Mr. Burke and the district attorney’s office.

Mr. Clifford, the spokesman for the district attorney’s office, dismissed the accusation, saying the case against Mr. Rodgers came from a whistle-blower and “the timing of the investigation was based solely on the complaint made to the district attorney’s office.”

Mr. Clifford said that Mr. McPartland “conducted himself ethically, professionally and lawfully.”


