


To many defense lawyers, Joseph P. Dwyer, a retired New York police officer who became a private eye, was guided by justice — a highly sought investigator who uncovered key information to help their clients.

But that came at a price: Mr. Dwyer had been paying a police sergeant for information from a restricted law enforcement database, prosecutors charged. And in a sentencing memo this week, the government said Mr. Dwyer’s motivation had been “a desire to enrich himself,” citing his billings of about $500,000 from 2011 to 2014 from public funds used for indigent defense.

Mr. Dwyer and the sergeant, Ronald G. Buell, who has since retired from the force, were charged in 2014, and pleaded guilty this year to one count of conspiracy. On Friday, Mr. Dwyer, 48, appeared in court to be sentenced.

His case has drawn much attention within the defense bar in New York, whose lawyers often retain former police officers for their investigative skills. More than 20 lawyers wrote to the judge on Mr. Dwyer’s behalf.

Standing and choking back tears, Mr. Dwyer apologized and said he took “full responsibility” for his actions. He said that in investigating cases, some involving capital offenses, he became “too engaged and overwhelmed in trying to provide a zealous defense” for his clients.

In paying for restricted information, he said, he used “poor judgment” and made “a terrible mistake.”

But, he said, money had not been his objective. There was never an “ulterior motive,” he said. He had worked “proudly” for defense lawyers, he said, and was “devastated” to read the government’s sentencing memo with the enrichment allegation.

Judge Alison J. Nathan of Federal District Court in Manhattan ultimately said that she would not send Mr. Dwyer to prison, prompting a row of relatives seated behind him to leap up and let out a loud shriek of joy.

The parties agreed in January, when Mr. Dwyer pleaded guilty, that under the advisory federal sentencing guidelines, he faced 10 to 16 months in prison, according to his plea agreement.

There was no doubt, the judge said, that he “broke the law” and had “crossed the line” for reasons that involved at some level both a desire for financial gain and zealous investigation and advocacy on behalf of indigent clients.

But she also cited his history of public service, on the police force and as a defense investigator, and said she was convinced that he would not again engage in such conduct.

As prosecutors described the scheme, Mr. Dwyer relied on the sergeant to gain access to a law enforcement database at least 15 times from 2011 to 2013 to obtain personal information about potential witnesses and other people associated with 11 criminal prosecutions in which Mr. Dwyer had been retained as a defense investigator.

During that period, Mr. Buell deposited at least 17 checks into his personal bank account, totaling almost $9,000 — which prosecutors said were from Mr. Dwyer’s investigative firm.

Mr. Dwyer, according to his lawyer’s court filing, had worked in narcotics enforcement before his short police career ended when he was injured while making an arrest. He became a private investigator in 1995, the filing says.

Before Judge Nathan imposed the sentence, five years of probation, Mr. Dwyer’s lawyer, Guy Oksenhendler, called his client “one of the great equalizers” and said Mr. Dwyer’s role was “critically important to the defense.”

There was no evidence Mr. Dwyer had used any of the information he obtained for “a nefarious purpose,” Mr. Oksenhendler said, adding: “No one was threatened. No one was intimidated.”

In the letters from defense lawyers, which the judge cited, many offered support for Mr. Dwyer. One lawyer, Lisa Scolari, wrote that Mr. Dwyer “believed that gathering information was the path to truth and the way to bring justice to our vastly overmatched indigent clients.”

But in the government’s sentencing memo, prosecutors said Mr. Dwyer’s conduct “had the foreseeable effect of putting victims and witnesses in danger, undermining criminal investigations and jeopardizing the public’s confidence in law enforcement.”

A prosecutor, Hadassa Waxman, said in court that the reason he had been such a good investigator was “he could get his hands on things that other investigators could not get their hands on, and he did that by breaking the rules.”

Mr. Buell, 49, who retired after more than 25 years with the Police Department, is to be sentenced in the summer.


