


London — The underdog story to cap them all, Leicester City winning the English league, remains on hold.

A 1-1 draw at Manchester United’s famed Old Trafford stadium inches the Foxes closer to the first title in their history, but it now means that Leicester, and seemingly most of the world that has embraced its story, must wait.

Maybe the championship will be Leicester’s on Monday night if Tottenham Hotspur fails to beat one of its own archrivals, Chelsea. The Spurs are the only team that could catch Leicester, but to do that Tottenham has to win all three of its remaining games, and Leicester has to win neither of its last two.

And frankly, who believed that cockerels could survive a run-in against foxes?

Whatever else needs saying about the contest in Manchester, it was a thrilling, pulsating, typically English game on a Sunday afternoon. Full of foreigners, guided by foreign managers, yet from start to finish full of running and heart and spirit.

“We believe,” Leicester’s Italian manager, Claudio Ranieri, had told his players before the start. “Show it!”

Some eight minutes into the game, that belief was shaken. Anthony Martial, a player whose 50-million-euro, or about $57 million, transfer fee from Monaco amounted to the sum total of what it cost to put Leicester’s lineup together, scored for the home side.

Antonio Valencia created the opportunity with a curled pass off the outside of his foot and Martial, strangely unmarked in a Leicester penalty box that is usually locked fast, struck his shot through the legs of goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel.

Schmeichel, the son of a famous Manchester United keeper, was later to make save after save, but on this occasion he was beaten on his near post, where goalkeepers dread to be beaten.

No matter. Slowly, slowly, as Manager Ranieri often says, the Foxes found their survival instinct. They ran, hard, at the back line of United’s defense. And in less than 10 minutes, Leicester was back on level terms.

A free kick 40 yards out was guided by Danny Drinkwater into the United penalty area and there, outmuscling Marcos Rojo and rising above him, Leicester’s skipper, Wes Morgan, produced a powerful downward header.

The scores tied, the battle engaged, and even though Manchester itself desperately needed a win to try to qualify for next season’s Champions League, there was no quarter left unchallenged.

Some of it was rugged and rough. There was a moment that will have repercussions when Leicester defender Robert Huth tangled with Marouane Fellaini. Huth grabbed a handful of Fellaini’s Jimi Hendrix-style mane of hair. Fellaini reacted with his hand into Huth’s face.

The referee saw neither aggression. Fellaini will most likely be banned for three games when the soccer association reviews video of the incident and, as so often in these cases, the instigator of the malevolence, Huth, will escape punishment.

However, the lawmaker on the field, the referee Michael Oliver, had his own hands full trying to spot the fouls in such a fast-moving, attritional match. He missed a nailed-on penalty for Leicester when Riyad Mahrez was brought down by Rojo, and missed another one when Drinkwater hauled down Memphis Depay late on.

The Drinkwater grappling began outside the penalty box, but carried on into it. Drinkwater, at one time a trainee on Manchester United’s staff, actually received a yellow card for the offense, which, coupled with an earlier caution, meant he was sent off with four minutes remaining.

By that time, Manchester had regained the ascendancy with which it started the game. In between, for an hour, Leicester was the equal at least, and often, in terms of teamwork and desire, the more likely of the two sides to score again.

In front of a crowd of 75,275, and at a stadium where the Leicester players were taking photographs of themselves before the start, this equality was another manifestation of the journey City has taken this season.

From survival in the league one year ago to catch-us-if-you-can top dogs this season, Ranieri’s players have captured the world’s imagination. From a 5,000-to-1 outsider to now odds-on champion sometime soon, these players are living what the manager calls “our once-in-a-lifetime chance.”

Mr Ranieri, the silver fox himself, says he is sorry that he cannot watch Monday’s game between Chelsea and Tottenham, during which his team might claim the title. “I would like,” he said on television immediately after Sunday’s game. “But I have to go home, and when the Tottenham match is on, I will be in the airplane, flying back to work.”

He laughed, as Ranieri has taught his players to laugh at their improbable tilt at fame all season long. Leicester is billed as the fairy story of sports. In fact, it is a truly grounded story of a team showing tenacity and character from beginning to end.

“It’s not ours until we’ve got both hands on the trophy,” said the captain, Morgan. “We’ll be watching and waiting tomorrow night.”

The party is on hold. The world awaits, but no-one has run the foxes to ground.


