


There is no longer “Key & Peele,” the razor-sharp Comedy Central sketch series that ended in September. There are only Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele, the comic actors and writers who used the five seasons of that show to shine a satirical spotlight on racial stereotypes and injustice (not to mention the increasingly distinctive names of college football players). And so the two men started pursuing their individual career paths.

A few months later, those paths have brought Mr. Key and Mr. Peele back together on their first movie, “Keanu,” which Warner Bros. will release on Friday, April 29. In this comedy, they star as cousins in Los Angeles who take in an adorable kitten they name Keanu. (It can mean “cool breeze,” too, you know.) But, unaware that Keanu once belonged to a notorious drug lord, the strait-laced pair must navigate the city’s criminal underbelly to reclaim Keanu when he is stolen from them.

“Keanu,” which was written by Mr. Peele and Alex Rubens (a former “Key & Peele” writer) and directed by Peter Atencio, the “Key & Peele” director, preserves the goofy but socially conscious sensibility of that series. But it is also the comedy team’s first effort at telling a feature-length story, and an important moment to show that they — as well as a wider range of black actors — can carry motion pictures of their own.

Mr. Peele and Mr. Key came together in Los Angeles earlier this month to talk about “Keanu,” and, in these edited excerpts from a Skype interview, they discussed the changing dynamics of their collaboration, the challenges of making the movie and the superstar who participated in it — as well as one who remains just out of reach.

You finished “Key & Peele” several months ago. What does it feel like now when you work together on something?

KEEGAN-MICHAEL KEY It’s special when we get together now. Part of the juggling act is to make sure that people understand that we are a team, and at the same time, we are our own artists — but get tantalized, because we’re going to come back together.

JORDAN PEELE It’s very exciting to see each other’s — I want to say side projects, now that is attachment — but to see each other’s other projects. We’re each other’s biggest cheerleaders.

KEY We text each other frequently. And just go, “How’s that going?”

Where did the idea for “Keanu” come from?

PEELE It came from a lot of discussions that Keegan and I have had. We love a style of movie that we don’t see made very much anymore: action comedies that have heart and are, a certain amount, grounded.

KEY You’re laughing, but the bullets are real.

PEELE We love “Raising Arizona,” “True Romance,” “Midnight Run,” “Thelma & Louise.” Well, maybe that’s not a comedy. We love real-guy, ordinary incompetence in a heightened genre situation.

Were you cat people before you made the movie?

KEY We actually have dogs. We’re dog people.

PEELE We thought about making “Keanu” about a puppy at one point, but kittens are just one notch more vulnerable and precious.

Was it the same cat who played Keanu throughout the film?

KEY A bunch of cats. And different cats are trained differently: This cat has an aptitude for jumping or running. This cat has an aptitude for laying in your lap and purring. A couple of the cats were getting older, and they’d have to swap them out to keep them the same size. You know how it is in Hollywood. If you’re 14 weeks old, you’re out of the business.

Though you’ve each played supporting roles in other people’s movies, were studios hesitant to make “Keanu” because you had no starring film credits?

PEELE You’ll hear a lot of Hollywood execs talk about: “You know, African-American-led movies don’t do well overseas. So you’re not going to see a lot of chances being taken.” There’s this excuse that people throw around. It helps perpetuate this notion that if a black person’s going to lead a movie, it has to be Will Smith or Denzel [Washington].

KEY It’s a specious argument to say, “Well, our numbers say this.” If the movie is of quality and has some kind of universal appeal, it should work in Thailand and Iceland and Nigeria and Israel.

PEELE It’s an industry that hasn’t taken the time to build stars of different types. I hope that this movie helps show that there is an incredible market for movies with people of color.

There’s a running idea in “Keanu” about black men who don’t fit traditional stereotypes having to navigate a world of stereotypical characters. Is that drawn in any way from your real-life experiences?

PEELE Part of it is a commentary on the lack of representation in movies. Certainly, there’s an overwhelming amount of stereotypes in movies. We’ve placed ourselves in a more typical world of Hollywood stereotypes.

KEY African-American culture’s not a monolith. You could take 56 pictures, and there’s one picture where you make this face [contorts his features], and that’s the picture they pick. “He loves to make that face!” No, dude, you didn’t look at the other 55 pictures. If we’re black nerds, we write from a point of view being black nerds. But we’re still African-American. In my life, it’s been frustrating when someone says, “You’re not black enough.” And I’m going: I’m black enough to not get that cab you also didn’t get. They didn’t pick me up either.

What if you get criticized, that the drug dealers and gang members in the film are themselves clichés?

PEELE That’s kind of the point of the movie.

KEY You have to be able to set up a stereotype to knock it down.

PEELE We wouldn’t have made it very far if we worried too much about how people would be offended.

The music of George Michael is a recurring motif in “Keanu.” Why was this important to you?

PEELE Who doesn’t like George Michael? The moment he said yes, I put a down payment on a house. I was like: We’ve won Hollywood. We just got a George Michael soundtrack to our kitten movie.

KEY People are going to be having babies to this movie. “Remember how good George Michael was? Let’s get it on.”

Did you hope that Liam Neeson — or as, he is known in your work, Liam Neesons — might play a role?

KEY You need to understand that Liam Neesons is such a legend, in the fact that he just exists on the earth. The mere mention of his name is enough production value for us.

PEELE It cost us $2 million to say his name incorrectly.

Really?

KEY No, no, no, no, no. [laughter] It was $3 million.

PEELE Are you going to include that in the article, that you actually thought Hollywood might work that way?

Jordan, you and your fiancée, Chelsea Peretti, are generally quiet about your relationship. But you have started appearing together in a TV campaign for booking.com — was it a good time to cash in?

PEELE Am I supposed to be getting paid? Does money usually change hands for this?

KEY Give me a second, let me talk to my partner about commerce.

PEELE I’m delighted to be able to do something with my beautiful love and confidant. We haven’t gotten a chance to work together very much, and let’s just say it’s all feeding our real-life wedding.

Keegan, are you going to have a role in Jordan’s wedding ceremony?

PEELE The real-life ceremony is a little bit of an elope situation. Chelsea and I, we’re very private, and sneaking away and just having something private is perfect for us.

KEY I may have suggested this. [laughter] It’s just rigmarole, a wedding. You’re just better off. What they did is the most efficient and the most logical way to have a union.

Have you decided what your next joint project will be?

KEY We haven’t talked about it yet. We’re just seeing what happens organically. We’re on this kind of Richard Pryor-Gene Wilder model right now, which is, go off and do your thing.

PEELE I smoke crack.

KEY And I may one day marry a Jew. We spend time together, so something will come up. We have discussed you directing me in a movie. Or writing and me producing, me being in it and him not.

PEELE What do you mean?

KEY Me starring in a big blockbuster action movie.

PEELE I never said I wouldn’t be in it.

KEY Maybe you play a small cameo in it. Like Cheech Marin as the bartender in “Desperado.”

PEELE We have some things to talk about, obviously.


