


When Maya Rudolph and Martin Short shared the stage last year at the “Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special,” audiences thought they were simply paying tribute to their mutual history on that NBC series. (So did they.)

But as these two comedians later learned — and NBC decided somewhat after the fact — they were also testing the waters for their own prime-time variety series. “Maya & Marty” debuts on Tuesday, May 31, and promises a frothy mix of sketches, celebrity guests, music and other performances.

What shape that will take, exactly, was still being figured out on a recent visit to their offices at NBC’s 30 Rockefeller Plaza headquarters. It is sure to draw upon their years of experience, not only at “S.N.L.,” but also, for Mr. Short, 66, on “SCTV,” in film and on Broadway; and, for Ms. Rudolph, 43, at the Groundlings, in movies like “Bridesmaids” and a previous 2014 variety special, “The Maya Rudolph Show.”

While it pays homage to classic variety shows of the past, “Maya & Marty” is also hoping to capitalize on the spontaneous and playful dynamic between Ms. Rudolph and Mr. Short. Here are edited excerpts from an interview with them.

MARTIN SHORT How are you today?

MAYA RUDOLPH A little tired. I was just packing, because I’m heading from here to the airport.

SHORT Why are you tired?

RUDOLPH Life.

SHORT Oh yeah. I know, it’s cumulative. Did you go to the party last night?

RUDOLPH No, I did not go to the party last night, did you?

SHORT Yes I did.

RUDOLPH And?

SHORT [Gets very close to Maya’s face] BOOM-BAH, BOOM-BAH, OOM-BAH, OOM-BAH, OOM. That was that.

My first question was going to be, do you feel like there’s chemistry between you two?

RUDOLPH Nope.

SHORT There’s no chemistry, and there’s a kind of underlying resentment.

RUDOLPH Are you telling me that it’s hard for you to find chemistry with others? Because you’re very chemical, um ——

SHORT Dependent?

RUDOLPH No! You’re easy to love.

SHORT Awww. [to reporter] Headline!

You have just a couple of weeks before your debut. Does the show feel ready?

SHORT It’s ramping up. We did a test show last week, and that made everyone feel like: Ohhhh. There could be a show here. It felt very loose, and that’s what you’re always trying to achieve.

RUDOLPH There’s something about that studio. I was watching an old Letterman “Late Night” — it’s the studio that we’re in, and it’s amazing to be in that same space and recognize all the corners, nooks and crannies but know that you’re mounting something new.

SHORT That whole floor is just hilarious. I was walking in the hallway, and there was one 35-year-old guy who just wanted to tell me what I had meant to him. He was doing a thing on Fallon, and he was dressed like a baby, in a diaper, with a sailor hat. And I might have been dressed as a rabbit. So he wasn’t even aware that he looked odd.

RUDOLPH It’s crazy to think about all that is going on in this building at one time. I’m just surprised that the 3,000th person that plugs in a hair dryer doesn’t bring the whole place down.

How did that sketch at the “S.N.L” anniversary show come about?

SHORT We had conceived that idea with [the composer] Marc Shaiman and Fred Armisen. But throughout that process, Maya and I found that we had a natural rapport. We’d break into characters or little improvs and then snap out of it, with a great deal of ease. Sometimes you meet people, and you kind of go ——

RUDOLPH Is it you? Wait it’s you! [they begin feeling each other’s faces] Father?

SHORT If I only could see. If this damn acid accident hadn’t happened, I’d see your face.

RUDOLPH Your hand smells so good. What is that, a cream? A lotion? A salve?

SHORT Keep guessing. [laughs]

Despite being from different generations of comedy history, do you still feel like peers?

RUDOLPH I grew up on Marty. When I was a kid, I wanted to be Gilda Radner. But he was dating Gilda Radner. That’s the difference. But we have a comedy fraternity, and there’s no age. We’re brothers and sisters.

SHORT I’m 66 years old. I could easily, a year ago, symbolically, at 65, have said, [singing] “Excuse me while I disappear…” The epitaph’s kind of written. But this was something that was uniquely fascinating. You never know, going in, what the end result’s going to be. But you do know if the company you’re keeping makes you feel happy.

Did you do any other bonding exercises before starting work on the show?

SHORT Maya and Paul [Thomas Anderson, her partner] and their 400 children came up to my cottage, north of Toronto, with some writers. We hung out for about five days, had dinners. There’s different buildings and properties ——

RUDOLPH Like he said, a little cottage.

SHORT All right, an estate. This is the place where Fergie and Prince Andrew honeymooned. We Canadians call it a cottage.

RUDOLPH Listen, this guy has his own stamp.

SHORT It’s true. By the way, I have my own coin.

Are you taking any inspiration from classic variety shows of the past?

SHORT I was looking at Sonny and Cher and thinking, all they did was insult each other. But people knew they were married, so it was O.K. Steve Martin and I have this show together, and all we do is insult each other. No one questions whether we like each other, because they know it’s a joke. And we’re married, too.

RUDOLPH I watched “Saturday Night Live” with my parents. “The Muppet Show” was a big one for me, and “The Carol Burnett Show” was another staple. Everyone seemed to have Shields and Yarnell, the mimes. We thought they were hilarious, and we re-enacted them all the time at home.

SHORT On “SCTV,” if we were doing a bad list of guests coming up, it would be, “From Shields and Yarnell: Shields.” Just Shields. They couldn’t get them both.

How will you distinguish your show from “Saturday Night Live,” or the many other topical comedy programs out there?

RUDOLPH If there’s something going on politically, I tune into “S.N.L.” This is a variety show, in the performance aspect. It isn’t the place to get a take on the news. It’s an extension of what we’ve been doing all these years, and a place for multiple guests to come. We have different friends who do different things — people we love, people who are just amazing performers. That allows it to feel more like a party.

SHORT We’re trying to explore the parameters of what you can do, whether it’s showing a scene from a Broadway show, or having a stand-up or having someone sing. Still, cut to Show 5: “What do you mean, Marty’s in Bellevue? He was institutionalized last night?” Uh-huh. Running naked around the Waldorf Towers.


