


Founders Day: In the middle of a weird primary season, one secondary weirdness has surfaced on the nonfiction lists — after a flurry last fall, the usual campaign books are nowhere in sight. That’s not to say political books aren’t selling. But instead of history in the making, readers are ­opting for history already made. This week, ­Lin-Manuel Miranda’s “Hamilton: The Revolution” — written with Jeremy McCarter, it’s a look at Miranda’s hit musical about Alexander Hamilton — enters the hardcover nonfiction list at No. 1. At the same time, Ron Chernow’s 2004 biography “Alexander Hamilton,” which inspired the musical, is No. 2 in its 27th week on the paperback list. And a new biography of Thomas Jefferson, “ ‘Most Blessed of the Patriarchs,’ ” by Annette Gordon-Reed and Peter S. Onuf, enters the hardcover list at No. 16. Are readers turning to these books for context, as a reprieve or for some other reason entirely? I asked Gordon-Reed what she thought. “Peter and I have talked a lot about the strangeness of this political season,” she replied. “So many of the bizarre things that have happened raise questions about the fundamental nature of democracy in the United States. Could this have been our destination all along? Maybe people are now, even more than usual, feeling the need to look at how it all got started and are seeking out books that may give them a clue. The cliché about not being able to know where you’re going until you know where you’ve been may be in operation here. In the face of uncertainty about the future, people are looking to the past.”

Drunken Spa Girls: Nora Roberts tops the hardcover fiction list with a new romantic suspense novel, “The Obsession.” For all of her hard work — Roberts has written some 200 romances under her own name and is also prolific as the crime novelist J. D. Robb — she still finds time to play. “It began, of course, with packing,” she wrote on her blog recently: “A couple cases of champagne, a big bag o’ fabulous prizes, a scoreboard, books and many other necessary goodies for a week of fun with girls. . . . This is Drunken Spa Girls Week.” Every spring, Roberts and her friends gather for a week of massages, charades, video games and lots of adult beverages. “I treasure my circle of women, their humor, their wisdom, their eccentricities,” she wrote. “My fabulous prizes from this week are, as always, the memories and the moments we made and shared.”

Copy That: Dominic Smith’s art novel, “The Last Painting of Sara de Vos,” about a forged Dutch masterpiece, is new on the hardcover fiction list at No. 16. “The presence of forgeries probably dates back to the earliest forms of art,” Smith said in an email. “The fake keeps us fascinated, I think, because of its power to entice and deceive. To discover that a beloved painting or sculpture is a fraud is to realize that one has fallen in love with an impostor.”


