


BERLIN — A lawmaker from Chancellor Angela Merkel’s party stunned his colleagues on Thursday when he took to the floor of the German Parliament to repeat a vulgar accusation that the president of Turkey has a venereal disease, perhaps contracted while having sex with goats.

“Unbelievable,” murmured one surprised lawmaker in the chamber when Detlef Seif, a member of the Christian Democratic Union, read a satirical poem about President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

The poem created a diplomatic firestorm when its author, the German comedian Jan Böhmermann, recited it on his national television show in March.

It so enraged Mr. Erdogan, who has sought to silence his critics at home and challenge them abroad, that he demanded Mr. Böhmermann be prosecuted under an obscure German law that makes it a crime to insult a foreign leader.

Raising the Turkish president’s ire was Mr. Böhmermann’s intent. But Mr. Seif, 53, meant no offense when he recited the poem Thursday on the floor of the Bundestag, inadvertently entering the profane text into Germany’s permanent public record.

Mr. Seif said he was so disgusted by the content of the poem — which, among other insults, accuses Mr. Erdogan of pedophilia and bestiality — that he wanted to remind his colleagues just how offensive it was.

“I really didn’t want to do this, but I read this out to you so that one knows what actually was said here,” Mr. Seif said.

“A person’s honor is clearly under attack here,” he added, “and justice must decide if this kind of language is still covered by freedom of expression and press. But put yourselves in the shoes of Erdogan and think about it: How would you feel about it yourself?”

Unlike Mr. Böhmermann, Mr. Seif is legally protected from prosecution should Mr. Erdogan again feel aggrieved by another recitation of the satirical poem.

But Mr. Böhmermann insisted, sarcastically, that Mr. Seif be held to the same standards.

“I ask that the parliamentary immunity of CDU MP Detlef Seif be lifted for prosecution under paragraph 103 of the penal code,” Mr. Böhmermann wrote on Twitter.

He also shared his caustic surprise at Mr. Seif’s earnest repetition of his comedic provocation.

Renate Künast, a lawmaker from the Green Party, told Mr. Seif that she “felt very embarrassed for this house that you read out the text.”

Another lawmaker, Christian Flisek of the Social Democrats, said that Mr. Seif’s recitation was provocative and unnecessary.

Last month, Mrs. Merkel announced she would allow the prosecution against Mr. Böhmermann to go ahead, but added that her government would seek to repeal the 1871 law that she said was inconsistent with modern Germany’s commitment to free speech.


