


Muhammad Ali was near the end of his boxing career when he filmed commercials for d-Con, the pesticide maker, that showed what a delightful spokesman he was — and could have been for a long time.

“I can whup anything on two legs,” he declared to the camera. “But even me, the Greatest, needs help beating things with six legs. I mean roaches.”

But Parkinson’s disease robbed him of his ability to actively endorse products, so that by 1997, when he shot a poignant Pizza Hut commercial with his former trainer Angelo Dundee, he communicated with only a few gestures.

Ali’s increasing inability to move with his former grace or speak with his onetime loquaciousness did not bother the entrepreneur Robert F. X. Sillerman. In 2006, he paid $50 million for 80 percent of Ali’s G.O.A.T. (Greatest of All Time) company to control Ali’s name, image, likeness and publicity.

Sillerman vowed to jump-start the Ali brand — which he thought to be woefully underused — without bothering him.

“It is not our plan to involve him in any way personally,” he said then.

And that is how Ali’s image has been handled since, as the rights acquired by Sillerman’s CKX company were then bought by the private equity firm Apollo Global Management and then by the Authentic Brands Group in 2013.

To evoke Ali’s image in their marketing, companies have been using archival footage, photos, audio and his sayings. In a recent Porsche commercial with Maria Sharapova and Magnus Carlsen, the world chess champion, computer-generated special effects superimposed Ali’s head on the actors playing him in the ring.

Ira Mayer, a consultant to licensing companies, said Ali’s image had been used as if it were part of an estate, even while he was alive. In that way, he has been preserved at his most vibrant, even as he was seen publicly in his decline.

Ali’s death this month, and with it an extraordinary outpouring of coverage, will probably increase his value to companies that want to link their products to him.

“It has a salutary effect on the immediate future,” Mayer said.

As with any boxer whose lucrative fighting career comes to an end, Ali’s earning power after his final bout was uncertain. He was generous to too many people and not always shrewd about his dealmaking, which began to change after his marriage to Lonnie Williams in 1986.

“There was a time prior to Lonnie where Muhammad could walk from one end of the airport to another and he would have six deals in his pocket,” said Ron DiNicola, Ali’s longtime lawyer. “Some he’d sign. Some he didn’t. That changed dramatically when Lonnie took the reins and we instituted controls that allowed for the maturation of the Muhammad Ali business.”

Ali missed out on the enormous pay-per-view jackpots enjoyed by boxers like Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Oscar De La Hoya, but he avoided the financial pitfalls that pushed Mike Tyson into bankruptcy.

As big a name as Ali was, it was one of his fallen opponents, George Foreman, who cashed in first by refashioning his formerly sour persona into that of a jolly endorser of multiple products. In 1999, Foreman landed a deal worth $137.5 million from the maker of the Lean Mean Fat-Reducing Grilling Machine that he had promoted so effectively in a series of commercials.

Sillerman recognized Ali’s value with a less spectacular agreement and combined it in CKX with two previous deals for iconic brands: 85 percent of Elvis Presley Enterprises and the company that owned “American Idol.”

“There was a movement at the time for celebrities and recording artists to collateralize their future income capacity,” DiNicola said. “David Bowie was one of the first to go to Wall Street. For Muhammad, this was smart business.”

Once Ali’s rights moved to Authentic Brands, the company sweetened the deal for the Alis. In addition to a 20 percent cut from each deal, the Alis also received a stake in Authentic Brands, whose holdings include the estate of Marilyn Monroe, a chunk of Shaquille O’Neal’s future income, and management of Michael Jackson’s brand.

“We cut a new deal with the family that involves part of A.B.G.,” said Jamie Salter, the chief executive. “So whatever we do, it always benefits the family.”

The company has consulted with the Alis, largely Lonnie, about the deals it plans to make. “We explain everything to her, and she’s never said no,” said Nick Woodhouse, the president of Authentic Brands. However, Lonnie did have early hesitations about starting a Twitter feed in her husband’s name, he said.

“She didn’t want someone speaking as Muhammad,” Woodhouse said. “And we said, ‘One of Muhammad’s great talents was communicating to people, and digital is the way to do it.’ ”

The account has 868,000 followers and is augmented by archival photos and his sayings.

Lonnie Ali was unavailable for comment.

There is no way to determine precisely what the Alis have earned over the last decade, besides the initial $50 million payout. Public filings by CKX show that its Ali revenues did not appear to exceed $6 million annually.

Forbes magazine’s annual listing of the highest-paid retired athletes — which ranks Michael Jordan No. 1 this year, with $110 million — has never listed Ali because it “did not have enough clarity” on his earnings, a spokeswoman said.

Authentic Brands is privately held, so Salter spoke only generally about the growth of Ali-related revenue since 2013.

“Where we are today is four to five times bigger than it was three years ago,” Salter said. “And the potential is probably another five to six times the size of what it is today.”

Since taking control of Ali’s licensing rights, the company has made deals with Porsche; Under Armour; Toyota; Roots of Fight, an apparel maker with a strong focus on fighters; and Supreme, which is selling a limited edition of hoodies and T-shirts using a Polaroid shot taken by Andy Warhol. An Ali exhibition of photos, footage and memorabilia is on display at the O2 arena in London.

For Under Armour — whose stable of athletes includes Stephen Curry — producing T-shirts, tops, shoes, shorts and warm-up jackets that evoke Ali’s past is a bet on linking his deep heritage to the company’s thriving business. Expectations are, of course, more modest for Ali than for Curry, whose shoes have become the sort of hot product that they are drastically lifting Under Armour’s business.

“Its not a deal around building a $100 million Ali business but a way to connect our brand to the stories about the most famous athlete of all time,” said Glenn Silbert, a senior vice president of Under Armour. “If he were just a legacy connected to a long-gone demographic, this would be harder to do. But he connects to young, middle-aged and old. Nobody embodies what he embodied.”

Authentic Brands is seeking deals in categories like timepieces, airlines, energy drinks, financial services and computers. A Broadway show is possible, as is an Ali hotel that was once envisioned by Sillerman until the recession upended real estate.

“Think of it as an Ali destination,” Woodhouse said, musing over the possibilities. “It would be fitness-based, with a boxing gym. It would have a miniature Ali Center to spread his message. You could rent the Thrilla in Manila room and when you’d pick up the phone, you’d hear, `I am the greatest.’ ”


