


When Angela Collins and her partner wanted to have a child, they reached out to a sperm bank in Georgia to look for potential donors. They thought they had found the perfect match in Donor 9623, described as a man with an I.Q. of 160 who was healthy and working toward his Ph.D.

But in 2014, about seven years after Ms. Collins gave birth to their son, she and her partner, Elizabeth Hanson, made an upsetting discovery after learning the man’s identity through a donor sibling group. The donor had a history of mental illness and a criminal record, and had exaggerated his educational accomplishments, they say.

“It was like a lead ball went to the bottom of our stomach for both my partner and I,” Ms. Collins said in a radio interview last week with “As It Happens” on the Canadian network CBC.

She added, “We know nobody is perfect, but we didn’t sign up to choose knowingly that our donor had schizophrenia.”

Ms. Collins and Ms. Hanson, who live in Port Hope, Ontario, about 70 miles east of Toronto, were among three families who filed lawsuits in Ontario Superior Court this month accusing the sperm bank, Xytex Corp., in Augusta, Ga., of misleading them about the donor. The suit says the company failed to describe him accurately or disclose that he had a mental illness and a criminal record.

The three lawsuits are the first in an expanding group of cases that go to the heart of privacy and health issues as more would-be parents — many of them single or in same-sex partnerships — seek donors to help them conceive, said Nancy Hersh, a lawyer in San Francisco who is representing Ms. Collins and the other families.

“This is a huge problem,” Ms. Hersh said in a telephone interview. “Lots of people will avail themselves of sperm banks, and it is important that the public will be educated about the risks. It is a public health issue.”

Ms. Hersh said at least a dozen other American, Canadian and British families were planning lawsuits related to Donor 9623. The 15 families she represents have conceived 23 children using the donor’s sperm, all with “a genetic predisposition to schizophrenia, which nobody knew at the time they purchased his sperm.”

The three lawsuits are each seeking more than 4 million Canadian dollars (about $3 million in United States currency) in damages, partly to provide support and pre-emptive care for children the families fear will be affected by mental illness.

A lawyer for Xytex, Ted Lavender, said he would not comment on the case. But he noted that in October, a county judge in Georgia tossed out a similar claim by Ms. Collins and her partner.

“Making unfounded allegations in the court of public opinion requires no actual proof at all, but merely the word of the very lawyers and litigants who already failed in a court of law,” he said in an email.

In 2015, Xytex’s president, Kevin M. O’Brien, defended the company’s procedures.

“In this case, the donor underwent a standard medical exam and provided extensive personal and health information,” he said in a statement. “He reported a good health history and stated in his application that he had no physical or medical impairments. This information was passed on to the couple, who were clearly informed the representations were reported by the donor and were not verified by Xytex.”

The lawsuits filed in Canada also name as defendants Outreach Health Services, a Canadian fertility clinic, and unnamed Xytex employees. They quote the donor as saying in interviews that he had never been asked for medical records or for information about his mental health or criminal history. He said he had lied about having college degrees.

The lawsuits said the donor committed a burglary in 2005 and spent eight months in custody. A statement from Cobb County Superior Court said the conviction was cleared in 2014 under the state’s First Offender Act.

Ms. Collins told CBC that she had found out about the man’s background when Xytex included his name and contact information in an email sent around as part of a donor sibling registry, and parents on the list started digging for information about him out of curiosity. Ms. Collins said that by searching public records and other verified information about him, she had disproved some of the company’s advertised claims.

“Had they done that, we wouldn’t be here today,” she said. “There needs to be measures in place by these companies to make sure that the people that are coming through the door are safe options for donor-conceived children.”

But Ms. Collins told CBC that she would not object if her son wanted to meet the man.

“He is not a bad man; he is a person who has an illness,” she said. “He helped to create the love of my life.”


