


MINNEAPOLIS — When he left Goldman Sachs to join the Treasury Department in 2006, Neel Kashkari held a worldview that played to type.

“I was a free-market ideologue,” he said.

Then came a huge, sudden financial crisis, and the free-market ideologue found himself sending bailouts to Wall Street in hopes of averting a second Great Depression. Later, Mr. Kashkari ran an improbable (and unsuccessful) race for governor of California, in which he felt up close the fear, anxiety and anger of financially squeezed voters.

Now president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Mr. Kashkari is no longer a free-market ideologue.

“Maybe a humbled pragmatist,” he said. “Markets can make mistakes, and sometimes those mistakes can be incredibly costly.”

That’s why Mr. Kashkari these days sounds a little like Bernie Sanders, the Democratic presidential candidate. He, too, believes that the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul enacted under President Obama didn’t go far enough — and that the biggest banks may need to be broken up.

That led him to create the “Ending Too Big to Fail” initiative. It hasn’t settled on recommendations for reducing the risk that bailouts would be needed during the next financial crisis, whenever it occurs, but the initiative has unsettled and confused some erstwhile Republican allies.

“I’ve had people call me up and say, ‘What the hell are you doing?’ — friends of mine,” he said with a grin.

His answer, grounded in those harrowing days at the Treasury Department: “We’re supposed to look out for big risks.”

Mr. Kashkari fears the financial sector has grown too large as a share of the economy as middle-class incomes have stagnated, but the shift in Mr. Kashkari’s outlook goes only so far.

He defends the sector’s essential role in the efficient “allocation of capital” and rejects Mr. Sanders’s flamboyant assertion that “the business model of Wall Street is fraud.”

The central cause of the 2008 crisis, he argues, was not fraud but rather “mass delusion” among lenders, borrowers and investors that home prices would keep rising. He thinks some executives should have gone to prison for misrepresenting some of the mortgage-backed securities they sold but faults current laws for making convictions too difficult.

He isn’t persuaded by arguments for a national increase in the minimum wage to $15 an hour, saying that’s best left for the states to decide. He doubts the effectiveness of trying to engineer higher pay for workers through mechanisms like the stock grants or profit incentives that top executives command. He questions whether shifting the way in which Wall Street pays its executives can “change the culture” and protect Main Street.

The most effective steps government can take to make average Americans wealthier, he said, are investing in education and infrastructure.

The kind of bank breakups that Mr. Kashkari is exploring could come at a cost. Ben S. Bernanke, the former Fed chairman, cautioned at a conference organized by the Minneapolis Fed this week that much smaller Wall Street firms might mean “less efficiency” and “fewer services at higher cost.”

Mr. Bernanke prefers giving time to Dodd-Frank, which calls for the largest institutions to prepare bankruptcy plans, to gauge its adequacy. Regulators recently directed five big banks to revise their so-called living wills.

Mr. Kashkari is reviewing other options besides breakups. They include requiring banks to hold much larger capital cushions as insurance against failure, or taxing the use of “leverage” (borrowed money) to increase investment returns.

Fed colleagues have had mixed reactions to his initiative, casting doubt on whether his recommendations will go anywhere once he makes them later this year. Coaxing a gridlocked Congress to engage in advance planning has become an event almost as rare as financial crises themselves.

What won’t deter him, Mr. Kashkari insists, are objections from those in the free-market circles he once traveled in while on Wall Street or as part of the George W. Bush administration.

“If that means people are going to be unhappy with me, that’s too bad,” he said. “I’ve long since passed the need to be loved.”


