


After being bombarded by the Penguins, after skating off the ice to boos, after being pulled from a playoff game at home, Henrik Lundqvist brooded at the end of the Rangers’ bench. He traded his goalie mask for a cap, his stoicism for a scowl. He was too enraged to even remove his blocker, too detached to watch the two-on-one unspooling right in front of him.

The Rangers are supposed to hold the advantage in goal most nights when Lundqvist plays, but especially in this series, with Pittsburgh’s starter, Marc-Andre Fleury, sidelined by a concussion. Fleury’s unavailability has indeed illuminated an edge at the position — for the Penguins, who lead the series three games to one.

This has been an odd little playoffs so far.

The goalies with pedigrees, with their names engraved on the Vezina Trophy and the Stanley Cup, are in danger of exiting soon, while less accomplished netminders are preserving their teams’ survival.

Out West, the two-time Cup winner Jonathan Quick of the Kings is lagging behind the Sharks’ Martin Jones, who backed him up last season. One more misstep by the Blackhawks and the Kings, perennial favorites who have represented the Western Conference in the last four Cup finals, will send them careening out of the first round. In the East, as Braden Holtby dominates for the Capitals and Ben Bishop for the Lightning, Lundqvist is being outplayed by a 21-year-old rookie who, until Tuesday, had never appeared in the postseason.

Since then, that rookie, Matt Murray, has saved 47 of 48 shots, including all 31 in Game 4 of their Eastern Conference quarterfinal Thursday, when he shoved the Rangers toward the abyss in a 5-0 victory that was more lopsided than the score suggested.

Two days after winning his first playoff game, Murray recorded his first postseason shutout, and afterward, he was asked what it’s like to be him. He chuckled.

“That’s a weird question,” he said.

To be Murray means standing behind a lectern at a news conference in his socks, with his cap backward and a towel draped around his neck. It means radiating a preternatural calmness that permeates the locker room. It means anticipating puck movement so astutely, surveying the play so precisely, that he always squares up the shooter.

“He has a quiet confidence,” Coach Mike Sullivan said. “He knows he’s good.”

In Fleury, Murray and the third-stringer Jeff Zatkoff, who started the first two games of this series while Murray recovered from a concussion sustained in the regular-season finale, Sullivan has three viable options. He has three goalies he trusts.

It is a luxury, an indulgence, but also a necessity. Whether compelled by injury or ineffectiveness, more coaches seem willing in these playoffs to make changes in goal, and their teams are enduring, or thriving, as a result.

Antti Niemi made his 2016 postseason debut for the Stars in Game 4, swiping an away victory to send the Wild to the brink of elimination.

Since replacing Steve Mason with Michael Neuvirth after losing the first three games against Washington, the Flyers have won two straight to climb back into the series.

The Ducks, after losing their first two games to the Predators with John Gibson in net, switched to Frederik Andersen, who responded by saving 57 of 58 shots to help Anaheim even the series at two games apiece.

Come playoff time, teams’ goalie situations are usually set: The entrenched starter starts and the backup backs up, and rarely are the roles reversed. Already this postseason, six teams have used more than one goalie, and the Penguins could wind up deploying more than two, Fleury’s health permitting.

The Penguins have not announced their plans for Game 5 on Saturday in Pittsburgh, but Murray factors into them. Expecting to face more than the 17 shots he saw in Game 3, Murray blocked that many through two periods Thursday — including an excellent opportunity, a one-timed rebound by Eric Staal, a fellow native of Thunder Bay, Ontario — before completing his masterpiece.

“He’s been thrown into a lot of new situations at a young age, with a lot of pressure,” center Sidney Crosby said. “And I think even the way he plays, it almost looks like it’s part of his game.”

Murray called it “a conscious effort” to maintain his equanimity, a process he has been refining since Pittsburgh drafted him in the third round in 2012, the 10th goalie chosen. He dominated the American Hockey League, compiling the longest shutout streak in league history — 304 minutes 11 seconds — before earning a promotion this season, supplanting Zatkoff as Fleury’s backup.

Eventually, Murray could become Fleury’s successor, though that topic is too hypothetical, too distant, for him to wonder about. He permitted himself to acknowledge that the past few days have been “exciting, obviously” and “pretty cool” and “pretty emotional,” but said he was able to recalibrate his focus within minutes of the game ending.

One more victory, and he will dismiss Lundqvist, the Rangers and the notion of their perceived superiority in goal.

With Fleury, the Penguins were contenders. Without him? Not a thing has changed.


