


Like many orchestras, the Utah Symphony struggled during the Great Recession. But as it returns to Carnegie Hall on Friday for the first time in decades, it is an ensemble on the upswing, with rising ticket sales, new players and an energetic music director, Thierry Fischer.

Among the many factors that allowed the orchestra to rebound was something that, while common elsewhere in the world, is unusual among American groups: significant state and local aid.

The Utah Symphony received more than $4 million in government support in the year ended Aug. 31, 2015, according to its financial statements, making up over 18 percent of its unrestricted operating revenue of $22 million. That is the highest level of public support among the 21 biggest orchestras in the nation, which average 2.7 percent the year before, according to the League of American Orchestras.

“It’s tremendous,” Patricia A. Richards, the orchestra’s interim president and chief executive, said in an interview. Along with extra private support, the public aid helped the orchestra balance its budget after weathering a rocky past decade, in which its precarious finances were further undone by the economic downturn, forcing it, like other ensembles, to make cuts and seek concessions from its union musicians.

While the orchestra has a dedicated core of donors and board members who support it with private philanthropy, and it has seen both ticket sales and (more unusually these days) subscription sales rise recently, the government aid has played an important role. To some extent, public support is in its DNA: The orchestra, which is celebrating its 75th anniversary, was founded during the Great Depression as a Works Progress Administration endeavor. It was initially called the Utah State Symphony Orchestra.

These days, local aid comes from Salt Lake County’s Zoo, Arts and Parks tax, a sales tax of a penny on every $10 spent, which supports a variety of cultural and recreational organizations — and which was renewed by county residents in 2014 with 77 percent of the vote.

“It’s a very popular program,” Ms. Richards said. “We feel very good about it because we know the public wants us to do these things.”

State education aid pays for an intensive outreach program that offers concerts for students at Abravanel Hall, the orchestra’s home in Salt Lake City, and elsewhere, and sends smaller groups of musicians to visit every school district in the state every few years. The longstanding program allows the orchestra, which merged with the Utah Opera in 2002, to provide year-round employment for its musicians. Mr. Fischer said that the educational activities accounted for roughly a third of their time at work.

Other orchestras, which act in their cities as important civic institutions and provide educational services, receive significant public support, too. After Utah, the League of American Orchestras said the ensembles getting the largest portions of their budgets in public aid were the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra (10 percent) and the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra (6.7 percent). (In Europe, government funds can account for between a quarter and, in some places, three-quarters of orchestras’ revenues, though aid in many places has been frozen or cut since the economic downturn.)

The Utah Symphony has been rebuilding under Mr. Fischer, who was appointed music director in 2009. He has hired more than 30 musicians, a change that has not been without tensions, and recently named a new concertmaster, Madeline Adkins. The ensemble is wrapping up a Mahler cycle and released a recording of that composer’s First Symphony last year, following it a few weeks ago with an album of works it commissioned by Augusta Read Thomas, Andrew Norman and Nico Muhly. Friday’s concert at Carnegie includes the New York premiere of Mr. Norman’s percussion concerto “Switch.”

“More and more, I feel that people come to the concert almost whatever we program,” Mr. Fischer said, “because they know and they trust that it’s going to excite them.”

The orchestra has also expanded its horizons geographically. In 2014, it went on what it called the Mighty 5 tour, giving free outdoor concerts in Utah’s national parks. Ms. Richards recalled a concert near Capitol Reef National Park in Wayne County, which has a population of about 2,700 people. “There were 1,100 people at the concert,” she said. “It was wonderful.”

Now, Ms. Richards said, the orchestra is looking forward to reaching a different audience at Carnegie. “We would like people outside Utah to see what we’ve been doing,” she said.


