


Noah Syndergaard seldom looks uncomfortable on the field. He is a 6-foot-6, stone-faced intimidator who threw his first pitch in the 2015 World Series toward an opponent’s head.

But even the most tyrannical pitchers have weaknesses. Last Monday, the Cincinnati Reds took note of Syndergaard’s dawdling delivery with runners on base and stole five bases, uncovering a soft spot in what was previously perceived as an ironclad makeup.

On Sunday, the San Francisco Giants took the few opportunities afforded them to exploit the same deficiency and went on to end the Mets’ eight-game winning streak with a 6-1 victory in a cold, windy and wet affair at Citi Field.

A light but steady rain kept many fans in the announced crowd of 39,077 under cover inside the stadium or snug at home. Add in the subpar outing by Syndergaard, and his eagerly awaited duel with the Giants ace Madison Bumgarner played out on a somber note.

“The last two starts, I haven’t felt very comfortable on the mound mechanically, just allowing base runners to get better jumps on me, and I’ve been slower toward home plate,” Syndergaard said. “It’s a slight mechanical issue I’m still trying to work on.”

The Giants were aware of Syndergaard’s leisurely delivery. Matt Duffy said before the game that they scouted charts of how long it took Syndergaard to throw the ball to home plate.

In the fourth inning, Duffy turned his studies into action after hitting a one-out single. With Buster Posey batting, Duffy attempted his first stolen base of the year, successfully taking second. Posey then singled, moving him to third.

With runners now on first and third, the Giants continued to toy with Syndergaard’s composure. Posey and Duffy got advantageous jumps on Brandon Belt’s ground ball to second base. Instead of trying to turn an inning-ending double play, Neil Walker made the only feasible play, throwing to first while Duffy crossed the plate with the game’s first run.

“It’s big,” Duffy said of his effort to understand Syndergaard’s pace. “Anytime you’re facing a top-end arm like that, you’ve got to try to take advantage of any opportunities he’s going to give you.”

Hunter Pence followed Belt’s R.B.I. with a two-run homer.

For Syndergaard, it was his first loss of the season after two victories. He was outdueled by Bumgarner, who pitched six scoreless innings, striking out seven. Bumgarner (3-2) is 4-0 in four career starts at Citi Field, allowing two earned runs in 29 innings.

Mets Manager Terry Collins had scheduled David Wright’s day off for Saturday to make sure he could face Bumgarner. Walker described the two pitchers with a variety of compliments, calling them “aces,” “horses” and “studs.”

For all of Syndergaard’s talent and his emergence as one of the top pitchers in April, Bumgarner’s résumé is incomparable, particularly in the postseason: He was the most valuable player of the 2014 World Series, and he owns a 4-0 record with a 0.25 earned run average during three World Series championship runs with the Giants.

Bumgarner was also vastly more successful stranding base runners on Sunday. The Mets left nine on base against him. Their best scoring chance came in the sixth, when they loaded the bases with two outs. But Asdrubal Cabrera, pinch-hitting for Hansel Robles, who had replaced Syndergaard, struck out looking on a fastball pristinely placed on the inside corner.

Over all, the Giants were 3 for 3 on stolen-base attempts against Syndergaard. Brandon Crawford also stole his first base of the season, in the third inning.

Twelve of 13 base runners have been successful stealing against Syndergaard this season, including all nine at second base. In the sixth, Duffy again picked up a one-out single, stole second and scored on Pence’s third R.B.I., a single to right field.

Syndergaard allowed four runs in five and two-thirds innings. He struck out six batters, the first time in eight consecutive starts that he did not strike out at least eight.

After the game, Collins suggested that Syndergaard might need to use a slide step when pitching from the stretch.

“You can’t be that slow to the plate,” Collins said. “You’ve got to change the pace, give the runner something different to look at. We got to get better at it.”

Syndergaard seemed reluctant to fully embrace adding the move to his repertory. Collins did not believe it would take long to incorporate, and thought Bumgarner presented a prime example of how it can work effectively.

“You saw Bumgarner today — he’s slide-stepping and slide-stepping, and all of a sudden he’d give you a big leg kick, the slow delivery,” Collins said. “If you disrupt the timing of the base runner, that’s the difference. It’s not something he has to use every pitch, it’s just something that the base runner has to know he has and that he will use and it will slow them down a little bit.”

Talking about his mechanics, Syndergaard later explained:

“It just all reflects off my leg kick. Too slow with that, causing me to drag a little bit. Something easily fixable.”

Three years ago, Bumgarner, a pitcher whom Syndergaard is often compared to, thought it was a necessity to learn a slide step when he felt he was allowing too many stolen bases.

“You’ve got to do it, I think,” Bumgarner said. “It’s no fun when you’re giving guys 90 feet.”


