


When California officials announced an end to restrictions on urban water use, they cited the recent wet winter as one reason. El Niño, the climate pattern that brought a succession of storms to Northern California, had given the state a reprieve from its water woes, they said.

Those storms left a mountain snowpack that, while ordinary by historical standards, far exceeded the meager accumulations of 2015. The healthy snowpack — which will provide about one-third of the state’s water as it melts this spring — and successful efforts to sharply reduce water use gave officials enough confidence to suspend the restrictions that had been imposed last April.

At the same time, they acknowledged that California’s five-year drought was far from over, especially in Southern California, where El Niño did not have much of an impact. They kept agricultural restrictions in place and said they could impose new statewide curbs if drier-than-normal conditions returned.

The odds of that happening would appear to be strong, as signaled by two announcements that occurred around the same time as California’s decision to lift the water restrictions.

One, the news that the water level at Lake Mead, the huge reservoir on the Colorado River, has reached a historical low, suggested that long-term problems for the water supply in California related to a warming climate have not changed. The other suggested that there is a potential short-term challenge ahead, in the form of La Niña.

This month, forecasters with the federal Climate Prediction Center and the International Research Institute for Climate and Society issued their latest seasonal outlook, saying that El Niño was coming to an end and that the odds now favored the development of La Niña by the fall.

“Our models are pretty much in agreement — over the next several months they are really flipping us into a La Niña,” said Mike Halpert, the deputy director of the Climate Prediction Center, which is part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

El Niño and La Niña are two sides of the same story, one that involves atmospheric pressure, prevailing winds and sea surface temperatures in the equatorial Pacific.

When average water temperatures in the eastern Pacific rise by a certain amount above normal, forecasters declare an El Niño. Eventually, though, the water begins to cool, which is what is happening now.

Mr. Halpert and his colleagues say as of now there is a 75 percent possibility that water temperatures will fall far enough by the end of summer to result in La Niña.

As with El Niño, the jet streams that circle the planet would be affected, though in different ways. That in turn would affect weather in North America and around the world.

Just as with El Niño, because there are many other variables that affect the weather, there are no certainties of specific La Niña-related effects in specific locales.

But typically, Mr. Halpert said, La Niña brings wet weather to the Pacific Northwest and Ohio Valley and drier-than-average conditions across the southern part of the country. (Forecasters are making no predictions about effects in the Northeast.)

For California, Mr. Halpert said, La Niña could mean another dry winter in the south, while the far northern part of the state could be slightly wetter than normal. Because winter is when California gets nearly all of its precipitation, that could put more pressure on water supplies.

On the day of California’s announcement, the federal Bureau of Reclamation reported that the level of Lake Mead, which stretches across the Nevada desert behind Hoover Dam, was slightly more than 1,074 feet above sea level.

That is the lowest level since the dam was filled in the 1930s, and is 150 feet below the level when the reservoir was last full, in 1983.

Put another way, Lake Mead, part of the Colorado River system that supplies water to California and six other Western states, is now at 37 percent of capacity.

The lake level is something of an arbitrary milestone — it can and will be raised later this year by increasing releases from Lake Powell, upstream on the Colorado. That will help avoid triggering reductions in the amount of water allotted to Arizona and Nevada.

But the historic low is another symbol of the devastating drought that has affected the Rocky Mountain basin for a decade and a half, said Jonathan Overpeck, a director of the Institute for the Environment at the University of Arizona.

And if the drought continues, the lake level could fall even farther, potentially triggering cutbacks to California’s annual allotment of 4.4 million acre-feet, or about 10 percent of the water the state uses in a year.

The Rocky Mountain basin has been through droughts before, Dr. Overpeck said, but this one is different. Previous droughts were marked by lower-than-normal precipitation, he said, but with this one, “the precipitation hasn’t been that low.”

“But it’s been much warmer than normal,” he said. “This is what I like to call a hot drought, or a climate-change drought. And there’s going to be more and more of them in the future.”

Warmer temperatures have the same effect in the Rockies as they do in the Sierra Nevada. They reduce snowpack because more precipitation falls as rain rather than snow, and snow accumulates at higher elevations than before, meaning less terrain is covered.

Warmer spring temperatures can also make the snowpack melt faster, which in extreme circumstances can force water managers to dump water out of reservoirs to protect against flooding. (Although the Sierra snowpack has been melting fairly fast this spring, a representative of the California Department of Water Resources said that the reservoirs had not been affected.)

Dr. Overpeck said that the upper basin of the Colorado — mostly parts of Utah, Wyoming and Colorado — was warming as quickly as anywhere in the continental United States.

“As the atmosphere warms, it is holding more moisture, and it has to get that moisture from somewhere,” he said.

The region normally goes through wet and dry cycles, he added, and could enter a wet period that might last for a decade or two. So it is possible that Lake Mead could some day be filled to capacity once more.

“But the chances go down because of the effects of warming,” Dr. Overpeck said.

On the other hand, he added, “we could also go into a major precipitation deficit that lasts for decades.”

“Couple that with warming and it would be just devastating.”


