


I paid $341 to ride in the Five Boro Bike Tour, so though the forecast called for cold and rain, I had to do it to get my money’s worth.

What else could a sensible person do? Have a cozy Sunday indoors, with brunch or a movie, and kiss that $341 goodbye? When I have the opportunity to put on more foul-weather gear than Admiral Peary and risk collision with 32,000 other bikers?

Sure, one could argue that this is the wrong way to look at it, that you are not getting the $341 back, no matter what, but that does not factor in the other investments I had made.

I had sweated through countless spin classes at the Y.M.C.A., hanging around 15 extra minutes after each class so that there would be a better chance of someone calling 911 if I collapsed. I’d paid $128 for new bicycle tires, which brought my Five Boro tab to $469. And of course, there was also that triumph-of-will thing: I wanted to put my finish photo on Facebook, where all endeavor, human and feline, is measured.

Oh, excuse me, I have an I.M. from an out-of-town reader: You paid $341 for a bike ride? What are you, crazy?

No, just slow. The regular entry fee was $94 plus processing fees, but those slots sold out in 48 hours, leaving only the V.I.P. spots for $325 plus handling fees. I had seen the buff and jolly riders coming up Avenue of the Americas on glorious, blue-sky May days. So this year I thought: “Oh, hell, I can afford it. And they are throwing in a V.I.P. breakfast, which is sure to attract men who are not destitute; the investment banker-turned-sculptor demographic I so long to meet. And when these men see me in my hot, skintight bike clothing (I believe it has been two months since I mentioned I lost 26 pounds), my nights as a Jewish nun will be over.”

I wasn’t worried about the actual course, which I had ridden before, until I realized I had ridden it 16 years ago, which meant, if you follow the medical literature on this stuff, that I was 16 years younger. Also, it turned out to be 40 miles, not 30 as I remembered. But I can do 25 or 30 miles easily, as long as they are flat miles, so I figured I could handle it. I borrowed some rain pants from a friend as well as a baggy jacket that she said had proved absolutely waterproof. (My beautifully cut bike jackets, selected from the Get Lucky line, are merely water-repellent.)

The V.I.P. breakfast, near the starting line at Franklin Street and Avenue of the Americas in Lower Manhattan, seems to be bagels in bags, and I do not spot a single sculptor turned banker. (Later I am told by a spokesman for the event that I took a wrong turn and ended up in the volunteer area.) But we are all in luck with the weather. It doesn’t start to drizzle until the sponsors finish talking.

Off we go. I am at the front with the biking 1 percent, and it’s great to be riding through Manhattan without fear of motorized vehicles. All you have to fear are the 32,000 other riders, but with this horrible forecast I am sure there are no more than 26,000.

I’m psyched. It is a bit embarrassing when a little person in her 30s passes me on her little bike, but I content myself with the thought that her legs are spinning so frantically that she will not possibly make it through Central Park, where they will find her crumpled body the next morning.

We ride through Harlem, up to the Bronx, on to the F.D.R. Drive. The route is dotted with free-food stops and bands. At an exit off the F.D.R., the Street Beat Brass Band is playing Dixieland jazz. It’s like the Count Basie scene in “Blazing Saddles,” but better because you’re in this movie. All the crazy New York color is out. I see half a dozen middle-aged men in tutus; a man on a stand-up elliptical bike with calves so cut they look Cubist; and, as we pedal through Queens, a guy in a turban, which, as the drizzle has now turned into rain, probably weighs 20 pounds.

Meanwhile, I’m having a problem with my borrowed rain pants. They are so tight that they are affecting my breathing. This is creating something of a dilemma: Do I keep the pants on and remain dry and breathless, or take them off and get wet but oxygenated? I opt for the oxygen and peel the pants off at the Mile 18 Astoria Park rest stop.

The rain gets heavier as I bike into Brooklyn. About Mile 28, on a crowded bridge on the Gowanus Expressway, it really kicks in. My waterproof jacket, which had been quietly trickling water down my back, is now siphoning rain into my two layers of jerseys; my shoes are sopping. I am freezing. I now have but two thoughts, and unfortunately they are somewhat contradictory: Facebook, triumphant photo, yeah! and Hot bath, this very minute.

At Mile 32 I spot an exit ramp.

The temptation to leave is strong. The N train, which can get me to my apartment in half an hour, is nearby. On the other hand, I am only eight miles from the finish. I know what I have to do.

I am kind of sorry, though, that I didn’t take a selfie in my hot bath and post it on Facebook. As a triumph-of-will kind of thing.


