


No one, it seems, knows quite what to expect from “Showgasm XXL,” Ars Nova’s supersize fund-raiser on Thursday at the Chelsea nightclub Marquee. Not even the show’s host, the comedian John Early, who says only that the night will be a “wild experiment.”

A few things are certain: Mr. Early, along with his sidekick and D.J., the drag queen Hamm Samwich, is hosting some recognizable performers: Ana Gasteyer, who will portray one of her “Saturday Night Live” characters; the comedian and actress Chelsea Peretti (“Brooklyn Nine-Nine”); the drag star Sweetie; the actor and model Nico Tortorella (“Younger”); and the actor Josh Charles, of “The Good Wife.”

Over a recent dinner in Brooklyn, Mr. Early said that he was working with Mr. Charles “on whether he’s going to do an act, or if Hamm and I will just relentlessly flirt with him for five minutes.”

Ready to perform later that night at a bar show in Clinton Hill, Mr. Early was energetic and excitable, dipping into different voices for emphasis and imitating the gestures of family members and friends. Dressed casually, in jeans and a button-down shirt, he has a clean-cut look and real-life sweetness — he describes himself as a “Southern people-pleaser” — that contrast with the melodramatic nature of many of his characters and the sometime smuttiness of stand-up. Fans of streaming comedies may recognize him from his scene-stealing turn as Logan on last year’s Netflix series “Wet Hot American Summer: First Day of Camp” or his episode of the sketch anthology “Netflix Presents: The Characters,” released last month.

Since 2013, he’s also been hosting the long-running variety series “Showgasm,” at Ars Nova, the Off Broadway theater dedicated to emerging artists.

“There’s so much momentum behind the show and behind John that it felt really exciting to do a blown-out version,” Jason Eagan, Ars Nova’s founding artistic director, said of the decision to use the monthly show for the theater’s spring fund-raiser. (Last year’s event was a roast of the cabaret comedian Bridget Everett.)

Mr. Early, 28, became involved with Ars Nova through its annual talent showcase, ANT Fest. “It was completely unforgettable,” Mr. Eagan said. “When you’re out scouting new talent, you’re really hoping to see someone like John.”

In his subsequent meetings with Mr. Eagan, Mr. Early recalled, “I was speaking very florally about my ambitions in comedy, and the whitewashing of comedy and wanting to host a show that was more diverse and gayer than I was used to.” Mr. Eagan asked him to take over Ars Nova’s “Showgasm” series, a place for artists to experiment with short-form pieces, and encouraged him to bring in more comedians.

Among the “Showgasm” regulars in the XXL event are the absurdist stand-up comic Kate Berlant, the downtown character comedian Cole Escola, the humorist Isaac Oliver and the comedy dance act Cocoon Central Dance Team.

Though Mr. Early is deeply entrenched in the alternative comedy scene in New York, his stand-up has always had a theatrical flair: He often sings Britney Spears songs in his sets. He began doing stand-up five years ago and quickly gravitated to the downtown variety scene, which incorporates a rich history of drag, burlesque, music and Off Broadway theater and produces more character-driven, less caustic comedy than the traditional stand-up world.

His style is open and warm, incorporating pop culture references of the alt scene into a showier act. While his topics are standard for almost any comic — politics, dating, sex, hipsters — his point of view is distinct. Take his riff on the glamorously exhausting pace of the city: “I love being in New York, or I love the drag of being in New York, or I love to be in the West Village with a pashmina and a coffee, just, like, late to something.”

Hamm Samwich, one of Mr. Early’s longtime friends, said, “His particular constellation of talents is so explosive,” adding that no one else was operating “at such a high level at all times.”

“It’s kind of gross how good it is,” she said.

Mr. Early, whose parents are ministers, grew up in Nashville, he says, in “a very liberal, very accessible form of Presbyterianism,” and he suspects that visiting churches in the South influenced his performance style. “You’re hyper-aware of the job element to it,” he said. “It’s less mystical when you’re behind the scenes with your parents, who do it for a living. I think I was always very distrustful of a certain kind of sincerity.”

Characters trying too hard to make a strong, sincere impression are a consistent theme in his work. In his episode of “The Characters,” his overly controlling “über-John” character is trying to host a perfect “shabby-chic” wedding rehearsal dinner, but can’t help making it all about himself. “New York is my home,” he begins a toast. “And sometimes, you know, L.A. I go back and forth. For business,” he adds with a wink.

Indeed, Mr. Early is developing a series with Ms. Berlant that is likely to be shot in Los Angeles, and he is amassing film and television gigs, including a role in the pilot for the TBS series “Search Party.” Mr. Early is hesitant to make the move westward — “I’m trying to hold out as long as possible” — but he admits that his spell as “Showgasm” host is likely to wind down as his schedule fills.

But Mr. Early is clearly devoted to Ars Nova, crediting his time there with helping him develop his type of comedy. “It’s my favorite thing I do in New York,” he said emphatically. “It gets the wildest of anything I do. It just always takes a mind of its own.”


