


Suzanne Amador Kane, a physicist at Haverford College, in Pennsylvania, was thinking about visual signals by animals — mostly come-ons and warnings.

She was viewing various courtship videos online when she found some impressive high-speed recordings of the bird that defines showiness — the peacock.

They not only fan out those spectacular tail feathers — called a train — to tempt pea hens, but they also shake them in a behavior called train rattling. Dr. Kane noticed that the feathers “were resonating like cantilevers” during the rattling.

A cantilever is commonly defined as a beam or girder fixed at one end. But, in physics, it could also be a feather, or a stalk of dried hay or a pickup stick fixed at one end.

Dr. Kane wrote to the person who had made the videos, Roslyn Dakin, now a postdoctoral researcher at the University of British Columbia. Dr. Dakin, a biologist, had been studying the color of peacock feathers. She and other researchers had found that the most successful males had the most iridescent blue-green color in the tail eye-spots.

She was interested in how females perceive the eye-spots, and Dr. Kane was interested in how the motion of the feathers related to the visual abilities of the intended audience, pea hens.

Dr. Dakin invited Dr. Kane to California where they began their collaboration on the study of peacocks that roam the grounds of the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanical Garden. The goal was to develop a basic understanding of the shaking motion. “These motions are a key part of courtship,” Dr. Dakin said. “They have a visual component and a sound.”

They videotaped the peacocks during their natural courtship behavior. They display their feathers often, but, said Dr. Dakin, “They don’t vibrate when females are not around.”

Dr. Kane also conducted laboratory research. She and Owen McCrossan, an undergraduate at Drexel University, made an artificial train with peacock feathers and shook it. “We had to rent a shaker,” she said.

They and several colleagues, including Mr. McCrossan, published a detailed account of their findings Wednesday in the journal PLOS One, giving a full picture of the physics of train rattling.

Among the highlights:

— The tail feathers vibrate at their natural resonating frequency — like a guitar string.

— The iridescent eyes stay fairly still while other parts of the tail move because of the structure of the feathers.

— Males with longer, heavier feathers don’t shake them more slowly, as might be expected, but faster.

They plan to use their analysis as a foundation for future research. Now that they understand how train rattling works, they could change some aspects of it to see what effect that has on females, and what that says about the visual system of pea fowl.

As for the noise, they know that pea hens hear it. But they are still not sure how important it is.


