


JUST before he took the stage at Don’t Tell Mama to perform a sensitive rendition of “She’s a Woman,” an aching love song from the musical “Kiss of the Spider Woman,” James Corden had been preaching his gospel on how to be a popular entertainer.

Whether he is performing for millions or for the 25 or so people at this midtown Manhattan piano bar, hosting CBS’s “The Late Late Show” as he has done since March 2015 — or the Tony Awards as he will do for the first time on Sunday — Mr. Corden said that inclusiveness was crucial to success.

“The worst way you can approach a show is to go, ‘Oh, we’re all in a club here — did you not get that?’” he said in an interview on Saturday night. “My job is to widen that net.”

A British actor and Tony Award-winner, Mr. Corden, 37, is no longer the cautious if ambitious relative unknown who crossed the Atlantic last year to take over CBS’s 12:37 a.m. time slot.

Having reinvented “The Late Late Show” as an engine for viral bits of musical comedy and franchise segments like “Carpool Karaoke” and “Drop the Mic,” Mr. Corden was brimming with confidence (and a vodka with cranberry juice) ahead of the intense preparation for the Tonys that would begin that Monday morning.

He was excited to host an awards program that holds so much personal value for him, and was full of ideas for how he believed he could make it connect with a wider national audience. Even the fleeting idea that it could all go wrong seemed to tickle him.

“If I slip and land on my nose and get a nosebleed, what do I do?” he asked. With a laugh, he answered himself: “You and every other millennial will have a great internet meme. I will have a horrifyingly embarrassing moment in my life. But that’s why you do it.”

On paper, Mr. Corden was a mathematical lock to host the Tonys, which will be held at the Beacon Theater. He is an increasingly visible personality on the network that broadcasts the ceremony, and has performed on Broadway in “The History Boys” and “One Man, Two Guvnors,” which in 2012 earned him the Tony for best leading actor in a play.

He also played the Baker in the 2014 film adaptation of “Into the Woods,” and has made “The Late Late Show” a home for his musical-theater peers, like Monday’s all-star “Carpool Karaoke” segment featuring Lin-Manuel Miranda, Audra McDonald, Jane Krakowski and Jesse Tyler Ferguson.

The online ubiquity of these segments has helped “The Late Late Show” thrive in an intensely competitive environment in which more than a dozen late-night series vie for TV ratings and internet clicks.

Mr. Corden claims not to pay attention to Nielsen ratings for his CBS program. “For $1 billion, I couldn’t tell you how many people watch our show.” (It averages about 1.3 million viewers a night, behind NBC’s “Late Night With Seth Meyers,” which averages about 1.6 million.)

But, he said, “I know, absolutely, the figure that have watched bits online.” “The Late Late Show” YouTube channel has surpassed one billion views, with more than 100 million of those views coming from his “Carpool Karaoke” segment with the pop singer Adele.

The opportunity to host the Tonys was especially meaningful because, Mr. Corden said, the awards represent the “true and pure voice” of theatergoers. As proof, he cited the year that he won his trophy, prevailing over formidable fellow nominees Philip Seymour Hoffman, James Earl Jones, John Lithgow and Frank Langella (again nominated this year).

In that instance, when he was not perceived as the favorite, Mr. Corden said, “If it could be bought, it would have been.”

Mr. Corden said there had been “a slight rumbling” for him to host the Tonys last year, only a few months after taking over at “The Late Late Show,” but it would have been “just too early.”

The 2015 Tonys show, hosted by Kristin Chenoweth and Alan Cumming, was watched by around 6.5 million viewers, a sharp decline from past years, when high-profile entertainers like Hugh Jackman and Neil Patrick Harris have served as M.C.

Glenn Weiss and Ricky Kirshner, the longtime executive producers of the broadcast, were coy about the selection process for its host, but acknowledged in an interview that a wide range of participants, including CBS, the Broadway League and the American Theater Wing needed to be satisfied.

Mr. Kirshner said that, aside from Mr. Corden’s other talents and the arsenal of signature bits he has developed on “The Late Late Show,” the most important qualities Mr. Corden would bring to the Tonys are his “infatuation for the theater and his love for the community here.”

Ben Winston, an executive producer for “The Late Late Show” and a lifelong friend of Mr. Corden’s, said that pressure at the program had eased considerably since his debut.

Now, Mr. Winston said, celebrity guests are sufficiently familiar with its welcoming atmosphere and grab bag of comedy segments that, when Anne Hathaway appeared on the show in a rap-battle segment with Mr. Corden, David Schwimmer emailed the next day asking to perform a rap battle of his own.

For all his success, Mr. Winston said, Mr. Corden remained an authentic fan of pop culture who never outgrew a boyhood love for the stage.

As a child, Mr. Winston said, “He probably wasn’t watching movies and looking at movie stars and going, ‘I’m going to be that guy.’ He was looking at Jean Valjean. Maybe not Danny in ‘Grease.’”

Anna Wintour, the Vogue magazine editor in chief and Condé Nast artistic director, who has become one of Mr. Corden’s most prominent fans, said the enthusiastic, inclusive spirit that he projects on TV persists after the show is over.

“You always feel you’re in on the joke with James,” she said. “He wants to bring you into his world.”

She added: “In our very first email exchange — I’d never met him — he said, ‘Will you be my best friend?’ He’s that sort of person.”

Should she see Mr. Corden at the Beacon striding down the aisle with a glint in his eye and the intention of incorporating her into a comedy bit, Ms. Wintour said: “I will be happy to see James. As long as I don’t have to sing.”

This year, Mr. Corden said he hoped to open the Tonys with “a song for, like, the theater kid who lives in Michigan or Nebraska, who just dreams of being on a stage.”

“For them,” he continued, “this night being on TV is everything, and I wonder if we can open our show for them.”

He may not have to do much heavy lifting at the Tonys when audiences will be focused on the fortunes of “Hamilton,” which has become an international sensation and is nominated for a record 16 trophies.

Still, Mr. Corden was tight-lipped about how he might incorporate the musical or Mr. Miranda, its star and creator, into his segments on the program. And not even Ms. Wintour, who is a fashion consultant for the Tonys, would say if Mr. Corden might be wearing a tricorn hat during the evening.

“As mistress of the wardrobe, I cannot give away any house secrets,” she said.

After about an hour’s conversation at Don’t Tell Mama, Mr. Corden brought me with him to the microphone for a not-at-all rehearsed performance of “One Day More,” from “Les Misérables.”

Mr. Corden sang the role of Valjean and a helpful bartender provided the voices of Cosette and Éponine while I, like a French revolutionary at the barricade, courageously fought my way through the parts of Marius and Javert. Several audience members generously applauded and no one walked out, as far as anyone could tell.

On their way out of the piano bar, two exuberant patrons stopped at Mr. Corden’s table to tell him that they would be watching the Tonys just to see what he does on the show.

With a smile, Mr. Corden buoyantly replied: “Lower your expectations. Lower your expectations.”


