


Most of what I know about writing comes from my experience as a card-carrying chorus boy. Let me explain: This month my third novel was published within days of my debut as a Broadway book co-writer. (For the uninitiated: The “book” of a musical is the “script,” a.k.a. the part where the audience checks their Playbills to see when the next song is.) But I didn’t go to college for creative writing, let alone earn an M.F.A. Instead, I played a fish in “The Little Mermaid,” a polar bear in the “Radio City Christmas Spectacular” and, for a change of pace, an actual human in the Bernadette Peters revival of “Gypsy.” Those years spent standing in the wings taught me a great deal about where to find stories, and how to tell them. Here’s what I discovered along the way:

Everything that got me picked on in middle school gets me paid now.

Thirteen-year-old me was short, “sensitive,” and sat with the sopranos in choir. I was prone to singing “Sunday in the Park With George” in the back of algebra class — not the most socially advantageous move for a Midwestern seventh-grade boy — and, naturally, was deeply unpopular with the lacrosse players (I did coach their girlfriends on how to walk in heels, though). I couldn’t throw a punch, but I could throw a punch line, which remains my most reliable resource as a writer now. Getting teased tends to either harden your shell or sharpen your wit, and my sarcastic “voice” became a launchpad for my young adult fiction. It’s tough to be the underdog in real life, but everyone roots for him as a fictional hero.

Take the note.

Musicals are living organisms whose performances change from night to night. Along with the blessing of this most immediate art form comes its own curse. Over the course of a show’s run, actors begin taking long pauses during monologues, dancers start straying from their onstage marks and shows tend to grow lethargic faster than you can say “Wednesday matinee audience.” I learned, the hard way, early on to just “take the note” — that if my dance captain tells me my energy is lagging in a production number, or that I’m doing some new, weird thing with my arms, to just say thank you and not offer an excuse or explanation. Nobody cares, not really; they’ve got 20 other dancers to monitor and give notes to on any given night. The same principle applied when I began receiving editorial comments on my novels. If your editor sees room for improvement in your work, they’re usually on to something. It’s their job to keep you in line. And to cut your adverbs. Ruthlessly.

Confidence is overrated. Courage is underrated.

Everything I’ve accomplished that I’m actually proud of was born of initial terror. When, at age 20, I took the bus from Pittsburgh to New York to crash an audition for a Super Bowl halftime show — wearing, God help me, a green Polo shirt and black tights (not all gay guys are born with a robust fashion gene) — my knees shook like crazy, but the one thing bigger than my fear was my desire. Same when I began writing books. I was 8 when I was told I had a way with words, which you develop when you’re the last boy picked in gym in a town that favors soccer over Sondheim. If I’d waited till I actually felt “ready” to pursue my dreams, I’d never have started.

Critics gotta critic.

I’ve been in flops that got raves and hits that got panned. My job as a dancer was to keep my head down and show up at work eight shows a week, no matter the reviews. My job as a writer is to keep my chin up and show up at the blank page, no matter what people are saying. In fact, I sort of want to know what they’re saying. The best outsider critiques can help you discover your own bad habits, and I’ll still occasionally have a beer or six and scan my Amazon page. That said, my skin is thin in places, and so I’ve taken to bookmarking the one-star reviews of various classic novels. After a critic doesn’t respond to my own best efforts, it’s comforting to read that “The Catcher in the Rye” was called “unequivocal trash” by an Internet citizen known as Thanks Nietzsche. To be criticized is to join the club known as your heroes.

Everybody is always starting over.

There’s nothing like kicking off a brand new year unemployed, which is what happened to the Broadway cast of “Chitty Chitty Bang Bang” when we closed on Dec. 31, 2005. A primary lesson of being a dancer is that if you’re lucky enough to be employed, you’ll soon be unlucky enough to be unemployed. Same goes for novelists. Hell hath no fury like a blinking cursor, which might as well be your editor’s index finger jabbing your shoulder to inquire “How’s the new book coming?” I suppose the reason I’m somewhat comfortable with writing fast, messy first drafts is that I’ve never had a job for longer than a couple of months. When you’re a gypsy, bouncing from job to job, “starting things” is your specialty. It’s slogging it out to “The End” that separates the boys from the chorus boys.


