


This is usually the season of hope and inspiration on college campuses, but the politics of immigration and the presidential race spilled into the commencement ceremony Sunday at California State University, Fullerton, in an incident that has continued to reverberate on social media.

A recording shows that the commencement speaker, Maria Elena Salinas, a prominent anchor for the Spanish-language network Univision, was booed after she praised Hispanic students in the crowd, spoke briefly in Spanish and made a critical reference to Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee.

A university official confirmed Wednesday that tensions had flared during Ms. Salinas’s address to graduates of the College of Communications. The video shows her smiling broadly as members of the audience first began to yell at her when she specifically praised Hispanic journalism graduates. The booing became louder when she referenced Mr. Trump.

The trouble began when Ms. Salinas referred to the assembled graduates as the new “voice of Hispanic America,” drawing cries from the crowd. Hispanics make up the school’s largest single ethnic or racial group — at more than 40 percent of the student body — but many of the graduates were not Hispanic.

“All of you are the future,” Ms. Salinas quickly responded. “Well, really, the youth are the future of our country. Those Hispanics who are here are the future of Hispanic America and the rest of you are the future of our country.”

Audience members became more upset when Ms. Salinas said that journalists were often unfairly turned into “public enemy No. 1” by politicians and their supporters.

“Imagine: They blame us so much for so many things that now they even blame us, the media, for creating Donald Trump. Imagine that!” she said, as some in the crowd started to boo her. “Isn’t that terrible? But we didn’t, right? We didn’t. Who did? I don’t know. But they are to blame.”

Denise De La Cruz, 23, a graduating student, said some people “looked visibly upset” when Ms. Salinas praised Hispanic students and mentioned Mr. Trump. There were shouts from the crowd of “get off the stage” and “trash,” she said.

“The negativity started really when she solely addressed Latino journalism graduates, not only because it felt like she wasn’t including other majors but obviously not everyone present was Latino,” said Ms. De La Cruz, who wrote about the speech and the backlash for OC Weekly, a local magazine. “As soon as she said how happy she was for Latino journalism students you could hear people in the crowd yell, ‘What about us?’ ”

Doris Muñoz, 22, another student who was present, said the hecklers — whom she described as “a small sprinkling” of people in the crowd — were friends and relatives of the graduates. Some shouted “English only, please” at the speaker, she said.

“She started getting pretty political in her speech, and I think that rubbed people the wrong way,” Ms. Muñoz said. “People were making kind of sly jabs at Donald Trump, but she just totally took him on.”

Attempts to reach Ms. Salinas through the network and via social media were unsuccessful on Wednesday. But she addressed the incident on Twitter several times in recent days, telling Ms. De La Cruz that she had not heard what the hecklers said on Sunday and later chastising her over the OC Weekly article’s “interpretation of the facts."

“If they complained about me speaking Spanish it’s sad racism is on the rise,” Ms. Salinas said in a tweet on Sunday, referring to those who booed her.

And she told The Washington Post: “I don’t think I insulted anyone by saying a few words in Spanish to the parents. The whole speech was directed to everyone.” She added: “I think the message is, we have to cool down the intolerance right now. We really do. This is ugly, what’s happening in the country.”

This is not the first time Univision and Mr. Trump have proved to be a combustible combination. The network refused to broadcast his beauty pageants in protest of his remarks about Mexicans, leading to a lawsuit that was later settled. In August, Jorge Ramos, a journalist for Univision based in Miami, was mocked by the candidate and then escorted out of a news conference after questioning him about immigration. Mr. Trump was unapologetic.

In the days after Ms. Salinas’s speech, critics lashed out at her on social media. She told one Twitter user who disliked her speech, “Unless you’re Native American we are all from immigrant families.”

Jeff Cook, the university spokesman, said the school was aware that some audience members had “expressed concerns” about her remarks.

“She is an accomplished journalist and I am sure she is an inspirational figure for many of our students,” he said. Ms. Salinas also delivered a commencement address at a university-wide ceremony earlier in the day without incident.

Ms. Muñoz said she thought it made sense to have a Latina voice like Ms. Salinas at the ceremony. “I grew up watching her on television — but for some people I guess it seemed offensive or exclusive,” she said. “But it’s not like she gave her whole speech in Spanish. I just don’t get it.”


