


No amount of gloss can hide the heartbreak caused by the closing of our editorial and production operations in Paris.

And it isn’t the first time.

In 1967, the money-losing International Edition of The New York Times — edited, produced and printed at 25 Rue d’Aboukir — was folded into The International Herald Tribune. With it went 116 jobs.

The move was a striking display of independence by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, still relatively new as The Times’s publisher, from the legacy of his father, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, who had laid the foundation of the International Edition in 1943.

During World War II, in a meeting with Maj. Gen. Donald H. Connolly at the Persian Gulf Service Command Headquarters in Tehran, the senior Mr. Sulzberger learned that morale was plummeting among the soldiers who supplied Allied troops. Theirs was a vital but monotonous job.

To keep the troops engaged, Mr. Sulzberger said, The Times would, at its own expense, furnish an eight-page tabloid to the armed forces. (It must have crossed the publisher’s mind that he would be inculcating a Times habit among thousands of grateful G.I.s.)

Called the Overseas Weekly, it was a pint-size version of The News of the Week in Review. Type was set in New York from which plastic molds were made and flown to Iran to be turned into printing plates. The first issue (PDF) came out in late summer.

At the end of the war, the Overseas Weekly was being printed at 16 sites in Europe and Asia. In 1948, The Times received a terrific response for its United Nations Edition, airlifted every day from New York to Paris while the General Assembly met there.

The International Air Edition began Dec. 11, 1948. It was a trimmed-down daily paper, with most of the foreign and national reports, but little metro or sports news. Copies were flown to Britain and continental Europe for distribution in Amsterdam, Basel, Brussels, Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Geneva, London, Paris, Rome, Stockholm and Vienna.

Mr. Sulzberger allowed that the project would “involve a substantial loss,” but said it would help Europe’s recovery and America's business and political interests. “It is hoped that, in time, the venture will become self-sustaining,” he added — a bit too optimistically.

To beat the cost of shipping entire newspaper bundles across the Atlantic, The Times took a big technological step in June 1949. It began making cardboard molds of pages for the International Edition. These molds were flown to Paris, where they were used to cast printing plates, allowing the paper to be published and sold in Europe only a day after it had hit newsstands in New York.

We left Paris the first time in 1952. Printing was shifted to Amsterdam “because it offered superior printing facilities close to the city’s international airport,” The Times said.

Something like the modern age dawned on Oct. 20, 1960, when the International Edition began being produced simultaneously in Europe. This was when the action returned to Paris, this time at the Imprimeries Lamartine.

“New York Times Now Printing on 2 Continents at Same Time,” a Page 1 headline said. This remarkable advance was made possible by teletypesetting.

In New York, a printer would transcribe edited copy on a perforator keyboard that turned each character into a series of holes punched into paper tape. The tape was fed into a device that translated the coded patterns into electric impulses, which were transmitted to Paris on one of three cable circuits or three wireless circuits.

In Paris, the electric impulses punched a duplicate set of paper tapes that could be fed into specially adapted Intertype linecasting machines, not unlike a player piano. The tapes coded in New York were now driving typesetters 3,600 miles away.

As production of the Paris edition grew less dependent on headquarters, editorial direction was also weaned from direct control by the editors in Times Square.

Thomas A. Daffron Jr., an assistant news editor, was named managing editor of the International Edition in 1964 and given “full responsibility for its news content,” according to Times Talk, the newspaper’s house organ. It continued:

“The I.E. no longer attempts to follow the makeup or play of stories in the New York edition. Copy is edited on the spot and set manually in the Paris composing room rather than transmitted from New York by coded tape.” Staff members in Paris were also starting to do their own reporting.

By 1966, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger had succeeded his father as publisher. That year he appointed Sydney Gruson, a close friend and a distinguished former foreign correspondent, as the editor and chief executive officer of the International Edition. Only six months earlier, the edition had moved into its own space in a new eight-story building on the Rue d’Aboukir owned by an affiliate of Le Figaro.

Under Mr. Gruson, circulation grew 17 percent and advertising grew 20 percent.

It must have seemed that the Paris edition had become a planet of its own, rather than an orbiting moon.

But there was a problem. A big problem.

The edition’s improved reach of 47,000 was still far behind The New York Herald Tribune-The Washington Post International, published by the Whitney and Graham families, which had a circulation of 60,000. Worse yet, even improved ad revenues had not brought our Paris edition close to the self-sustaining goal of the late ’40s.

Instead, since its inauguration, the edition had lost about $10 million (more than $70 million today).

Editors assumed Mr. Sulzberger would keep the edition afloat out of a sentimental commitment to his father and because of its prestigious promotional value.

“Their lack of insight into the young publisher became quickly apparent in the spring of 1967 when he announced that he was folding the International Edition,” Gay Talese wrote in “The Kingdom and the Power.”

Not just folding it, but merging it into its chief competitor, in a three-way partnership with John Hay Whitney and Katharine Graham. The combined paper was renamed The International Herald Tribune. (At least it wasn’t called The New York Herald Tribune-The Washington Post-The New York Times International.)

The Post and The Times bought out Whitcom, successor to the Whitney interests, in 1991, forming a 50-50 partnership that lasted until 2002, when The Times bought out The Post. The publication was renamed The International New York Times in 2013.

About the 1967 closing of 25 Rue d’Aboukir, Times Talk said:

“When the final edition of the I.E. went to press at 11:30 on Friday evening, May 19, visitors wandered into the newsroom — wives, staffers from other departments, printers from the composing room. Someone broke out the brandy, the bourbon, the Scotch. Suddenly there was lusty, lovely harmony, French songs led by the Gallic printers. ‘It wasn’t exactly a celebration, but it wasn’t a wake either,’ is the way one man put it. ‘It was more like ’til we meet again.’”

Given the state of journalism, however, this time may feel less like au revoir than adieu.


