


WASHINGTON — As Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump step gingerly into a general election debate on foreign policy, the rogue government in North Korea has become an early test case of the challenges that Mrs. Clinton will face in confronting the unorthodox pronouncements of her presumptive Republican opponent.

Mr. Trump told Reuters on Tuesday that he would be open to negotiating directly with the North Korean dictator, Kim Jong-un — an overture that would upend three decades of American diplomacy. “I would speak to him,” Mr. Trump declared. “I would have no problem speaking to him.”

The previous evening, in New York, the senior policy adviser to Mrs. Clinton, Jake Sullivan, laid out her strategy for dealing with the reclusive leader — one that relies on a familiar formula of tightening sanctions against the government to pressure it to enter into multiparty negotiations on its nuclear program. Mr. Sullivan said nothing about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump’s likely Democratic opponent, meeting Mr. Kim.

Foreign policy experts said Mr. Trump’s openness to a presidential meeting was problematic because it would legitimize North Korea’s status as a nuclear-weapons power, unnerve American allies like South Korea and Japan and likely fail to persuade Mr. Kim to give up his weapons. Some predicted that after a policy review, a Trump administration would likely take a similar approach toward Pyongyang as a Clinton administration.

To the extent that Mr. Trump fleshed out his plans for dealing with the North, he said he would put pressure on its neighbor, China, to use its influence with Mr. Kim to curb his nuclear provocations. That is essentially what Mr. Sullivan said in his description of Mrs. Clinton’s policy.

“Putting aside the politics of a different policy, the change would be at the margins, I think,” said Victor D. Cha, the director of the Asian Studies program at Georgetown University. “There is little disagreement that sanctions need to be pushed harder.”

“The main difference between the two might be what would be on offer if North Korea bends to the sanctions and is ready to come back to talks,” said Mr. Cha, who advised President George W. Bush on North Korea. “Trump seems to be saying he would go as far as putting a face-to-face on the table, which would be a break from 30 years of past diplomacy.”

Mr. Trump’s remarks about Mr. Kim reflect less a strategy than his instinct for cutting deals with people. In that sense, they are similar to what he has said about pursuing better relations with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. The comments came after Mr. Trump talked about withdrawing American troops from Japan and South Korea, which he suggested should acquire nuclear weapons to defend themselves. Mrs. Clinton and her surrogates have said these statements show Mr. Trump to be reckless, uninformed and unfit to be commander in chief. Still, her aides are sensitive to suggestions that he would be more open to diplomacy with North Korea than Mrs. Clinton, a former secretary of state.

In 2009, Mr. Sullivan noted, she appointed a special envoy, Stephen W. Bosworth, to explore whether there was a serious diplomatic path with North Korea. After Mr. Bosworth left, she named Glyn Davies, who negotiated an agreement in February 2012, known as the Leap Day deal, in which Pyongyang pledged to stop nuclear and long-range missile tests in return for a resumption of American food aid. The deal fell apart after North Korea announced plans to launch a satellite.

“She wasn’t averse to testing diplomacy with the North,” Mr. Sullivan said in an interview. “She did have a clear-eyed view of what was possible.”

But Mrs. Clinton also expressed little patience for continuing the six-party talks — involving the two Koreas, Japan, China, Russia and the United States — when there were no signs of progress. Since the collapse of the Leap Day deal, North Korea has continued to test bombs and launch missiles. In March, after yet another nuclear test, the United Nations Security Council passed stricter sanctions against the Kim government.

A month earlier, President Obama signed an executive order that would impose “secondary sanctions” against any individual or company that helped North Korea with its weapons program or with activities that abused human rights. These measures could be used to pressure Chinese firms, which continue to help North Korea evade trade sanctions. North Korea, Mr. Sullivan said in his talk on Monday at the Asia Society, “has to be one of the first and most important pieces of business in the first summit between the next president and Xi Jinping.”

The North Korea strategy he outlined resembles the Obama administration’s pressure campaign against Iran. Mrs. Clinton marshaled global support for stringent economic sanctions, which helped pull Iran to the bargaining table.

With her long experience, foreign policy ought to be an undisputed advantage for Mrs. Clinton. Mr. Trump sought to hone his own foreign-policy credentials on Wednesday by meeting for an hour with Henry A. Kissinger, the Republican elder statesman and former secretary of state, at Mr. Kissinger’s apartment in Manhattan. Last week, Mr. Trump met with James A. Baker, who served as secretary of state under the first President George Bush.

There is an echo — in Mr. Trump’s remarks about meeting Mr. Kim — of the Democratic primaries in 2008 between Mrs. Clinton and then-Senator Barack Obama. Mr. Obama said he would meet with the leaders of adversaries, from North Korea and Cuba to Iran and Syria, without preconditions. Mrs. Clinton ridiculed him as naïve, and when he was elected, he dropped Pyongyang from that list, though he did pursue talks with Iran and Cuba.

Experts on North Korea said a meeting with Mr. Kim was different in several respects from one with President Raúl Castro of Cuba, for example. The North already possesses nuclear weapons; it is guilty of widespread human rights abuses, and Mr. Kim would insist on holding any meeting in Pyongyang, where he could exploit it for propaganda value.

“Kim would control this reality show,” said Michael J. Green of the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “This is not like holding the Miss Universe contest in Moscow.”


