


PARIS — For Turkish women’s tennis, a historic first arrived as a pair.

Cagla Buyukakcay, 26, and Ipek Soylu, 20, playing in this year’s French Open, became the first Turkish women to reach the main draw of a Grand Slam tournament.

Buyukakcay made further history on Monday by winning her first-round match against Aliaksandra Sasnovich, 5-7, 7-6 (2), 6-2. Her run ended Wednesday with a 6-3, 4-6, 6-1 loss to 22nd-seeded Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova.

Buyukakcay, ranked 83rd, will climb about 10 spots after her four victories in Paris, including three in the qualifying draw. That will leave her on the cusp of the Olympic cutoff, which is based on the rankings released after the French Open. She would be the first Turk to compete in an Olympic tennis event.

Soylu, ranked 171st, also won three matches in the qualifying draw. She started well against the French veteran Virginie Razzano in her first-round match on Tuesday, but faded in a 4-6, 6-1, 6-0 defeat.

Buyukakcay, who had played 17 Grand Slam qualifying draws before finally breaking through in Paris, gained confidence for this run by winning the WTA tournament in Istanbul, a stunning result that propelled her into the top 100.

“In Turkey, everybody got so excited,” Buyukakcay said. “I’m really happy about that. I saw that they really want to support me, support tennis. They like tennis now; that’s what I’ve seen after the tournament. I’m really happy that I’m part of it right now, and now I’m just really motivated to do better.”

For Buyukakcay, the most meaningful result from her title was hearing that it had inspired others around the country to try the sport themselves.

“When I won Istanbul Cup, I got so many messages saying they just started to play tennis,” she said. “So many women play tennis now, and kids. Of course it was big for Turkey to see the best players in the world, but on the other hand, I think it’s important to have home idols in front. It’s better for the country to be inspired.”

Buyukakcay and Soylu hail from the same city: Adana, in southern Turkey about 100 miles from the Syrian border. They moved to Istanbul in their early teens to improve their tennis.

Soylu had no ambitions for a career in the sport when she began playing tennis at 6, but as her results improved, she set her sights higher.

“My parents weren’t pushing me this way,” Soylu said. “As I grew up, I was getting results in Turkey, so I started to travel around the world. And suddenly I said, I think I can be good at this. So far it has worked out well for me, and I have big dreams and big aims, and I’ll really work hard to get to them.”

Soylu won the girls’ doubles title at the 2014 United States Open. Last month, on the same day that Buyukakcay won the singles title in Istanbul, Soylu claimed the doubles title, becoming the first Turkish woman to win a tour doubles title.

Ipek Senoglu, a retired Turkish player who reached the top 60 of the WTA doubles rankings in 2009, said the three-year stint that the WTA year-end championships had in Istanbul between 2011 and 2013 made tennis dreams more tangible for a younger generation.

“It allowed our own players to watch the top players and realize that top players are human, too,” Senoglu said. “It allowed them to believe that if they work hard enough, they can be one day at the same place.”

Senoglu compared the two emerging players with two top Turkish soccer clubs, Galatasaray and Fenerbahce, whose intense rivalry has propelled them upward.

“I believe having to compete with each other makes you push harder,” Senoglu said. “And at the same time, it divides the pressure that’s on your shoulders as well, which helps at difficult moments.”

Senoglu said Buyukakcay “became a celebrity in one day” after winning the title in Istanbul, where her win was celebrated on the front pages of newspapers. With so many other less uplifting topics dominating headlines in the country, Senoglu said that sports were being treated with increased intensity.

“Turkey has been in a region where there has been a lot of political and cultural unrest, not only now but for many, many long years, so Turkish people need and appreciate success in sports more emotionally,” Senoglu said. “That’s good and bad; it’s great when you’re successful, but a bit harsh — much harder criticism — when things are not going great. But over all, it’s great that two female athletes are both doing wonderful for our tennis at the moment. They are getting the attention they deserve.”

Buyukakcay said she hoped to be an ambassador for Turkey as she worked her way around the global tennis tour.

“Of course I want to put a positive image; it’s very important, because I want to show them that Turkey is a lovely place to come,” she said.

Wednesday’s other results from players of more established tennis nations largely matched expectations. Despite being at her least comfortable on clay, second-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska of Poland dispatched Caroline Garcia of France, 6-2, 6-4. Fourth-seeded Garbiñe Muguruza had little trouble dispatching the French wild card Myrtille Georges, 6-2, 6-0, in 53 minutes.

Sixth-seeded Simona Halep, a finalist here in 2014, eked out a tough first set before beating Zarina Diyas, 7-6 (5), 6-2. Tenth-seeded Petra Kvitova advanced against Hsieh Su-Wei of Taiwan, 6-4, 6-1.

Shelby Rogers, ranked 108th, became the first American woman to reach the third round, beating Elena Vesnina, 6-4, 6-2. She was joined by 19th-seeded Sloane Stephens, who defeated Veronica Cepede Royg, 7-6 (0), 6-1.

In the longest women’s match of the year, 25th-seeded Irina-Camelia Begu of Romania outlasted the American CoCo Vandeweghe, 6-7 (4), 7-6,(4), 10-8, finally staving off an upset in 3 hours 38 minutes. Begu has surged this spring, with runs to the quarterfinals of Madrid and the semifinals of Rome.

In men’s action, the defending champion Stan Wawrinka, who needed five sets to win his first-round match, had an easier time in the second round, defeating Taro Daniel, 7-6 (7), 6-3, 6-4. Wawrinka, seeded third, next faces No. 30 Jeremy Chardy.

No. 5 Kei Nishikori, No. 8 Milos Raonic and No. 9 Richard Gasquet also advanced in straight sets.

The top American man, 15th-seeded John Isner, beat Kyle Edmund of Britain, 6-4, 6-4, 6-4. He and 23rd-seeded Jack Sock are the only American men who have reached the third round, out of 10 who started the tournament.


