


Tamima Azeeza Mohammed and Ryan Hamilton Crosner were married April 23 at their home in Redondo Beach, Calif. The officiant was Shaun H. Crosner, the groom’s brother, who became ordained through American Marriage Ministries for the event.

The bride, 30, and groom, 31, met at the University of Pennsylvania, from which each received a law degree and where the groom also received a master of bioethics degree.

The bride, who is taking her husband’s name, is a benefits analyst at Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, an aerospace manufacturer and space-transport services company in Hawthorne, Calif., where she investigates and analyzes workers’ compensation claims. She graduated with honors from Stanford.

She is the daughter of Tahira Mohammed and Ronnie C. Mohammed of Bakersfield, Calif. The bride’s father is a senior mechanical engineer in research and development at the ice cream division of Nestlé in Bakersfield. Her mother is a high school advanced-placement and honors chemistry and biology teacher at Stockdale High School, also in Bakersfield.

The groom is an associate specializing in labor and employment law in the Los Angeles office of Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, a law firm headquartered in Greenville, S.C. He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Southern California, from which he also received a master's degree in classical guitar performance.

He is a son of Joyce H. Crosner and Albert L. Crosner of Manhattan Beach, Calif. The groom’s father is a lawyer in Manhattan Beach. His mother retired as a substitute teacher for the Los Angeles Unified School District.

Ms. Mohammed met Mr. Crosner in September 2010 at the end of her desperate search for an upperclassman who could help her prepare for a torts final exam that she had been worrying about during her first year of law school.

“I was in a panic,” she said. “I was trying to find someone who had already been in the same professor’s class and could share their notes with me.”

Through a mutual friend, she found Mr. Crosner, the social chairman at the law school, who arranged to meet her at a Starbucks, where he shared his notes, and exchanged a few others, with Ms. Mohammed, whom he learned was a fellow Californian who had moved to Bakersfield from Trinidad & Tobago when she was 10.

“She was sweet, beautiful and very intelligent,” said Mr. Crosner, who grew up in Manhattan Beach. “She was definitely someone I wanted to get to know.”

Ms. Mohammed, who saw Mr. Crosner “as a mentor of sorts,” was soon “looped into his social circle,” as she put it.

“We became pretty good friends,” she said. “He would always invite me to group dinners or out to bars or to any other events where he went with his circle of friends.”

In August 2011, just before Ms. Mohammed was to leave California to begin her second year of law school in Pennsylvania, she received a dinner invitation from her mentor and friend.

Assuming it was another informal group gathering, she arrived at the home of Mr. Crosner’s family in Manhattan Beach wearing a T-shirt and cutoff white shorts, but found him there alone — holding a bottle of wine, dressed to the nines and reeking of cologne.

“I was like ‘Hey, where is everyone, who else is coming?’” she recalled. ”Ryan looked so nervous. I had no idea what was going on.”

When she asked about the rest of the gang, Mr. Crosner quietly replied: “It’s just us tonight.”

“I was like ‘whoa.’ I was completely blindsided,” she said. “Here he was all dressed up and I had just come back from Santa Monica Beach. There was still sand on my feet.”

Ms. Mohammed, who had an outfit in the trunk of her car that she had picked up from the cleaners, said she “put it together with a random pair of shoes, threw on some lipstick and said ‘O.K., let’s go.’”

“I respected Ryan so much, I wasn’t about to hurt his feelings by not going to dinner with him,” she said.

Mr. Crosner, who said he thought that Ms. Mohammed “had assumed it would just be the two of us,” laughed at what he described as a very awkward moment.

“But we got over it pretty quickly,” he said.

That first date, at a sushi restaurant in Manhattan Beach, ended with a kiss. They enjoyed a second date a week and a half later, before Ms. Mohammed returned to law school, setting up the beginning of what she described as an “insane” four-year long-distance relationship that lasted long after she returned to California after finishing law school in May 2013, and Mr. Crosner was in another part of the state.

“I have to admit, there were many times when I just thought it would be easier to break up,” she said. “But Ryan kept saying ‘Hang in there, there’s a finish line, this will only be for a short while until we are together forever.’”

The distance between them was eliminated in August 2015, when they bought their home in Redondo Beach.

“It was a long, expensive, crazy and emotionally draining long-distance relationship,” she said. “But looking back, I wouldn’t have wanted to cross the finish line with anyone else.”


