


ARNOLD, MD.

WHAT: A brick Georgian with five bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms, plus a two-bedroom guest cottage

HOW MUCH: $899,000

SIZE: 2,560 square feet in the main house

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $351

SETTING: Arnold is a city of around 23,000 people. It is about five miles from Annapolis, Md., which is on the Chesapeake Bay; about 25 miles from Baltimore; and 30 miles from Washington. Set on a peninsula between the Severn and Magothy Rivers, the area has several marinas.

The Baltimore & Annapolis Trail, built on a former rail line, runs through town. This house is on about four and a half acres buffered by gardens and woods.

INDOORS: The two-story brick Georgian was built in 1815 and most recently updated within the last 10 years. It retains nearly all its original interior features, including molding, hardwood floors and seven mantels.

The layout is symmetrical, with a living room and dining room opposite each other across the entry hall, followed by a kitchen and a family room at the back. The living and dining rooms are framed by ornate arched entryways. Both have marble fireplaces and large six-over-six windows.

The kitchen has been updated with granite countertops and stainless-steel appliances that offset simple white wood cabinets. A door off the kitchen leads to a back porch.

Four bedrooms are upstairs, each with a fireplace and roughly equal in size. Two open to an upper porch.

The fifth bedroom is in a finished lower level with wood-beam ceilings, an additional living area and a second kitchen. At the top of the house is a small belvedere for viewing the countryside.

The guest cottage is licensed to be rented. It has a living room paneled in knotty pine with a fireplace, a kitchen and two bedrooms. Also on the property is an old store now used as a workshop, as well as a smokehouse, a stone springhouse and a three-car garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: Behind the house, there’s a pool. The property is 4.6 acres, cleared around the house, with gardens and woods.

TAXES: $6,663 a year

CONTACT: Alex Tower Sears, the Tower Team, Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage, (443) 254-5661; thetowerteam.com

•

INDIAN HILL, OHIO

WHAT: A cedar contemporary with five bedrooms, five full bathrooms and two half-baths

HOW MUCH: $899,000

SIZE: Approximately 6,461 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $139

SETTING: Indian Hill is a quiet city of approximately 6,000 people about 15 miles from downtown Cincinnati. The area is rural: Nearly a quarter of the city’s land is under preservation, while residential properties are usually three to five acres. City zoning restricts retail development, so shopping is in neighboring communities. According to the listing agent, many residents keep horses. This house is on about three acres neighboring a 54-acre nature preserve with a walking trail and a stream.

INDOORS: The three-story 1975 cedar contemporary was designed by Larry Norris, a Cincinnati architect. It was updated in the late 1990s.

An angular, contemporary design, the house has walls of glass facing woods. The most heavily windowed parts of the house face southwest, a view that is shaded in the summer but open to sun during the winter.

The interior is open plan, with wood floors and pitched wood-paneled ceilings in most rooms. The living and dining area are more than 625 square feet, with walls of glass and ceilings that rise nearly 25 feet. Sliding glass doors open to a deck. The living area has a fireplace.

The kitchen is at the heart of the floor plan, with a breakfast bar. It adjoins a family room with built-in bookcases and a fireplace in a rock wall; there’s also an office nook with built-ins. The family room opens to a deck. There’s also a study with a pitched ceiling, a private deck and a picture window facing the driveway so that visitors can be seen as they arrive.

Three bedrooms, including the master, are upstairs. The master is part of a suite measuring nearly 600 square feet, with a high pitched ceiling. A spiral staircase on this floor leads to a loft that could be used as a crafts studio or work space.

The remaining two bedrooms are on a walkout lower level, which also has an exercise room and a recreation room. Sliding glass doors open to a patio that stretches around to the three-car garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is three rolling acres, mostly wooded.

TAXES: Approximately $13,440 a year

CONTACT: Carol Harris and Kelly Pear, Comey & Shepherd Realtors, (513) 703-1203; carolharris.com

•

BOSTON

WHAT: A condominium with one bedroom and one bathroom

HOW MUCH: $899,000

SIZE: 869 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $1,035

SETTING: This condo is in a former warehouse in Back Bay, a neighborhood and historic district along the Charles River. In addition to its many Victorian-era brownstones, the neighborhood is home to some notable public buildings, including the Boston Public Library, Trinity Church and the John Hancock Tower.

This building is on Newbury Street and surrounded by galleries, cafes and shops ranging from local boutiques to national chains, from Gucci to Marshalls. The Berklee College of Music and Boston University are within blocks, as are the Boston Public Garden and the theater district. The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority has a stop underneath this building.

INDOORS: The 1918 brick building was designed by Arthur Bowditch, who worked on several large-scale commercial buildings and hotels in the city, as well as the 1932 Art Deco Paramount Theater. Once used as a Wurlitzer musical instrument store and later by Tower Records, it was renovated by the architect Frank Gehry in 1989, the year Mr. Gehry won the Pritzker Prize. His renovation added diagonal metal struts and a striking contemporary top floor to the building, and finished one side of the facade in lead-coated copper. The building was converted to condos in 2005.

This unit is on the seventh of nine floors. Its great room has two broad cathedral windows running nearly floor to ceiling, with west-facing views of Fenway Park, as well as the sunset. Ceilings are more than 12 feet tall; floors are quarter-sawn oak with a dark walnut stain.

The kitchen has white cabinets with nickel handles, granite countertops with Carrara marble backsplashes, and stainless-steel appliances by Sub-Zero and Bosch, with a vented hood over the range. The kitchen design is by the Italian company Arclinea. The bedroom has a clerestory window. The bathroom is finished in Carrara marble with a tub and a glass-enclosed shower.

Among the apartment’s amenities are electric blinds, an in-unit laundry and extra storage in the basement. The building has 24/7 concierge service, and there is night security. While no parking is included, the seller rents space at a nearby Hilton for $345 a month.

OUTDOOR SPACE: None.

TAXES: Taxes are approximately $6,450 a year if the condo is used as a primary residence, or $8,370 if used as a secondary residence. Monthly condo fees are $652, which includes heat, gas, water, sewer, master insurance, and refuse and snow removal.

CONTACT: Myrna Rothman, Otis & Ahearn Real Estate, (617) 828-9622; otisahearn.com


