


Just past midnight on Saturday, Jimmy Glenn slumped into a small wooden chair in the back room of his bar in Times Square, his face aglow before a cable broadcast. The bar, a 45-year-old sanctum of boxing ephemera called Jimmy’s Corner, was packed with dozens of patrons in various stages of inebriation and celebration, but Mr. Glenn could hardly bring himself to move.

For much of his career, Mr. Glenn had served as both a friend and occasional trainer to Muhammad Ali at his old boxing facility, the late Times Square Gym, on 42nd Street. The two spent countless hours dancing around the ring, Mr. Ali throwing blow after stinging blow into Mr. Glenn’s padded hands. Although Mr. Ali’s halting speech and labored stride had portended his demise for decades, news of the legendary boxer’s death left Mr. Glenn shocked and unmoored.

“He was a king among men,” he said. “A fighter, a poet, a politician — he was everything.”

Above all, Mr. Glenn valued Mr. Ali’s political courage and unyielding honesty in a sport sullied by corruption. His favorite moment of the boxer’s career was his refusal to be conscripted into the military for the Vietnam War.

“He was the bravest fighter there ever was because he battled just as hard outside the ring,” he said. “There’s never been an athlete with that kind of integrity.”

Mr. Glenn shuffled into the main bar, an expression of sullen grief etched on his face, and switched the televisions from sports highlights to a loop of obituaries on CNN.

“It’s time they learn the news,” he said, leaning his hulking frame against a jukebox. Above his head hung a framed photo of himself with Mr. Ali, one of nearly half a dozen such pictures of the two friends positioned around the bar.

At first the crowd seemed unmoved by the news — or perhaps they were simply unaware — but soon enough, one man caught notice.

“This can’t be happening,” said Johnny Bautista, rising from his seat. As he watched the footage of Mr. Ali’s infamous trash talk, Mr. Bautista, 35, a crane operator, mouthed along in perfect unison. “Everyone be quiet and show some respect,” he bellowed.

For a few moments, the bar quieted to an uneasy hush as patrons took in the news. Every conversation seemed to turn to Mr. Ali.

“Even if you never watched him fight, he was a black activist and a hero,” said Jhannel Bernard, 24. Her friend Shanique Turner, 23, raised a shot of tequila and offered a toast: “To the king,” she said, clinking glasses with Ms. Bernard.

Several customers offered to buy Mr. Glenn drinks in condolence, but he politely declined. Instead, he lumbered back into his office to watch the news in peace.

“He always used to tell me ‘Jimmy, I’m gonna shake up the world,’” he recalled. Then, turning to face the image of his old friend on the television, he let out a deep sigh.

“Well you did it, Ali,” he said to the screen. “You shook up the whole damn world.”


