


Before sunrise on Thursday, someone passing by a community center in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn noticed a woman sitting on a bench and alerted the police. Her throat had been slashed, the authorities said, and hours later, blood splatters were drying on the sidewalk, forming a trail from the nearby public housing complex where she lived.

In Red Hook, residents said they were not unfamiliar with crime, long a source of frustration even as they saw their neighborhood improve in recent years. Still, the killing of the woman, who was identified by the police as Sharon Whigham, 51, unsettled many.

“Our community can’t accept this happening,” said Damien Scott, 36, who grew up in the neighborhood and works at the Joseph Miccio Community Center, near where Ms. Whigham was found.

The police were called around 4:30 a.m. to the sidewalk in front of the community center, on West Ninth Street, where officers found Ms. Whigham unconscious and unresponsive, the authorities said. Emergency workers pronounced her dead at the scene.

A police spokesman said he had no information on a possible killer or a motive.

Later on Thursday, a strip of sidewalk in front of the community center remained cordoned off as investigators worked the scene.

John Reid, a cousin of Ms. Whigham, stood by the police tape outside the community center, taking in the scene before shaking his head and turning away. “I’m lost for words,” he said. “But I came for answers.”

Darryl Curry, 50, said he had grown up in the neighborhood with Ms. Whigham. He passed her on the street on Wednesday afternoon, but he did not stop to talk. “I didn’t think that would be the last time I’d see her,” Mr. Curry said.

“That’s tragic, man,” he added. “I don’t know why someone would do that.”

The trail of blood led to an apartment on Henry Street, about a quarter of a mile from where Ms. Whigham was found, in the Red Hook East Houses, a sprawling New York City Housing Authority complex. She lived in the same complex, two blocks away. She had several children and helped care for her grandchildren, friends and relatives said.

Those who knew Ms. Whigham hinted at tumult in her life. “She had her ups and downs,” Mr. Curry said. “She struggled like anybody else.” Police officials said that Ms. Whigham had been arrested seven times in New York, at least twice on narcotics-related charges.

She had spent much of her life in the neighborhood, and would often sit on the bench where she was found on Thursday. “She wasn’t a stranger to Red Hook,” Mr. Scott, the community center worker, said.

Mr. Scott said Ms. Whigham’s death was a painful reminder of another loss in his life: His mother was fatally stabbed in the housing complex in 1984.

“I know what the family is going through now,” Mr. Scott said.

“I’ve had the time to go through the grieving process,” he added. “But it’s nothing you can ever completely get over.”

The neighborhood in South Brooklyn, which struggles with crime, has seen a considerable transformation in recent years amid an influx of new residents, upscale restaurants and retail outlets, much of it centered on Van Brunt Street.

This year, one other homicide has been recorded in the 76th Precinct, which covers the neighborhood: In January, a 33-year-old man was found with gunshot wounds in the lobby of a building in the same complex.

Near the scene where Ms. Whigham was found on Thursday, residents said they were dismayed and frustrated. “I’m in shock,” said Miram Acosta, who was on her way to the community center for breakfast. “Now I’m scared to walk around there. I think I’ll go to McDonald’s for breakfast instead.”

Cathy Melendez passed the scene as she walked her daughter to school.

“The neighborhood has changed a lot,” she said. “It’s better than it used to be. But I’m still not surprised it happened. It’s just what happens here. It’s like, again?”


