


At halftime, it seemed safe to go to bed. The Golden State Warriors led the Oklahoma City Thunder, 60-47, on Monday night. Golden State, the record-breaking 73-9 team, seemed to be cruising at home to a 1-0 series lead in the best-of-seven Western Conference finals. The half was capped by the N.B.A.’s most valuable player, Stephen Curry, swishing one of his trademark long 3-pointers over Andre Roberson.

Russell Westbrook, in particular, struggled for the Thunder, shooting 1 for 8 for 3 points. But a different Westbrook and Thunder came out for the second half.

It started with a third quarter in which the Thunder seemed to score at will, cutting Golden State’s lead to 3. The Thunder’s 38 points were the most scored in a third quarter against Golden State this season. In the fourth quarter, the mighty Warriors seemed to forget how to shoot, scoring 14 points and losing a game they seemed to have won, 108-102.

“Way too many quick shots,” Coach Steve Kerr said. “Five minutes left in the game and we’re down 4 or whatever, and we were acting like we had 20 seconds left. Five minutes is an eternity.”

Curry said, “We got rushed a little bit and tried to go for the home run plays.”

Golden State had shot its way out of trouble all season, but in the final quarter the team was 6 for 23, including 1 of 10 from 3-point range.

Golden State got 20 points or more from each of its big three — Curry, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green — but none from the starting center Andrew Bogut and 16 from the bench.

Despite its second-half woes, Golden State still had a fighting chance, trailing by 3 with 22 seconds left. As Westbrook stopped dribbling to call a timeout, he dragged his pivot foot. Kerr, standing right by the play, wanted a traveling call, but none was forthcoming.

“I thought he walked, but it wasn’t called, so that’s the way it goes,” Kerr said.

“I just played till I heard the whistle,” Westbrook said.

Joe Borgia, the N.B.A.’s senior vice president for referee operations, acknowledged the no-call was a mistake. “The officials, no one could get in a good position to see him drag that pivot foot. It’s an unfortunate miss, but so much going on in the play, the speed of it, and officiating is about getting angles and sometimes you just can’t get them, and they did not get a great angle on that play.”

Oklahoma City has now won three in a row on the road against San Antonio and Golden State, who combined to lose just three times at home in the regular season. Should the Thunder make the N.B.A. finals, they would also cede home-court advantage to the Cavaliers or the Raptors. (That series was set to start Tuesday night in Cleveland.)

Despite the loss, the Warriors are far from sunk. Bookmakers still have them as favorites to win the series at 4-7, with the Thunder at 7-5. That would translate to about a 60-40 edge to Golden State, even though the Warriors must now win four of six games.

Losing Game 1 at home in a seven-game series is not ideal, but also not a death sentence. Indeed, it has happened five times in the last two years, and each time the losing team came back to win the series. The Toronto Raptors in this year’s playoffs dropped Game 1 in their series against the Indiana Pacers and the Miami Heat, but rallied to win both.

“We’ve never been down, 0-1, at home; it’s a little different,” Green said. “Coming out in Game 2, we know we need to win. That’s pretty much what it is.”

Oklahoma City center Steven Adams apologized Tuesday for describing Golden State’s guards as “quick little monkeys” in a televised on-court interview after the game. Adams’s father is from England, his mother is from Tonga and he grew up in New Zealand.

“It’s just different, mate,” Adams told USA Today Sports. “Different words, different expressions, and stuff like that. But they obviously can be taken differently, depending on which country you’re in. I’m assimilating, mate, still trying to figure out the boundaries. But I definitely overstepped them tonight.”


