


Eric Fehr scored the tiebreaking goal against his former team with 4 minutes 28 seconds to go, and the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Washington Capitals, 2-1, tying their second-round Eastern Conference playoff series at one game apiece.

Fehr redirected a pass out of the corner from Evgeni Malkin, sending the puck off the right post and past Washington goaltender Braden Holtby.

Fehr had played parts of nine seasons during two stints in Washington before leaving as a free agent last summer to join Pittsburgh.

Carl Hagelin had put Pittsburgh ahead in the second period before Marcus Johansson pulled Washington even on a power play with about 16 minutes to go in the third.

The series shifts to Pittsburgh for Game 3 on Monday night. The Penguins improved to 43-0 this season, including the playoffs, when leading after two periods. They have not lost two consecutive games since overtime losses to Carolina and Tampa Bay on Jan. 12 and 14.

The Penguins’ rookie goalie, Matt Murray, made 23 saves. Holtby had 33 stops for Washington.

The scrappy tone of the game was established early on when Washington’s Brooks Orpik leveled Olli Maatta with a high hit. The Penguins defenseman fell backward, and his helmet slammed to the ice. Maatta was helped off and did not return.

Twelve of the game’s first 13 shots on goal were taken by Pittsburgh. The Penguins did not generate many truly dangerous chances, however, and the Capitals began to look more active at the offensive end in the closing minutes, when Murray blocked a backhand by T. J. Oshie — who had a hat trick in Game 1 — from the top of the crease during a power play.

Hagelin put Pittsburgh ahead at 7:08 of the second period after a pretty behind-the-net feed from Nick Bonino.

Washington appeared to have tied the game late in the second when defenseman Nate Schmidt sent a shot in over a prone Murray. But Capitals center Evgeny Kuznetsov was called for goalie interference, and the goal was waved off.

LEAFS WIN LOTTERY The Toronto Maple Leafs’ rebuilding project got a big lift on Saturday when they won the N.H.L. draft lottery, putting them in a position to take the American center Auston Matthews with the first pick.

With a 20 percent chance of winning the lottery on Saturday night, the Maple Leafs became the first last-place team to keep the top position in the draft order since the Edmonton Oilers in 2010.

“We earned this the hard way,” said Brendan Shanahan, the Maple Leafs’ president. “It wasn’t a whole lot of fun this year. When you have an opportunity to pick first over all, it’s an important moment for the Toronto Maple Leafs. It’s an important moment for our fans and our ownership group, who have given us the support to do this build the right way.”

The Maple Leafs have had the first pick just once, in 1985, when they selected Wendel Clark. Shanahan would not provide any hints about which player the Leafs might select.

Listed at 6 feet 2 inches and 194 pounds, Matthews is an Arizona-born forward who is rated by N.H.L. Central Scouting as the draft’s top prospect. After spending three seasons playing for various U.S.A. Hockey developmental teams, Matthews elected to play for Zurich in Switzerland’s professional league. He had 24 goals and 22 assists for 46 points in 36 regular-season games but managed just three assists in four playoff games before Zurich was eliminated.

Matthews has not played since March, but he will have an opportunity to showcase his talents by representing the United States at the world hockey championship tournament in Russia next month.

The Winnipeg Jets will have the second selection when the draft is held in Buffalo on June 24 and 25. The Jets made the largest jump in the lottery, moving from the sixth to the second selection.

The Finnish-born forwards Patrik Laine and Jesse Puljujarvi, who helped their nation win the world junior championship tournament in January, are ranked behind Matthews. Laine may be gaining momentum after he was named the most valuable player in the Finnish league’s playoffs, in which he scored 10 goals and five assists as Tappara won the championship.

The Columbus Blue Jackets moved up one spot and will pick third. The Oilers dropped two spots and will pick fourth after owning the first pick in four of the last six drafts, having won the lottery three times. The Vancouver Canucks slipped from third to fifth. The Calgary Flames dropped one spot and will pick sixth.

The N.H.L.’s last-place team has won the lottery in just six of the 21 times it has been held. The Oilers, in 2010, were the last last-place team to win the lottery, which led to their selection of Taylor Hall.

BYNG FINALISTS SET Florida’s Aleksander Barkov, Boston’s Loui Eriksson and Los Angeles’s Anze Kopitar were named finalists for the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as the N.H.L. player who exhibited sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct combined with a high standard of playing ability.

Barkov had 28 goals and 31 assists with just eight penalty minutes in 66 games. Eriksson had 30 goals, 33 assists and 12 penalty minutes in 82 games. Kopitar had 25 goals, 49 assists and 16 penalty minutes in 81 games.

Members of the Professional Hockey Writers Association submitted their ballots at the end of the regular season. The winner will be announced June 22.


