


The story of “Oslo” begins with a Norwegian diplomat in a restaurant with an American playwright.

In early 2012, as my play “Blood and Gifts” was finishing its run at Lincoln Center Theater, my director, Bartlett Sher, arranged for me to have a drink with a friend of his, Terje Rod-Larsen, who was then a United Nations special envoy focused on Lebanon.

The two men and their families had become friends through their daughters, who attended middle school together. Mr. Sher had invited his friend to rehearsals of “Blood and Gifts” to talk to the cast about his work as a diplomatic negotiator in the Middle East.

Late on a bitterly cold January night, we met for warm drinks at an Upper West Side haunt a few blocks from the theater. Mr. Larsen had just seen my play. He was vivacious and charming, draped in understated European finery — including dress shoes so elegant I filed the detail away under the mental heading Interesting Character Trait.

Peppering him with questions, I learned that his wife, Mona Juul, was Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Norway Mission to the United Nations. Further, that they had both been deeply involved for years in the politics of the Middle East.

As we ordered our second round, he got to the point. “We were part of a historic event,” Mr. Larsen said, “which we have waited 20 years to see written about.” I leaned in closely, eager to hear everything.

As a playwright, I look to tell stories that are framed against great political rupture. I am obsessed with putting characters onstage who struggle with, and against, cascading world events — and who are changed forever through that struggle. While journalism sharpens our minds, the theater can expand our sense of what it means to be human. It is where we can come together in a communal space to hear ideas that grip us, surprise us — even infuriate us — as we learn of things we didn’t know. For me, that is a deeply, thrillingly, political act.

I hunt perpetually for these kinds of stories. I look for them everywhere, but sometimes the story finds you.

In that bar, Mr. Larsen explained that he and his wife were intimately involved with the making of the Oslo Accords. I knew of the first-ever peace deal between the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. I’ll never forget watching the signing ceremony in the White House Rose Garden on television, Sept. 13, 1993 — seeing President Clinton preside over that historic handshake between the bitterest of enemies, Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister of Israel, and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. I already knew the joy and the rage that handshake caused around the world.

Then he told me something I did not know: that there was a clandestine diplomatic back channel that had made the accords possible. That without a handful of men and women — Israeli, Palestinian and Norwegian — working in secret to try to alter the political reality of two peoples, those accords never would have happened.

And when I heard that, I knew the writing of my next play had begun.

I contacted Ms. Juul and asked if we could meet. She was surprised at my interest in these events, but eventually agreed to talk to me. In person she was charming as well, but far more reserved than her husband. She deftly steered the conversation away from her own career and achievements, graciously but firmly keeping herself from being the center of attention.

I began a yearslong process of reading, travel and interviews with multiple participants as I sought to understand the full history of the secret channel — what came to be known as the Oslo Channel — through which the accords were birthed. Everything that Mr. Larsen and Ms. Juul had told me turned out to be in the public record — but they had downplayed their own involvement.

In our conversations, they had focused on the accomplishments of the Israelis and Palestinians who were involved, but Mr. Larsen and Ms. Juul were the ones who midwifed the entire process. And, like the agreements themselves, their involvement proved to be deeply controversial.

There are those who saw the Oslo Channel as a necessary and bold attempt to bring peace to the Middle East; there are others who saw it as reckless, naïve meddling that only added to the anguish in this region.

The further I dug, the more gripped I became as a dramatist. Here was the stuff of theater — events that were almost preposterous in their strangeness: clandestine meetings, often run by those who had no experience with such things; people’s lives constantly put at risk; governments threatened with calamity; emotions rising and falling at an operatic scale; people pushed to the brink of what they thought possible as friendships were fused and torn apart.

It became clear that Mr. Larsen and Ms. Juul would be characters at the very heart of the play. These were the sort of protagonists a writer looks for: two complicated, articulate people driven to achieve something far greater than themselves — who stumble, make mistakes, but keep pushing on.

As I researched, I drew a tight bracket around the historic events directly preceding and occurring during the time of the Channel’s existence. I burrowed into this sliver of history as deeply as I could, to summon a specific moment in time and place.

Then I took the who, what, when and where of journalism and threw them into a blender. I wanted to write a play, not a textbook or a re-enactment. I sought to capture the spirit of those real events — their craziness, fear, joy and heartbreak. I wanted to tell a story about men and women risking their own lives and challenging their own beliefs as they struggle without a road map toward peace.

The historic events in “Oslo” are all true but I have taken dramatic liberties. When Mr. Larsen and Ms. Juul come to see the play at Lincoln Center Theater, directed by Bartlett Sher, they will see my “Terje Rod-Larsen” and my “Mona Juul.” I have theatricalized and reinvented — all to focus my play on the radical act at the center of the actual Oslo Channel.

In the middle of endless bloodshed and hatred, members of the Israeli government and the P.L.O. chose to sit across from their enemy and see them as human beings. Each side listened to the other and was permanently changed by that listening. I am awed by the personal and political courage that took. It is a moment of history that I do not want forgotten.


