


CLEVELAND — LeBron James changed his routine in the wake of another demoralizing loss. On Sunday night, rather than take the Cleveland Cavaliers’ late bus back to their hotel in San Francisco, James showered, took care of his news media obligations and then boarded the first bus.

James had pressing business. He wanted to rewatch the Cavaliers’ 33-point loss to the Golden State Warriors in Game 2 of the N.B.A. finals as quickly as possible. So he grabbed a seat next to James Jones, his teammate, and went through the film, painful possession by painful possession. He found his seven turnovers especially galling.

“A couple of them were bad footwork,” James said Tuesday afternoon, adding: “Out of the seven, I would say four of them I can clean up and stop those guys from getting out on the break and doing what they do best, and that’s filling the lanes and sharing the ball. I’ll be much better and much more sound.”

The series will resume at Quicken Loans Arena on Wednesday night, and the Cavaliers, who trail by two games to none, are running out of time. The math is unforgiving. The Cavaliers need to win four games to claim Cleveland’s first major sports championship since 1964. They have five games to do it against an opponent that lost just nine times in the regular season.

James described the situation as “do or die.”

The Cavaliers, who are not exactly known for their depth in the first place, could be more short-handed than usual. Kevin Love was placed in the league’s concussion protocol after he was elbowed in the head in Game 2. On Tuesday, he met with medical personnel. His status for the game was unclear.

“It’s going to be the next man up,” James said. “We’re down, 0-2, and we can’t afford to look and say, ‘Wow, Kev’s not playing. What are we going to do?’ It’s next man up, because it’s a must-win for us.”

The Cavaliers have lost seven straight games to the Warriors, a stretch of futility that dates to Game 4 of last year’s finals. The Warriors realized then that they could go small against the Cavaliers and use their speed and shooting ability to run them off the court. Cleveland has yet to figure out how to slow them down.

“We just want to win,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said. “It doesn’t matter who scores the points or who gets the credit. We do feel like the strength of our team is our depth, and we’re not overly reliant on one player.”

The Cavaliers have focused their defensive attention on the Warriors’ Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson. But they have been willing passers when defenders collapse on them, and teammates like Draymond Green, who scored 28 points in Game 2, have made the most of their opportunities.

“They put you at some disadvantages,” Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue said.

James has tried to operate as a facilitator for the Cavaliers. In the first two games, he averaged 21 points, 10 rebounds and 9 assists while shooting 42.1 percent from the field. The question is whether he will opt to be even more assertive in Game 3, especially if Love is absent or limited.

“I try to do whatever it takes to help our team win,” James said, adding: “My game doesn’t waver one way or the other. I’m not a pure scorer. I’m not an all-assist guy. I’m not just a rebounder. I do everything. So for me, I said after Game 2 that I’ve got to play better. But as far as my numbers, I don’t worry about that.”


