


There is a myth explaining how blancmange acquired its Arabic name. From “The Book of Cooking in Maghreb and Andalus in the Era of Almohads,” by an anonymous 13th-century author: “It is reported that a cook of Persia had his residence next to that of Muhallab b. Abi Safra” — a famed seventh-century general — “and that he presented himself to prepare for him a good dish ... he prepared it and offered it to him; he was pleased and called it Muhallabiyya.”

The recipe that follows is for lamb pudding. Today, though, muhallabiyya or muhallabia or muhallebi is the Turkish (and Greek and Arabic) word for a lightly set milk pudding, often flavored with pistachios or almonds and rosewater. Which is also what blancmange (blanc for white, manger for eat) is made of, or used to be: We don’t make it in America anymore, at least not under that old, pretty name.

To write about something that has gone so far out of style requires (I have learned) some defense. Here is what I like about the old, wobbly white pudding:

I like that it is the world’s first truly international dessert, finding, in the Middle Ages, a home in (nearly) every cookbook, and in every country in Europe and the Middle East.

I like the economy of its ingredient list, even in medieval versions: almond milk, chicken, sugar, rosewater. In the mid-17th century, the chicken — exhausted by the centuries of labor — dropped out, replaced by the thickener isinglass, then sea moss or cornstarch or gelatin. But it stayed simple.

I have also always had a soft spot for foods devised for the physically delicate — an antiquated category including “nursery” and “invalid” foods, many of which were also desserts — and for dishes flattered with the compliment “delicate.” At their intersection is blancmange: easy for a fragile body to digest, and expressing that highest of human ideals, delicacy, which I think enjoys that usage because we all know, on some level, that we are such bulls in the china shop.

And I like very much that blancmange, with its endearing tremble and mild name, has proved both resilient and wily. It is as if, over the centuries, the dessert has been ducking or weaving or evading capture, in the style of a reptile or fox or petty thief. It will not be pinned or extinguished.

It is impossible to figure out quite where exactly it began, and when, and where it went, and where after that. Blancmange has gone by muhallibiyya, isfidhabaj, blancmange, blancmanger, blancmengier, blanc manger, blanched manchet, blank maunger, blomanger, manjar blanch, manjar braquo, manjar blanco, Whitpot, bramangere, blamensir, albus cibus, cibaria alba, esus albabus. The gift of the muhallabiya tale is how it floats outside history, like a “Just So” story — say, How the Camel Got His Hump or the Leopard His Spots — providing, for once, a shimmering and uncontestable beginning.

Each time the blancmange is threatened with extinction, it changes. Pease pudding has gone the way of the woolly mammoth. Haddock-apple pie might as well have been a dodo. Why did the blancmange’s mixture of capon and sugar and almond milk not lead to its demise? That is just the sort of thing — meat in a sweet dish, sugar in an entree — that often does; we don’t eat much medieval food today. But blancmange dropped an ingredient and stayed.

It is with us still. Its dust-rose-and-copper name has rubbed off, but if you put blancmange ingredients and instructions next to those for panna cotta, the differences are only details. Panna cotta isn’t necessarily flavored with nuts; but neither are the blancmanges, so called, that I’m told are still served today at British children’s parties and school lunches.

It might make sense even to treat blancmange as a genus, in a taxonomy of sweets. Genus: blancmange; Species: muhallabia or isfidhabaj or panna cotta; or even, depending on your liberality, flan or crème brûlée or custard or Bavarian cream (which all contain eggs, and which probably only the most promiscuous taxonomist would permit). It’s just an idea. But it’s forward looking, and lowers chronological and national borders that are mostly made up.

Which delivers me to what I like most about blancmange: as long as it’s without too much gelatin, I find it utterly delicious. Jessica Kerwin Jenkins writes in her “Encyclopedia of the Exquisite” that blancmange “tastes like heaven.” And it is an enrapturing, old-fashioned idea of heaven — beamy angels with gold harps, God on a throne, St. Peter at the milky gates.

Recipe: Blancmange


