


Three decades of international reporting have provided Nicholas Kristof with his fair share of stories.

There’s the time he lost his 13-year-old daughter at a shrine in Iran — only to find her some 40 minutes later, hidden from his view by her chador.

There’s the time he survived a plane crash as he entered Congo — only to be forced to escape from a warlord as he exited the country.

And then there’s the time he purchased two teenage prostitutes in Cambodia — to secure their freedom.

Mr. Kristof related all these stories, and many more, to a standing-room-only crowd at this month’s Times Insider event.

Throughout all the tales, the two-time Pulitzer Prize–winner also offered incisive commentary on instances of governmental censorship, on his crusade for the empowerment of women and, in particular, on grappling with issues of journalistic ethics.

In one such case, Mr. Kristof and his wife Sheryl WuDunn — both of whom were New York Times correspondents covering the 1989 protests in Tiananmen Square at the time — had to decide whether to help a Chinese protester flee the country.

“It was an agonizing decision, pitting our professional obligations to The New York Times — our obligations as journalists — against what we thought was the right thing to do,” he said. “And that comes up periodically in the course of journalism.”

(In the end, the couple decided to help — “with as few fingerprints” as possible.)

“One of the problems with journalism generally is that we cover what happened today, but we don’t cover what happens every day,” Mr. Kristof said, responding to question about underreported crises. “And so what we tend systematically to under cover are the kids who die every day of malaria, of diarrhea, of measles — about 15,000 kids will die on any given day. That is something we just don’t report. And I wish we could figure out better ways of covering that, globally and at home.”

Stay tuned with Times Insider for video highlights from Mr. Kristof’s event.

Times Insider Events bring live programing to Times Insiders and their guests. If you are not a Times Insider but would like to receive invitations to Times Insider Events, you can subscribe here.


