


When Monica Khemsurov and Jill Singer, the editors of the online magazine Sight Unseen, introduced the Offsite design fair in 2014, they focused on fostering American talent. But at this weekend’s edition, there will be a healthy Norwegian presence. Following a few trips to the Scandinavian country, Khemsurov, who is a T contributor, noticed that young talent there lacked access to manufacturing — not unlike the circumstances stateside 10 years ago. So she and Singer paired five emerging Norwegian studios with five enterprising American ateliers, who became Skype-pals and ultimately created Norway x New York, a series of collaborative objects, lighting and furniture, specifically for this year’s Offsite. Here, a preview of the “exhibition within our exhibition,” as Khemsurov calls it.

Pete Oyler and Nora Mattingly, the duo behind Assembly, brought an arts-and-crafts sensibility to Morten Skjaerpe Knarrum and Jonas Norheim’s humorous home goods, resulting in a set of Brooklyn-made mix-and-match vessels. The four different shapes, rendered in a palette of greens and grays, can be combined 19 different ways or each used on their own, should you host a large(r) soiree.

Khemsurov and Singer set up this pairing without realizing the two designers both had backgrounds in the fashion industry, although their aesthetic commonalities certainly sealed the deal. Working with lines and levels — and the daily ritual of getting dressed — they created a bench, mirrored clothing rack and hangers from blackened ash and steel.

Takagi (technically based in D.C., but an honorary New Yorker) and Homstvedt have collaborated before, so they used this as an opportunity to explore a new process. They turned to ceramic extrusion (very simply put: pushing clay through a molded tube) for their Beaded Vessels, and also devied a wooden cabinet with a single door that flips from side to side.

The foursome (that’s Dylan Davis and Jean Lee of Ladies & Gentlemen, and Vera K. Kleppe and Åshild Kyte of their eponymous studio) began with a glass piece, which became a lightbulb cover; then, the rest of the adjustable fixture, that uses a floor weight and pulley, took shape. Called “Krane,” it’s a nod to the late Italian designer Achille Castiglioni’s Arco and Parentesi lamps.

When designing housewares, both Bower (made by Danny Giannella and Tammer Hijazi) and van den Berg rely on simple geometry, unanticipated details — and functionality. Together, they dreamed up more or less circular objects made from squarish materials: a light and dark wood-striped tray, and a bowl and vase. They also shunned any adornments, shining a light on the items’ raw beauty.


