


Elizabeth and Nick Flint were apartment hunting in Brooklyn two years ago when a friend suggested they consider Jersey City instead. The couple, who were renting in Williamsburg, wanted to buy a place.

“By the time we found something in Brooklyn, it was like 13 stops on the L, so we started to look at other places,” Ms. Flint said. They soon realized that Jersey City had a vibrant downtown with an accessible waterfront. It was also a short commute to Manhattan.

The Flints focused on Jersey City Heights, at the city’s northern end. “We found this area of the Heights that was untapped,” said Ms. Flint, 36, a yoga instructor. The sleepy enclave had a mix of one-, two- and three-family homes and large apartment buildings. While some blocks were handsome, others seemed rundown.

The couple, who now have a 3½-year-old son and a newborn daughter, paid around $385,000 about a year and a half ago for a house with three bedrooms, two and a half baths and a small yard on Jefferson Avenue. Ms. Flint misses the energy of Williamsburg; where she lives now “kind of reminds me of Greenpoint five years ago,” she said, referring to the Brooklyn neighborhood.

The Heights is one of many neighborhoods in Jersey City drawing people priced out of Manhattan and Brooklyn.

“As Manhattan becomes increasingly more densely populated, people are migrating to the next stop,” said Michael J. DeMarco, the president of Mack-Cali Realty, which is building 6,000 residential units near the Jersey City waterfront, including M2 at Marbella, a 311-unit rental opening this month. “Now they’re looking across the water and saying, ‘Isn’t that a lot closer than Bushwick or Williamsburg?’ ”

Countless restaurants are now downtown. Whole Foods Market plans to open near the Grove Street PATH station in 2020. “Everywhere you look around, there is something new happening,” said Nicole Sorgentoni, 33, a jewelry buyer for Loft who pays $2,320 a month for a one-bedroom in 70 Columbus, a luxury rental downtown.

Steven M. Fulop, the 39-year-old mayor, said of the city, “We’ve kind of hit our stride.” He and his fiancée, Jaclyn Thompson, are renovating a Victorian rowhouse that they bought last summer in the Heights.

Schools remain a wild card. The city has some excellent schools, like Dr. Ronald E. McNair Academic High School, which is ranked third in the state, according to U.S. News and World Report. But others struggle.

“The school system is one that we’re still focused on improving,” Mr. Fulop said.

Popular charter schools have long wait lists. Mr. Flint, 40, an actor, waited in line for two days (hiring someone to camp overnight) to get his son a coveted spot in a prekindergarten charter program at Concordia Learning Center at St. Joseph’s School for the Blind.

But many parents say schools are improving, especially downtown. “The schools down here are getting better, and they’re getting better because more parents are getting involved,” said Jesse Teeters, 37, an actor whose daughter, almost 6, goes to kindergarten at Public School 5 downtown.

Mr. Teeters and his wife, Megan, 37, a clothing designer, bought a three-bedroom rowhouse in 2011 on First Street in the Village, a downtown neighborhood. They paid $515,000; similar properties in the area are selling for around $1 million today, he said.

Jersey City, with some 264,000 residents over 15 square miles, is a collection of neighborhoods with distinct personalities. In 2010, the population was 28 percent Hispanic or Latino, 26 percent black, 24 percent Asian and 22 percent non-Hispanic white, according to United States Census data.

The Hudson River is to the east; Union City, North Bergen and Hoboken are to the north; the Hackensack River, Newark Bay and Secaucus to the west; and Bayonne to the south.

The varied housing stock is dispersed along wide, congested avenues and quieter side streets. While high-rises abound in waterfront neighborhoods like Exchange Place and Newport, other waterfront enclaves like Paulus Hook retain a quaint sensibility. Row homes and brownstones can be found in downtown neighborhoods like Hamilton Park and Van Vorst Park. Bergen-Lafayette, to the southwest, has 19th-century Victorian houses and brownstones, along with neglected properties.

Some 9,700 residential units, mostly rentals, are under construction around the city and 16,000 more are approved, according to the mayor’s office.

Journal Square, in the north-center of the city, has a bustling transit hub surrounded by courthouses and shopping. Quieter swathes of Journal Square, like Hilltop, offer a mix of homes, along with larger multifamily buildings. It’s the “up-and-coming” area, said Kim Beier, a sales woman for Halstead Property.

On June 1, there were 529 residential properties on the market, according to JCity Realty, with a median asking price of $399,000. Listings ranged from a two-bedroom one-bath condominium in Journal Square for $55,000 up to a three-bedroom three-bath condo downtown for $2.5 million.

Bidding wars are commonplace, said Natalie Miniard, the owner of JCity Realty.

Prices are highest downtown, which includes the waterfront. Of the condos (the largest category of sales there) that sold downtown between January and May, the median price was $670,000, up from $583,500 during the same period in 2015, according to JCity Realty, an increase of almost 15 percent. By comparison, the median price for a condo in Journal Square was $243,500 through May of 2016, up about 26 percent from $194,000 a year earlier.

Rents also skew to the river. The median monthly rent in May for waterfront rentals was $3,000; the rest of downtown was $2,695; Journal Square was $1,825; and the Heights was $1,650, according to Urban Luxe Realty.

Liberty State Park, a 1,212-acre park abutting the Hudson River, houses the Liberty Science Center and a 9/11 memorial. Visitors can take a kayak tour of the Hudson River estuary or catch a ferry to the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.

Mana Contemporary, an arts center in Journal Square, is open to the public during select hours.

The Newport Center Mall has four department stores, more than 130 shops, an 11-screen cinema and a 1,000-seat dining pavilion. A pedestrian promenade along Newark Avenue between Grove and Erie Streets is lined with bars and restaurants.

The Jersey City school district serves about 28,000 children. Universal prekindergarten is available to all 3- and 4-year-olds in the city. There are 26 elementary schools and four middle schools, including a magnet school for gifted students. Four of the city’s eight high schools are magnet schools. The district’s average SAT score for 2014-2105 was 406 in reading, 407 in writing and 432 in math, compared with statewide averages of 500, 499 and 521. The New Jersey Department of Education website lists 12 charter schools.

Private School Review lists more than 30 private schools in Jersey City on its website, many of which are parochial.

The PATH has stops in Jersey City at Exchange Place, Newport, Grove Street and Journal Square. The trip to 33rd Street in Manhattan is around 15 minutes from Newport and around 20 minutes from Journal Square. The ride to the World Trade Center is around five minutes from Exchange Place and about 10 minutes from Journal Square.

New Jersey Transit operates buses to the Port Authority from various points in Jersey City.

NY Waterway ferries go to Manhattan from Paulus Hook, Liberty Harbor and Port Liberte. Light rail connects residents to various points in Jersey City and nearby towns. An entrance to the Holland Tunnel is in Jersey City.

When Dutch colonists arrived on the waterfront of what is now Jersey City in 1623, the Lenape Indians were living there, according to Jersey City Past and Present, a website run by New Jersey City University.


