


Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.

Goldie Hawn relaxes near a canyon trailhead. She wears snakeskin-print leggings, a tie-dyed tank top, oversize sunglasses, sneakers and a gold medallion around her neck, her blond hair blown out. She tips a bottle of water to her lips, then lifts it higher and higher, chugging it now, until her head suddenly jerks back and the water explodes out of her mouth. “I couldn’t swallow it fast enough!” she whines to herself. Then she looks into the distance, raises her arm in the air and calls to an off-screen handler for help: “Cheyenne!”

As an actress, Goldie Hawn perfected the ditsy blonde, but in playing the part so expertly, she proved herself to be smarter than she looked. In her latest role — on Instagram, in photographs and 15-second video skits — Hawn pulls off a similarly impressive trick. Her performance is a refreshing delight, alternately winking at the lunacy of the fitness-and-mindfulness-lifestyle and embracing it in her own way. She ends up imparting a kind of soothing release to those who scroll through her world.

Part of the lightness of Hawn’s feed comes with her apparent acceptance of the fact that she no longer possesses the aspirational Hollywood body. Stay fit? You bet. But why filter? Hawn is 70, and many of her Instagram videos play like goofy audition tapes for “America’s Next Top Retiree.” In her Instagram debut, Hawn bounced on a teensy indoor trampoline, arms flapping in and out of jumping-jack position, mouth agape in a kind of splendored focus on fitness. She flails and pants as she lopes down a canyon running trail. She wears a mammoth turquoise ring and chugs a green tonic straight from the juicer. She raises a pair of dumbbells above her head while her little dog settles onto her chest. She crouches low next to her swimming pool, bottom raised toward the camera, as she tries to “sneak up to welcome the ducks in my pool”; they’re caught in the photograph, blurred and flapping away. She waits out Los Angeles traffic, feet on the dash, tapping her foot to Sade. In a recent post, she dances erratically on a golf course in capri leggings and a sun visor, pumps her club over her head, then swings; her videographer dutifully follows the arc of the ball.

Hawn’s foray into Instagram appears to have been prompted by her daughter, Kate Hudson, who has had glittering social-media success: Hawn occasionally popped up on Hudson’s Instagram, to the delight of Hudson’s followers. But now, Hawn’s account functions as a bit of a rebuttal to Hudson’s brand of digital celebrity. As Hudson’s film career has waned (Hudson is all of 37, making her practically dead by romantic comedy standards), she has remade herself as a social-media queen. Her Instagram feed also features goofy, “relatable” images, but they’re staged with the slickness and extreme self-awareness of a sophisticated #branding exercise. In one snap of Hudson executing a situp, ostensibly shared because her dog has hilariously come to rest on her tummy, her expression is poised just so: lips pursed, cheekbones contoured, eyes cast down to emphasize the full curve of her lush eyelashes. In another shot, she’s wearing a bikini on a boat, back contorted into a tummy-slimming curve, arm casually lifted above her head in a way that just happens to mimic a time-tested pinup pose. In the background is Hawn, knotty knees exposed to the sun, face turned from the camera as she rummages through a beach bag.

Hawn sometimes borrows pictures from her daughter’s feed and posts them on her own, and the contrast between their approaches to the source material is revealing. Consider the dual presentation of one shared image posted in honor of Hudson’s April birthday. In the photograph, Hudson and Hawn lie in a circle of women on a chocolate-colored area rug staged with votive candles, Ikat throw pillows and two massive amethyst geodes. With pairs of bare feet mingling toward the middle and hands interlocked at their sides, their bodies are arranged to form a kind of socialite star fruit.

On Hudson’s feed, the image has been run through a filter that imparts an orange, airbrushed glow to the participants’ skin. The caption — “Birthday meditation went just as planned: Intentions set, tears shed, laughter achieved and then some, and enough love in one circle to last many lifetimes #lovemygirlfriends #lovemymama #callingonangels” — is weighted with mystical jargon, emotional appeals and what I can only assume is a Tiesto reference. Hawn’s version is naturally lit, and the caption is light, too: “Afternoon birthday Meditation with Kate and besties!” She manages to commemorate the occasion without sounding like ad copy for a protein bar.

If Hudson’s social-media empire represents a slightly desperate Act II to a flagging acting career, Hawn’s Instagram is an Act III: a hopeful, rumbling comeback for an older woman in Hollywood who hasn’t appeared on film in 14 years. (Hawn’s last movie, “The Banger Sisters,” was released in 2002.) Hawn’s Instagram represents a return to acting, if only on a very small screen. Maybe it’s just a warm up: shortly after her Instagram debut, Hawn revealed that she was plotting a big-screen comeback, playing Amy Schumer’s mother in an action-comedy film.

Hawn’s snaps draw a squiggly line between slapstick and sincerity. In the comedies that made her a star, she succeeded in stretching the dumb blonde trope partly because she seemed so comfortable inhabiting the stereotype. Her dizzy, go-go dancing hostess on “Rowan & Martin’s Laugh-In” was inspired by her own transcendently flubbed audition, in which she giggled throughout the proceedings. She made fun of herself, but that didn’t mean she was ashamed of herself. On Instagram, Hawn cheeses up her videos for the camera, but they’re based on genuine documents of her lifestyle. When she’s not playing up the earthy Hollywood diva role, Hawn sprinkles her feed with chipper philosophizing: a cat sleeping on a sleeping dog (“If they can get along … just think of our potential”); Hawn kissing a chimp on the lips (“Love has no boundaries”).

Most of Hawn’s Instagram images aren’t selfies, so “Cheyenne!” isn’t just a construction: She really does need a celebrity handler to tag along as she prances around golf courses and hiking trails. Hawn’s Instagram proves that she is really, truly into this stuff, but she’s also capable of stepping outside herself for 15 seconds and recognizing when her Hollywood hobbies might be just silly enough to make some people laugh. You can have a serious commitment to health and fitness, she seems to be saying, but you don’t have to be a serious person.


