


LAKE GEORGE, N.Y. — A few days before Memorial Day, this popular tourist destination in the Adirondacks was already a postcard-perfect image of summer: The T-shirt shops were open; the A & W Root Beer stand offered more than 60 flavors of ice cream; and the steamship Mohican was cruising the blue waters of Lake George.

But this village is trying to change its reputation as a summer-only spot and become a year-round destination.

In July, a 120-room Courtyard Marriott Hotel is expected to open on Canada Street, the main thoroughfare, as a way to attract visitors beyond the warm-weather months. Construction of the six-story hotel, which will tower over the surrounding two-story homes and stores, is possible because of a zoning amendment passed in 2015 that allows taller buildings on the west side of the street. Buildings on the east side, close to the lake, will remain small.

“We’ve got to grow up,” said Robert M. Blais, who for 45 years, has been the mayor of this village of 900 full-time residents. “Our biggest asset is tourism, but we need it year-round.”

The Marriott is seen as central to efforts to promote the idea that Lake George does not go into hibernation in the off-season. Supporters say its upscale rooms will attract younger professionals who want more modern facilities, while its large convention space will bring in visitors for events, meetings and weddings.

Some local business owners are also coming up with ways to lure visitors throughout the year.

In January, John Carr, the owner of the Adirondack Pub and Brewery, had an ice bar constructed for a party that attracted hundreds of people to drink wines and liquor produced in New York. He also organized a beer celebration in February.

This November, he is planning a pumpkin festival — of sorts. Participants will be encouraged to bring their aging jack-o’-lanterns for target-shooting on his property, using a giant slingshot.

“All these little events really do keep us busy in the off-season,” Mr. Carr said.

Elliott Heyman, the owner of the 20-room Windsor Motel on the edge of town, said he welcomes the Marriott. “Business brings business,” said Mr. Heyman, whose motel is open from Memorial Day weekend until mid-October. “With the Marriott open, I think the village could be more full time.”

Today, the greater Lake George area, which includes surrounding towns like Queensbury, has 4,958 hotel rooms open during the summer season; 2,218 of those are open all year long, according to the Lake George Regional Chamber of Commerce.

But not everyone believes that a taller hotel will give the village year-round appeal.

“It’s going to change the whole personality of the village,” said Mercedes Gaudier, a retired art teacher who has lived here since the 1970s. “I look at it this way — you have a beautiful natural treasure. You wouldn’t be putting six-story hotels on the rim of the Grand Canyon. Why do that to Lake George? I think in the end money and the developer won.”

Residents tend to be very protective of the pristine, 32-mile-long lake.

Stringent efforts are maintained to prevent zebra mussels, milfoil and other invasive species from gaining a toehold. A few years ago, scuba divers removed a colony of zebra mussels discovered near the village. All boats brought in by trailer from elsewhere are inspected and, if necessary, decontaminated before they are allowed to slide into Lake George.

Environmentalists also are working with municipalities to cut the amount of rock salt dumped on roads during the winter to keep it out of the lake and reduce storm-water runoff, which can pollute the lake and fuel algae and plant growth.

Yet, in the six-million-acre Adirondack Park, known for its rugged summits, wilderness lakes and miles of hiking trails, the touristy village has always borne more resemblance to Coney Island than to a quiet mountain town.

Visitors can choose from watersides, zip lines, Jet Ski rentals, paragliding, a historical fort, the nearby Great Escape amusement park and, according to the mayor, nine miniature golf courses. In one two-block walk, visitors will find two arcades, Dr. Morbid’s Haunted House and the House of Frankenstein Wax Museum. A T-shirt shop famous for its X-rated slogans has been so successful its owner opened a second store a block away.

In a place whose architectural character might best be described as postmodern kitsch — most inns are in the style of the 1950s motor lodges — many wonder what harm another hotel would do.

“There is no character — it’s a mish-mosh,” Mr. Heyman, the motel owner, said. “I think it’s all good for the village.”


