


Greenwich and Docklands International Festival Various venues, June 24-July 2

This free, outdoor festival takes place by the banks of the Thames in Greenwich in East London. The event will feature puppet shows, circus acts and spectacle theater pieces, some geared more toward adults and some toward children. Scheduled performances include “Stilt Men,” a circus act from Togo; “Stück,” a folk dance piece by the Welsh-Irish duo Up & Over It; and “Peregrinus,” by the Polish theater company Teatr KTO. festival.org

Shanghai International Film Festival Various venues, June 11-19

“Salt and Fire,” the latest work from the German director Werner Herzog, will have its world premiere at this festival, mainland China’s leading film competition. Other movies in the lineup include a mix of Chinese and European films, like “Flowers of Evil” by the movie and music video director Antti Jokinen, and “Soul on a String,” a movie set in Tibet that was directed by Zhang Yang. In all, 14 movies will compete for the top prize, the Golden Goblet. siff.com

Roskilde Festival Various venues, June 25-July 2

Last year, bouncers carried Damon Albarn from the stage at this festival after he refused to end a concert that ran well into the early morning. Mr. Albarn is back at this year’s event, this time with the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians, a collective of dozens that includes refugees who fled Syria. Wiz Khalifa, Macklemore, PJ Harvey and the Red Hot Chili Peppers are among the other acts in the mostly mainstream lineup. roskilde-festival.dk

Telling Tales: Excursions in Narrative Form MCA Sydney, through Oct. 9

Works from about a dozen contemporary artists who experiment with storytelling through their art by incorporating puppets, fog and music will be on view at this exhibition. The show will include Lee Mingwei, whose “Sonic Blossom,” features opera singers interacting with viewers; and Jitish Kallat, whose “Covering Letter” shows a letter that Gandhi wrote to Hitler projected onto a wall of fog. mca.com.au

The O.P.E.N. Various venues, June 22-July 9

This ambitious, interdisciplinary theater and performance festival features genre-defying performance pieces from worldwide troupes. It is the opener for the Singapore International Festival of Arts, which takes place here in August. There’s some edgy stuff in the lineup, like “Ibsen: Ghosts,” by the German theater group Markus&Markus. The documentary theater piece focuses on Margot, an elderly woman with dreams of being euthanized. Most other works in the lineup are more playful — like Club Malam, a rave takeover of Old Kallang Airport by rockers and visual artists. sifa.sg

Catherine, the Greatest Hermitage Amsterdam, June 18-Jan. 15

The Prussian princess Catherine the Great married into the Russian aristocracy in her teens. One of her lasting accomplishments was the establishment of this museum’s older sibling: The Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia. This exhibition includes hundreds of objects from the empress’s collections, like dresses, paintings, crafts and a jewelry box. hermitage.nl

Glastonbury Festival Worthy Farm, June 22-26

Adele, Coldplay, Beck and James Blake will perform at this four-day event, arguably the highlight of the European music festival calendar. More than 100 acts will play on various stages, spread around Worthy Farm, in the country’s verdant southwest. Some off-kilter acts will also appear. Idris Elba, for example, will appear as his D.J. alter-ego Driis. Bookstores, vintage clothing shops and movie screens are also on site. glastonburyfestivals.co.uk

Bachfest Leipzig Various venues, June 10-19

Every year Leipzig holds a festival celebrating Bach, who called the German city his home during his later years. Scheduled performances at this year’s event include an organ concert of Bach and Mozart at the Nikolaikirche; “African Reflections” on Bach by the Malian musician Vieux Farka Touré ; and Bach & Mime, a piece featuring mime performers and a chamber music group. bachfestleipzig.de

Sónar Barcelona Various venues, June 16-18

This festival sees itself as a lineup for “music, creativity and technology.” The acts that will appear include Anohni and Santigold. Some lectures by major names also figure in the lineup. On the opening day, the musician and visual artist Brian Eno will give a talk called “Why We Play.” sonar.es

Brueghel and His Time Fitzwilliam Museum, through Sept. 4.

Flemish renderings of landscapes from the 16th and 17th centuries take center stage in this show at the Fitzwilliam on Cambridge University’s campus. Artists in the exhibition include Paul Bril, Abraham Bloemaert, David Vinckeboons, and, of course, the era’s leading light: Jan Brueghel the Elder. fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk

Dark Mofo Various venues, June 10-21

The Museum of Old and New Art organizes this festival, a lineup of installations, movies and music marking the shortest days of the year in Hobart, a small city close to the southernmost point in Australia. The lineup includes a production of Euripides’s “The Bacchae”; a concert by the rock band Savages; and Dark Park, a “public art playground” featuring work by Tina Havelock Stevens, Patrick Hall and Cameron Robbins, among others. darkmofo.net.au


