


At All’Arco, a small and busy lunch place not far from the Rialto in Venice, there’s not a lot a room to eat. So people head outside with their drinks and plates of fresh cichetti (Venetian for snacks).

There are few outdoor tables, so glasses come to rest where they can, on ancient windowsills and stoops. By early afternoon, the alleys around the restaurant resemble an open-air dining hutch, lined with goblets. The ones that glow red are Campari spritzes; the orange, Aperol.

Spritz culture is ingrained in the cities and towns of northern Italy, where ice-filled chalices of the classic combo — bitter liqueur and sparkling wine or water (or both) — refract sunlight on every other cafe table. You can even buy a spritz at the Venice airport before you board your plane.

The drink’s footing in the United States is a bit shakier, rooted mainly in embarrassing memories from the 1970s and ‘80s of sipping bland concoctions called white wine spritzers.

But that’s beginning to change. Thanks in part to the recent publication of “Spritz,” a lighthearted book-length examination of these effervescent quenchers, more American bars will serve them this summer.

“The spritz formula — bitter, bubbly and low in alcohol — is a pretty malleable template,” said Talia Baiocchi, who wrote “Spritz” with Leslie Pariseau, “and one that can yield drinks that are simple three-ingredient cocktails, to drinks that are more avant-garde in composition.” (Proportions vary from spritz to spritz, with soda water ranging from a splash to a couple of ounces, but generally the wine outweighs the bitter component.)

The Aperol spritz (officially two parts Aperol, three parts prosecco and a splash of sparkling water) is the inescapable standard-bearer of spritzdom. It can now be ordered from Philadelphia to Puget Sound. “We wouldn’t be having this conversation if it weren’t for Aperol,” Ms. Baiocchi said.

But American bartenders haven’t stopped there, and drinkers needn’t, either. At Prizefighter, a friendly, sprawling bar in Emeryville, Calif., the owner, Jon Santer, took Bruto Americano, a newly released aperitif from nearby St. George Spirits, and coupled it with California chardonnay, grapefruit juice and soda water to create the Cali Spritz.

Lynnette Marrero of Llama Inn in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, mixes gin, fino sherry, strawberry shrub, St. Germain elderflower liqueur, Peychaud’s bitters, cava and Perrier for the Señorita Spritz, a pretty pink concoction that tastes a lot like a fruity, fizzy glass of rosé.

At Montana’s Trail House in Bushwick, Brooklyn, Austin Hartman, an owner, piles Aperol, grapefruit juice and sparkling white wine atop a base of Del Maguey Crema de Mezcal, a product that adds agave syrup to the spirit.

“It still has some of the smoky spice qualities of mezcal,” Mr. Hartman said, “but some of the sweetness that works well with the bitterness of the Aperol.”

American mixologists are pretty loose-limbed in their spritz-building; they ignore the classic wine-bitter-fizz blueprint as often as they adhere to it. William Elliott, bar director at the new restaurant Sauvage in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, does not include a bitter element in his Riding Tigers (made of sparkling rosé, peach-infused pisco, Pineau des Charentes, Armagnac and lemon juice). He even declines to put the drink on ice. Nonetheless, it’s awfully spritzy.

“Bubbly — that’s it,” said Natasha David, when asked what a drink needed to qualify as a spritz. She has a right to her opinion: The menu at her Lower East Side bar, Nitecap, has had a spritz section since the place opened in 2014.

“I think it’s nice to have wine or fortified wine in it,” she said. “But I’ve really gone outside the boundaries of what a spritz is. We’ve had cider cocktails and beer cocktails in the spritz section.”

She draws the line at topping drinks with seltzer. “I think it has to be an alcoholic sparkling thing,” she said.

Lauren Corriveau, the head bartender at Nitecap, has come to like spritzes well: “Who doesn’t like something that feels like it’s dancing on your tongue?”

Recipes: La Quebrada Spritz | Cali Spritz | Ice Queen | Italian Cocktails


