


MIAMI — Dwyane Wade had a night off recently, so he watched basketball on television. The Oklahoma City Thunder were looking to close out the San Antonio Spurs on Thursday night in the Western Conference semifinals, and Wade was struck by the way the game developed.

Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook were explosive in Oklahoma City’s victory, which came as no surprise to Wade, who has dabbled in the art of clutch performances. But Durant and Westbrook also received some vital help from Andre Roberson, a third-year swingman who scored 14 points. In the previous five games of the series, he had scored 4 — total.

“Roberson was the one who put his imprint on that game,” Wade said, “and really had one of those special games that took them over the hump.”

It was Friday morning, hours ahead of the Miami Heat’s game here against the Toronto Raptors that night in the Eastern Conference semifinal, and Wade, a perennial N.B.A. All-Star like Durant and Westbrook, openly wondered which unsung teammate would emerge for Miami. Someone, in the parlance of pro sports, would need to step up. Someone. Somehow.

Sure enough, with their season teetering on the edge, with their roster shredded by injuries, the Heat evened the series at three games apiece thanks to a couple of surprising performances. Goran Dragic, an experienced guard, scored 30 points, which might not have come as a complete shock. But what about Justise Winslow, a first-year forward who started at center and proceeded to change the tenor of the game? Their efforts were a welcome diversion from a series that had, until then, been an inartistic, defense-minded slog.

“We feel like when we play more aggressive and when everybody’s attacking, that’s our game,” Dragic said.

In a move born of equal parts circumstance and desperation, Coach Erik Spoelstra went small against the Raptors, who could neither defend the perimeter nor slow the Heat’s penetration. The result was a lost opportunity for the Raptors to finish off the series on the road — and another chance for Wade to concoct some of his familiar playoff magic.

Game 7 is scheduled for Sunday afternoon in Toronto. Wade is fluent in the language of elimination games. In his career, he has played in seven Games 7s and come away with five wins. Perhaps the city of Toronto has reason to feel nervous.

“You’re either going to continue playing, or your season is over,” Wade said. “That’s the reality of it. So you got to give a little more, and you got to do a little more.”

Then again, what do either of these teams have left? Both were pushed to seven games in the first round. Now, they might as well be clubbing each other with cartoon-size mallets as they vie for the opportunity to face the Cleveland Cavaliers — the extraordinarily well-rested Cleveland Cavaliers, who have yet to lose a playoff game — in the conference finals.

For Wade, of course, a meeting with the Cavaliers would be a reunion of sorts with his close friend and former teammate LeBron James. But while Wade continues to push himself to exhaustion, James has not appeared in uniform since May 8, a rare luxury in the middle of a playoff grind.

The Heat, who are doing all they can to finally escape James’s shadow, showed plenty of resolve in Friday’s 103-91 victory. At the team’s morning shootaround, Spoelstra informed his players that he planned to start Winslow at center. Hassan Whiteside, who usually occupies that role, was out with a sprained right knee, and Spoelstra wanted to generate offense.

“You never know how it’s going to work,” Spoelstra said.

The move reminded Wade of the 2012 N.B.A. finals. In that series, Spoelstra sought to space the floor against the Thunder by playing Shane Battier at power forward and center. On offense, Battier tended to roam to the 3-point line, which put Serge Ibaka, his primary defender, in difficult spots.

“Ibaka was a big guy who would come to the rim, and Shane would have all day to shoot 3s,” Wade said before pivoting to Spoelstra’s most recent handiwork. “It’s just unconventional. Sometimes unconventional works. It’s not your traditional big man-big man lineup.”

On Friday, the Raptors’ Bismack Biyombo, a 6-foot-9 center, played the role of Ibaka as Winslow operated along the perimeter, scoring 12 points. More important, Winslow lured Biyombo away from the rim. That created room for Dragic, who found seams to the basket, and for Wade, who finished with 22 points. It was all connected.

“We were all spaced out, and they kind of got to go where they wanted to go,” Raptors Coach Dwane Casey said, adding, “We didn’t adjust to it.”

If Spoelstra gambled by going small, there were a couple of mitigating factors. First, the Raptors were without their own starting center, Jonas Valanciunas, who sprained his right ankle in Game 3. So even though the Heat were still at a size disadvantage, they remained competitive on the glass.

Also, Spoelstra trusted Winslow to deliver. His playing time in the series has been sporadic. In fact, after Winslow failed to leave the bench in Game 3, Spoelstra called him that night to assure him that he would have a role going forward.

“He approaches his profession and competition like he’s a 30-year-old veteran,” Spoelstra said.

The Raptors are still searching for their first trip to the conference finals in franchise history, but they will need to find more balance. On Friday, DeMar DeRozan and Kyle Lowry combined for 59 points. No one else scored more than 8.

The Heat, on the other hand, figured out how to let some of their lesser lights shine.

“This is the path,” Spoelstra said. “You have to embrace competition, attack it and then find different ways to try to win.”


