


Hillary Clinton and her family donated $105,000 to veterans’ organizations from 2006 to 2012, her campaign said on Wednesday, part of a wider array of philanthropy by the Clintons in recent years.

The donations were made from the family’s personal charity, not the well-known and far larger foundation founded by former President Bill Clinton. The charity has undertaken large-scale public health programs and other activities with funding from corporations, wealthy individuals and some foreign governments.

The disclosure from the Clinton campaign comes as Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, faces scrutiny about whether he has followed through on his pledges to support veterans’ groups.

The Clinton campaign, which compiled a list of contributions from publicly available tax returns at the request of a reporter, said the family foundation gave to eight groups around the country, which received grants ranging from $5,000 to $25,000. The groups included the Navy-Marine Corps Relief Society; Operation Gratitude, a California-based charity that sends care packages to American troops; and a golf-based rehabilitation program in Tacoma, Wash.

Mrs. Clinton has also helped raise money for the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund, which supports the families of American military personnel who have died or been severely wounded during their service. They have not made any personal donations to veterans’ groups since 2012, according to the list.

Mr. Trump assailed reporters on Tuesday while detailing a list of his contributions his foundation had made to veterans’ charities, most of them with money raised from his supporters. He also announced a $1 million contribution of his own, made last week to a veterans’ group connected to one of his employees. That check, originally pledged by Mr. Trump in connection with a nationally televised telethon shortly before the Iowa caucuses in January, did not materialize until after a reporter for The Washington Post inquired about whether Mr. Trump had followed through on his commitment.

While Mr. Trump’s single belated contribution now dwarfs the money donated to veterans’ groups by Mrs. Clinton and her family, a Clinton spokesman contrasted the two candidates’ style and sincerity in fighting for veterans.

“It took Donald Trump getting caught making fraudulent statements for him to follow through on his empty campaign claims about supporting veterans,” said the spokesman, Josh Schwerin. “While Trump needed to be shamed into honoring his commitments, Hillary Clinton has quietly made personal donations in addition to spending her career fighting for veterans through legislation, fund-raising and the work of the Clinton Foundation.”


