


Nearly a dozen retired N.F.L. players have asked the entire United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit to consider hearing their arguments against the settlement between the league and thousands of former players who said the N.F.L. hid the dangers of concussions.

Last week, a three-judge panel in the Third Circuit resoundingly affirmed the approval of the settlement, which provides up to $5 million to individual players with severe neurological diseases.

Some of the players who objected to the settlement are now asking the larger panel of appeals court judges to hear their plea, which focuses primarily on how chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease, is treated in the settlement. In the deal, only the heirs of players who died from 2006 to April 2015 and were found to have had the disease can receive cash payments of up to $4 million.

No money will be paid out until all appeals are exhausted.

Christopher Seeger, a lead lawyer for the main group of players, urged the court not to hear the appeal because it would further delay getting payments to players in need.

“This meritless appeal carries devastating consequences for the thousands of retired N.F.L. players suffering from neurocognitive injuries, and those concerned about their future,” he said in a statement, “as they will be forced to wait even longer for the immediate care and support they need and deserve.”

The N.F.L. declined to comment on the petition.

Legal experts consider the appeal for a hearing by the full appeals court a long shot because the three-judge panel overwhelmingly affirmed the original district court opinion.

RAIDERS CONSIDER LAS VEGAS Mark Davis, the owner of the Oakland Raiders, said Thursday that he wanted to move the team to Las Vegas and was willing to spend $500 million — with $200 million of that coming from an N.F.L. loan — as part of a deal for a new stadium in the city.

He appeared alongside the billionaire casino owner Sheldon Adelson before a committee studying the idea of a $1.4 billion stadium. Adelson, owner of Las Vegas Sands, is spearheading the construction of a 65,000-seat stadium just off the Las Vegas Strip to host a variety of events, including college football, soccer matches and major concerts.

But it is the inclusion of the Raiders that is pushing the stadium forward. The N.F.L. has long shunned Las Vegas, refusing its television ads and telling players not to make appearances at casinos. (AP)

INDICTMENT IN SAINT’S DEATH Cardell Hayes, a business owner and semiprofessional football player, was indicted on a second-degree murder charge in the shooting death of the retired New Orleans Saints defensive end Will Smith after an April 9 car crash.

Hayes was also indicted on a charge of attempted second-degree murder in the nonfatal shooting of Smith’s wife. (AP)


