


A state lawmaker who represents the Queens district where an armed man was fatally shot by the police over the weekend asked on Tuesday for the governor to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate the episode, officials said.

State Senator James Sanders Jr., whose district includes the South Ozone Park neighborhood where the man, George Tillman, 32, was killed by plainclothes officers on Sunday, said he had submitted a written request to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.

Rich Azzopardi, a spokesman for the governor, confirmed that his office had received the request and said it would be forwarded to the attorney general for consideration.

Eric Soufer, a spokesman for the attorney general, said his office was aware of the senator’s letter. Investigators from a special unit created to look into police-involved civilian deaths have been in touch with the Queens district attorney and are reviewing the case, he said.

Mr. Sanders, a Democrat, said he was prompted by complaints from about six residents who said the police had barged into their homes after the shooting and demanded to see their video recordings of the events.

“I think that anytime that you have a shooting of this nature, you need fresh eyes, people who are not connected to the local officers, to give a free and fair and impartial investigation,” Mr. Sanders said.

The police have said that the officers approached Mr. Tillman because he was holding an open container of alcohol and that four officers shot him after he ignored their verbal commands and reached for a handgun in his waistband. But friends and relatives have questioned that account.

The police initially said Mr. Tillman was shot several times in the torso. The medical examiner said on Tuesday that he was shot 11 times; the cause of death was a gunshot wound to the head.

Police officials have not yet released additional details about the shooting, including the officers’ names, what they said to Mr. Tillman, and how many bullets were fired. They said they were waiting for a report from the department’s Force Investigation Division, which reviews all instances in which officers use deadly force.

Mr. Tillman was visiting from Maryland, where he worked as an electrician and was raising five children with his wife.

Mr. Sanders has planned a community gathering for Mr. Tillman on Thursday, and relatives are expected to speak.


