


BKW Brooklyn Winery, one of several in the borough, makes its wines in Williamsburg from grapes cultivated in upstate New York and California. It has a rustic tasting room serving light food. And now the owners, Brian Leventhal and John Stires, have opened a full restaurant with a skylight, radiating beams and colorful tilework. The chef, Michael Gordon, who worked at Bouley, Asiate and Savory, is producing wine-friendly fare like a chilled shiitake soup, crisp brussels sprouts with pastrami, roasted chicken breast with leg and thigh potpie alongside, hanger steak with red wine sauce, and pan-roasted skate. The restaurant has a library of the winery’s older vintages. It serves only its own wines, but that’s quite an extensive portfolio: 747 Franklin Avenue (Sterling Place), Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-399-1700, bkwnyc.com.

Maman This group of home-style cafes evoking the South of France keeps expanding. It started in SoHo, then opened in TriBeCa and is now in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. It is also installing a cafe in the new International Center of Photography Museum on the Bowery. (Opens Thursday): 80 Kent Street (Franklin Street), Greenpoint, Brooklyn, no phone; 250 Bowery (Stanton Street), 212-857-0000, mamannyc.com.

MamaSushi The Latin-accented Japanese restaurant in Washington Heights has a new sibling a bit to the south. The owner, Susana Osorio, is also opening Bocaditos Bistro & Espresso Bar in Inwood, near the original MamaSushi: 3569 Broadway (146th Street), 646-682-7879, mamasushi.com.

Ruby’s Cafe After 13 years in SoHo, this Australian cafe is branching out with a Murray Hill location and menu additions, including a spritz on tap: 442 Third Avenue (31st Street), 212-300-4245, rubyscafe.com.

Sammy’s House of BBQ Summer. Times Square. Barbecue. It sounds as if the right buttons have been pressed with three floors of ’cue engineered by the pitmaster Lou Elrose, formerly of Wildwood and Hill Country. The enterprise is the work of Sammy Benmoha, of the nearby Benash deli. (Opens Wednesday): 258 West 44th Street, 212-944-6900.

Zadie’s Oyster Room Cooked oysters, which have a long history in New York, are the focus of Marco Canora’s makeover of what was Fifty Paces (and Terroir before that): 413 East 12th Street, 646-602-1300, zadiesoysterroom.com.

David Waltuck The former chef and owner of Chanterelle and, more recently, Élan, has become the director of culinary affairs at the Institute of Culinary Education. He will be a liaison between restaurants and students seeking to build careers. He will also teach.

Blue Water Grill After 20 years, this seafood stalwart will close July 10 for a million-dollar renovation. It will reopen in the fall with a new chef, Chris Meenan, formerly at Vaucluse.

Majorelle The restaurant opening in the former Post House space in September has named a chef: Christian Delouvrier, formerly of Lespinasse and more recently, until his so-called retirement at the end of 2014, the bistro La Mangeoire. The restaurant is named for Jacques Majorelle, a French painter who created the elaborate Majorelle gardens in Marrakesh, Morocco. The gardens were bought by Pierre Bergé and Yves Saint-Laurent in 1980 and are now owned by Mr. Bergé. Charles Masson, the manager of the restaurant, said he asked Mr. Bergé for permission to use the name. Mr. Majorelle was known for using a striking shade of cobalt blue, and Mr. Masson said there would be touches of it in the restaurant. More important, he said, is that the space has been opened up with a garden in back. “Anyone who knows me knows how important flowers and plants are to me,” said Mr. Masson, who for decades ran the dining room at La Grenouille. Mr. Delouvrier’s food will be French-Mediterranean: light, herbaceous, with some emphasis on small plates and less rustic than at La Mangeoire. Mr. Delouvrier, 69, said he came out of retirement when Mr. Masson called him. “I would have regretted not doing this,” he said: 28 East 63rd Street.

Zigmund’s Eric Lemonides and Jason Weiner of Almond in Bridgehampton, N.Y., are expanding their footprint there with this bar and restaurant serving Greek-accented small plates in what was the Fresh Hamptons restaurant. They expect to open in a few weeks: 203 Sag Harbor Turnpike, Bridgehampton, N.Y.


