


Two years ago, the International Center of Photography bowed to the realities of Manhattan real estate, giving up its Midtown home on Avenue of the Americas and going dark. Now it is set to reopen on June 23 in a new incarnation downtown, after institutional introspection compelled not only by the move but also by the presiding quandary about what, exactly, defines photography today as the medium keeps morphing and mutating within a vast, evolving technological landscape. The smartphone has turned us all into photographers; social media floods us with an endless array of images; omnipresent video threatens the relevance of the still photograph; and the hovering eye of drone surveillance chronicles our every move. The center had to recalibrate.

Its curatorial staff has been investigating the meaning and relevance of photography for years with shows that, at times, either challenged the medium, confirmed the stature of individual photographers or identified significant new work. In 2014, the center’s controversial exhibition “What Is a Photograph?” didn’t try to answer the question, said Carol Squiers, the show’s curator, but simply posed it. It was the right question at the right time, underscoring the challenge ahead for the institution as it searched for a new home.

The center paid $23.5 million for 11,000 square feet of exhibition space at 250 Bowery, across from the New Museum on the Lower East Side and only blocks from the cluster of anti-Chelsea galleries and restaurants that cater to a millennial crowd. An all-glass, street-level facade is intended to draw foot traffic into a visible public space where talks and events are planned.

With its new neighborhood comes an expanded identity. Mark Lubell, the executive director, now refers to the center as an institution dedicated to “photography and visual culture,” a term meant to incorporate the breadth of the technological change in which photography is a malleable part. Mr. Lubell insists that we are no longer even photographers, per se, but, rather, “image makers.”

In the context of such multitentacled image-making — 350 million pictures are uploaded daily on Facebook alone — the center’s curators must make sense of the vast array of imagery presented on myriad platforms and to identify work that most poignantly reflects contemporary experience and warrants historical preservation.

“I look at I.C.P. as an arbiter in this wild, wild west world that we’re living in right now,” Mr. Lubell said in an interview earlier this spring, gesturing to an illustration of the center’s new facade on display in his office, which is still in Midtown. In a world where everyone is taking pictures of everything, he said, “there should be a place with a deep history of the understanding of photography and the power of the image in order to put some of what’s happening today in context.”

The issue was simpler for Cornell Capa, the Magnum photographer who founded the center in 1974 in an elegant neo-Georgian mansion on Fifth Avenue at 94th Street, with galleries in intimate parlors. The impetus to open it derived from Mr. Capa’s growing anxiety in the late 1960s about the diminishing relevance of photojournalism because of the increasing use of film footage on television news. It would be a center for “concerned photography” — the term he coined for social-documentary photography in which, he specified, “genuine human feeling predominates over commercial cynicism or disinterested formalism.”

The center opened just as photography was gaining stature in the art world, yet it proceeded on a course parallel to the museum world — one in which subject matter took precedence over artistic intent. Its first show was the work of Henri Cartier-Bresson, an appropriate choice given Mr. Capa’s relationship to Magnum — his brother, Robert, was a co-founder, along with Cartier-Bresson. All three were exemplars of bedrock photojournalism.

Willis E. Hartshorn, Mr. Lubell’s predecessor, was executive director from 1994 to 2012, and sharpened the center’s goals. Upon his retirement, Mr. Hartshorn said he had aimed for “greater awareness about how pictures create meaning and an understanding of the impact that they have on us. You know, visual literacy.” To that end, in the last decade the center’s curatorial program stood at the front of the art world’s dialogue about photography. “A Different Kind of Order,” its fourth Triennial, in 2013, featured a roster of contemporary artists, including Mishka Henner, Trevor Paglen and Walid Raad, who have a substantial influence on the making of photographic art today.

The question now is whether it can keep a clear eye on what the medium is becoming without losing sight of its history. The exhibition inaugurating the new Bowery space, “Public, Private, Secret,” is organized by Charlotte Cotton, the center’s first curator in residence. It explores the ways in which self-identity is intertwined with public visibility. At the same time, technology is yielding new breeds of photography, and artists are exploiting the medium’s surveillance capabilities or identifying visual patterns in social media networks.

Visitors will confront their reflections in mirrored partitions meant to suggest our “selfie culture”; Closed Circuit Television cameras will document museumgoers with live feeds projected as pixelated patterns of color on a wall in the public space. The idea here is to pay attention to the visual language of machines, something we are all being conditioned to read.

In the main gallery, there will be video-based wall-size projections of work by Natalie Bookchin, Jon Rafman and Doug Rickard, who “represent a clear turn in artistic practice,” Ms. Cotton said, “choosing to gather and sequence found images and footage from the vast terrain of social media.” She said “authorship and artistry reside in the ways in which they sequence and edit seemingly disparate and unconnected visual material” to tell new kinds of stories about contemporary behavior.

Amid construction debris as the galleries were being completed, Ms. Cotton described the heightened sensory effect she hopes to achieve with the installation. “I create shows for people who like to put things in their mouth to see what they taste like,” she said with a wry smile, describing her goal to create a visceral experience. In a separate gallery, work will be shown by established artists who have long explored issues of identity — Sophie Calle, Lyle Ashton Harris, Nan Goldin, Martha Rosler and Larry Sultan, among others.

Asked if the trustees are on board for this journey, Jeffrey A. Rosen, deputy chairman of Lazard and president of the center’s board, projected confidence. “I’m a strong believer,” he said in a telephone interview, adding that the board does not get involved with programming. “The director runs the institution,” he said.

Stefano Tonchi, editor in chief of W Magazine, joined the board four years ago. He doesn’t think that responding to photography’s digital evolution alters the center’s fundamental purpose. On the contrary, “the art of photography has really changed so much,” he said by phone. “I think I.C.P. would really like to chronicle these changes and be in step with the times.”

The senior curators Christopher Phillips and Ms. Squiers are working on the next show, “Perpetual Revolution: The Image and Social Change,” planned for January. “We’re trying to take apart the online visual world and organize it in some way that is more comprehensible,” Ms. Squiers said.

The show’s themes will include “ISIS and the Imagery of Terror.” Ms. Squiers is looking at the organization’s intensive media campaign of propaganda, designed both to lure recruits and to frighten other people. “The very violent material that we see all the time in the American press is only a small part of the visual material that ISIS puts out,” Ms. Squiers said. “In fact, the greater part of its output is a kind of utopian view of what the caliphate is doing for people now and will do for them in the future.”

Another theme of “Perpetual Revolution” will be the impact digital media have had on extreme winter sports. Technology continues to alter our visual experience and even shape our activities. The speed and agility with which GoPro cameras, for example, document treacherous jumps on 500-pound snowmobiles has only increased the bravado of those athletes, making them try ever more dangerous stunts. Ms. Squiers joked that the images in this part of the show might “draw a new demographic of 14-year-old boys into I.C.P. for my little celebration of these sports.”

The center is emphasizing the need to grasp the contemporary moment, but what about the past as prologue? After all, photography evolved with technological advances that changed the look of the image from one era to another.

Asked about the center’s formidable permanent collection, Mr. Lubell insisted that it had not abandoned the history of photography and the masters of the art. Still, no gallery space has been set aside at 250 Bowery to show work from the collection, which is housed at Mana Contemporary, an arts center in Jersey City. At least 85 percent of the 156,000 images in the collection are scanned, and students, scholars and general visitors are able to access the pictures using onsite computers in Jersey City.

“There’s a millennial generation that doesn’t even know some of this great work,” Mr. Lubell said. But some of those people will have to travel across the river from the new center to see what photography once was.


