


Newcastle continued to show some late determination to avoid relegation from the top tier, playing to a 1-1 tie with visiting Manchester City on Tuesday after Sergio Agüero became the second-fastest player to score 100 goals in the Premier League.

With its title dream effectively over, City was seeking to strengthen its grip on third place and automatic Champions League qualification. It moved to a point ahead of Arsenal, and 5 ahead of Manchester United, with both teams having a game in hand.

Leicester leads the Premier League with 73 points, 12 more than City, with four games left.

Newcastle drew encouragement from its recovery despite remaining only 2 points from relegation. The Magpies rallied after Agüero’s 14th-minute disputed goal gave City a 1-0 lead. Vurnon Anita scored the equalizer in the 31st minute.

CELTA VIGO TIES IN SPAIN Celta Vigo missed a chance to move closer to the top in the Spanish league by drawing with host Espanyol, 1-1. Striker Iago Aspas opened for Celta with an acrobatic touch from inside the area in the 28th minute before Espanyol equalized with a long-range shot by forward Marco Asensio in the 39th. Celta needed a win to move to within 4 points of fourth-place Villarreal. The fourth-place team earns a spot in a qualifying round for next season’s Champions League.

BAYERN IN GERMAN FINAL Bayern Munich needed a disputed penalty to secure a 2-0 win at home over Werder Bremen and a place in the final of the German Cup. Thomas Müller scored both goals, the second coming from a 71st-minute contested penalty.

NAPOLI ROMPS Napoli regained its winning ways as Dries Mertens scored a hat trick to help the team to a 6-0 victory at home over Bologna in Italy’s Serie A. Napoli’s title hopes had faded after two defeats in its previous three matches.

P.S.G. REACHES FRENCH FINAL Zlatan Ibrahimovic scored the winner as Paris St.-Germain reached the French Cup final with a scrappy 1-0 win over host Lorient. Ibrahimovic slotted home his 42nd goal this season in all competitions with 15 minutes left after P.S.G. had struggled to create chances.

WORLD CUP REPLAY POSSIBLE Video replays could be used at the 2018 World Cup, said Gianni Infantino, FIFA’s new president.

The International Football Association Board, which sets soccer’s rules, approved trials of video assistance last month.

Calling the technology “something that everyone was waiting for,” Infantino said it could be used in the World Cup almost as soon as those experiments come to an end.

“This test period will start now, will take two years,” Infantino said. “This will mean that by March 2018, we will see if it works or not.”

The use of video will be restricted to referees rulings on whether a goal has been scored, a penalty should be awarded and a player should be sent off, as well as cases of mistaken identity.


