


WASHINGTON — If Donald J. Trump loses the presidency, he can return to his Manhattan office tower and get back to business. But Speaker Paul D. Ryan intends to remain on the job in the Capitol after November, and he would like as many fellow Republicans as possible right there with him.

Mr. Ryan’s remarkable declaration on Thursday that he was not yet ready to embrace the candidacy of his party’s all-but-official nominee was the starkest evidence yet of how deeply top Congressional Republicans fear the damage an unbridled Mr. Trump could do to their majorities in the House and Senate.

It was also perhaps a vain attempt to control the uncontrollable by letting Mr. Trump know that the campaign was not only about him and to make clear he had some responsibility to come to terms with down-ballot candidates on explosive issues like immigration and trade.

“The bulk of the burden on unifying the party will have to come from our presumptive nominee,” Mr. Ryan, the highest elected Republican official in the nation, said in an interview on CNN

As a disciple of Jack Kemp, the New York lawmaker and 1996 vice-presidential nominee known for offering a positive conservative vision, Mr. Ryan embraces a tone and policy agenda often at odds with Mr. Trump’s style and statements. Mr. Ryan also remains very close to Mitt Romney, his presidential running mate four years ago and someone who has been unsparing in expressing his low opinion of Mr. Trump.

Still, the general assumption around Washington was that Mr. Ryan would follow the lead of his Senate counterpart Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, and reluctantly get on board the Trump train despite having spoken out earlier when he felt Mr. Trump had strayed too far from the conservative line. But Mr. Trump’s quick reaffirmation of his plan to ban Muslims from entering the United States while deporting millions of illegal immigrants, even as he was promising to unify the party in the aftermath of his decisive Indiana primary victory on Tuesday was seen in Ryan circles as a doubling down on policies the speaker opposes. It helped prompt Mr. Ryan’s surprising statement.

“It’s time to set aside bullying, to set aside belittlement and appeal to higher aspirations, appeal to what is good in us and to lead a country and a party to having a vast majority of Americans enthusiastic about choosing a path,” Mr. Ryan said in the CNN interview.

Left unsaid was the fact that Mr. Ryan is a man with ambition and a political future that could possibly include a White House run. He and his allies know a full embrace of Trump policies could cost him dearly in the years ahead — all for what could be a losing effort this year.

As the reality of Mr. Trump’s nomination continued to sink in with Republican office holders around the country, Democrats have become increasingly optimistic about their chances for big November gains on Capitol Hill.

Senator Harry Reid, the Nevada Democrat and minority leader, made it abundantly clear on Thursday that he intended to be a regular and harsh critic of Mr. Trump and that Republicans were possibly on the precipice of an electoral debacle.

“He’s the embodiment of everything Americans hate about a system that’s rigged for the top 1 percent,” Mr. Reid said of Mr. Trump during a conference call with reporters. “He’s the definition of a man who was born on third and thinks he hit a triple. What’s worse, he uses his wealth to rip people off and is now sowing hatred and division every place he steps.”

While Republican control of the Senate may be at serious risk, Republicans — at least at the moment — are expected to hold on to the House though with some loss of seats. But the loss of each one makes Mr. Ryan’s job as speaker in charge of a restive and difficult-to-control Republican majority just that much harder.

In addition, the seats most in play this year are those of the less conservative House Republicans in more vulnerable districts, meaning the speaker could enter 2017 with a smaller but even more conservative majority, making it even harder to strike compromises. He and his allies want to limit the damage as much as possible.

With House Republicans under increasing pressure to take a position on Mr. Trump, Mr. Ryan’s statement also buys his colleagues additional time as well as political cover if they choose to say they are not ready to get fully behind the last man standing in the Republican primary presidential race. And it echoed the positioning of other House Republicans who are uneasy with Mr. Trump and want some reassurance before giving him their full support.

“I don’t think it’s my job to offer the olive branch,” said Representative Steve King of Iowa, a hard-line Republican who was a national chairman for Senator Ted Cruz’s campaign. Mr. King said he wanted Mr. Trump to present the names of the justices he would appoint to the Supreme Court.

Mr. Ryan outlined his stance as the Trump campaign was reaching out to Republicans on Capitol Hill, putting him at odds not only with Mr. McConnell but with other House Republican leaders who have promised to endorse the New York businessman. And Mr. Trump has spoken favorably about Mr. Ryan’s top lieutenant, Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the majority leader.

Mr. Ryan left the door open to a meeting of the minds with Mr. Trump in the future, though any interest in meeting Mr. Ryan anywhere near halfway was not reciprocated in the dismissive statement Mr. Trump issued after Mr. Ryan’s pronouncement.

Mr. Trump, according to Mr. Ryan, will be the nominee “because he earned it, he deserved it, he won the vote.” The support he hasn’t won quite yet is the House speaker’s.


