


EASTLEIGH, England — Leaving the European Union would amount to economic self-destruction for Britain, Prime Minister David Cameron said on Monday, presenting a Treasury report that warned of a recession, a decline in the value of the pound, and half a million lost jobs.

Mr. Cameron and George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, who are campaigning for Britain to stay in the European Union in the referendum on June 23, have also warned that home values would fall and that Britons would face costlier foreign holidays if they voted to leave the bloc.

Speaking a month before the vote, Mr. Cameron said that leaving the European Union would jeopardize Britain’s recovery from the economic damage caused by the world financial crisis.

“It would be like surviving a fall and then running straight back to the cliff edge,” Mr. Cameron said at an event at the headquarters of a home-improvement chain in southern England.

Recent opinion polls have shown voters are leaning toward remaining in the European Union, but the outcome remains too close to call.

Some polls have shown that the economy is growing in importance as an issue for voters, something that opponents of European Union membership have sought to counter by arguing that the only way to slow levels of migration and avoid economic stagnation is to leave the bloc.

The analysis published by the Treasury on Monday said the economy could be as much as 6 percent smaller two years after a “Brexit,” as leaving the European Union is known, than if the country decided to stay in the bloc.

Mr. Osborne, also speaking at the event on Monday, said that Britain would lose at least half a million jobs within two years of a vote to leave and that a fall in the value of the pound, estimated at 12 percent to 15 percent, would push up inflation sharply.

The campaign backing a British exit said the Treasury had consistently produced flawed reports, describing the latest analysis as biased because it provided no details about the possible advantages of leaving the bloc, nor about the potential consequences that would come with a crisis in the eurozone.

“What they’ve done is they assumed a disaster and then spelled out the details,” Nigel Lawson, a chancellor of the Exchequer in 1980s under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, told the BBC. “They’ve done this in order to scare the pants off the British people because they can’t find anything positive to say about the European Union.”

Mr. Osborne defended the credibility of the report, saying it had been reviewed by Charlie Bean, a former deputy governor of the Bank of England.

The forecast of a yearlong recession was gloomier than a warning by the Bank of England’s governor, Mark Carney, who said this month that Britain’s economy could enter a recession — defined as two consecutive calendar quarters of contraction — after a vote to leave the European Union.


