


The N.H.L. suspended Pittsburgh Penguins defenseman Kris Letang for one game for an illegal hit on Washington Capitals forward Marcus Johansson.

Letang will miss Game 4 of the teams’ Stanley Cup playoffs series on Wednesday night.

The N.H.L.’s Department of Player Safety ruled that Letang had made “significant head contact” with Johansson well after Johansson had released the puck during a sequence in Pittsburgh’s 3-2 victory on Monday night in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference semifinal series.

Johansson was carrying the puck into the Pittsburgh zone when he made a pass to the boards as four Penguins converged on him. Letang drilled Johansson in the upper body. Johansson briefly left the game.

Letang received a minor penalty for interference after the play and was issued the suspension after a brief hearing on Tuesday.

The league pointed out that because Johansson was not in possession of the puck, he was not eligible to be checked on the play. The N.H.L. stopped short, however, of describing the hit as charging, which could have carried stiffer discipline.

Letang did leave his feet while finishing the check, but the league attributed that to the force of the collision. The N.H.L. also said “the head was not the main point of contact.”

Johansson went through the N.H.L.’s concussion protocol before returning to the game, although he did complain of some neck pain after the game. The Capitals trail, two games to one, in the best-of-seven series.

Washington held Johansson out of practice Tuesday, and he will be evaluated on Wednesday, Coach Barry Trotz said.

Letang said he had no intention of hurting Johansson.

“I saw him coming full speed,” Letang said. “I tried to step up in the middle. Things happen fast.”

The suspension is the second in two games for a player in the series. Washington’s Brooks Orpik was suspended for three games after taking aim at Olli Maatta’s head in Game 2.

A CHANGE IN CALGARY The Calgary Flames fired Bob Hartley, a season after he was voted the N.H.L.’s coach of the year.

Calgary took a big step backward after reaching the playoffs last season. The Flames finished 35-40-7, with only Vancouver and Edmonton posting fewer wins in the rugged Western Conference.

“Bob has taken this team as far as I feel he can take it,” Flames General Manager Brad Treliving said at a news conference.

Last season, Hartley led the Flames to a 45-30-7 record and third place in the Pacific Division.

In four years with Calgary, Hartley had a regular-season record of 134-135-25. He won a Stanley Cup in 2001 with the Colorado Avalanche, a team he coached for five seasons. He also coached the Atlanta Thrashers (before they became the Winnipeg Jets).


