


If residents of the Inkwell, a new condominium in Hell’s Kitchen, find themselves instinctively raising their hands for permission to speak, it might be understandable.

The 18-unit development, from the Gotham Organization, is housed at 520 West 45th Street inside a former grade school, with enough vintage flourishes to make it feel as if a teacher is going to walk around the corner at any second.

Though most of the institutional details, like chalkboards, caged fans and cubbyholes, aren’t original to the 1905 Beaux-Arts building, the effect is convincing all the same.

“It’s like that Picasso saying, about how art is the lie that reveals the truth,” said Matthew Goodrich, the chief creative officer of AvroKO, the design firm behind the Inkwell’s interiors. “It’s not a restoration, but it has the feeling and power of the original use.”

With 13-foot ceilings, tall windows and either two or three bedrooms, the apartments at Inkwell have the roominess of a turn-of-the-last-century school, with extras thrown in to buttress the theme.

All but two of the units have a tall, narrow chalkboard by the entry, which is not so much for spelling lessons as for grocery lists. “The idea is, you could leave a note for your spouse saying, ‘Go buy dog food,’ ” said Melissa Pianko, Gotham’s executive vice president for development.

Next to the chalkboard will be a long low row of cubbies, for stashing sneakers and other shoes. To reach storage cabinets by the ceiling, Inkwell will supply the kind of rolling ladders one might spot in a campus library. Transom windows over doors also look the part.

Kitchen counters are made of soapstone, a material common in school science labs, said Mr. Goodrich, who added that he studied old photographs of schools at the New York Public Library for inspiration.

On the ground level, the small gym, which opens to an outdoor lounge, also evokes the past. A tile mosaic on the wall spells out “P.S. 51,” the public school that was the previous occupant and that moved to West 44th Street. And the gym’s ceiling fans are encased in cages, as if to insure that no stray basketballs get shredded.

The lobby features a card-catalog-type mailbox, which resembles the menu-stuffed card catalog AvroKO installed in Public, the NoLIta restaurant the firm designed.

Though reproductions may fill Inkwell, some mementos were preserved elsewhere. For instance, a wall-mounted pencil sharpener wound up in AvroKO’s conference room, Mr. Goodrich said, along with a 1990s-era fire-drill poster. A claim to fame for the school is that, in 1908, it was one of the first to serve lunch to its students, according to a site study by AKRF, an environmental, planning and engineering consulting firm.

Prices at Inkwell, which is being marketed by Brown Harris Stevens Development Marketing, start at about $1.78 million for two-bedrooms and average about $1,600 per square foot. Sales are expected to begin in late summer, and the condominium is expected to open in the fall.

If that price seems to be on the low side, in a borough where new condos sold for an average of almost $2,400 a square foot in the first quarter of this year, according to the brokerage Douglas Elliman Real Estate, it might be explained by Gotham’s relatively low land costs. The firm has owned the site, which is part of the Gotham West megadevelopment, for years. But Ms. Pianko would not disclose Inkwell’s specific cost.

With Inkwell’s completion, the development of Gotham West, which occupies three-quarters of a city block between 10th and 11th Avenues, will draw to a close. In addition to its 1,238 apartments, more than half of which are income-restricted housing, Gotham West also contains Gotham West Market, an AvroKO-designed food hall.

The below-average price could also be a function of location, brokers say, since the billboard-dotted area is still fairly industrial and less than convenient to subway lines.

But the growth of Hudson Yards to the south means it’s only a matter of time before the Far West Side becomes an established luxury address, said Kurt Bauccio, a Douglas Elliman agent who works in the area but is not affiliated with the project.

“I love that area,” he said, “because it is still up and coming.”


