


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. It’s a good one to swoon over Melissa Clark’s new recipe for chicken and artichokes , which would make for a terrific dinner one night this week. And to think about David Tanis’s new recipe for pork satay with cucumber relish as well. (Passed hors d’oeuvres!)

We could see our way to making some vegan Thai curry vegetables this week. And an asparagus salad, Italian-style. For sure we’d like to make bulgogi sloppy Joes.

Cooking fills us with inspiration. Have you spent much time with Julia Moskin’s fine guide to cooking eggs? It’s a revelation, one that’s in the process of transforming our evening cooking game. (Scroll down and check out her microwave egg-poaching technique. It may change your life.) Why, we’ll take what we’ve learned and make matzo brei!

But that’s not all that’s on the menu this week. We’re always game to make this old-school recipe for broiled pork chops beneath a glaze of maple, balsamic and cinnamon, which we pair with polenta cut through with goat cheese and rosemary.

We like steel-cut oats in the morning, adorned with fresh fruit – some may prefer salted butter, crumbled bacon and a drizzle of scotch. We love radish sandwiches for lunch, at least when we can find good baguettes. And a classic tuna sandwich always.

For dinner sometime soon: Melissa’s recipe for baked fish and chips. Tabbouleh with apples, walnuts and pomegranate seeds. A nice, fancy, uncomplicated meatloaf. Maybe some roasted sweet potatoes like they do out at Gjelina in Los Angeles, dusted in red pepper, with lime-scented yogurt dotted over the top? And, absolutely, Melissa’s recipe for green goddess chicken because it’s just fantastic.

You can find other recipes to cook this week on Cooking. You can rate them when you’ve cooked them, or leave notes on them, or tell us and others about them by reaching out on social media. We’re on Facebook and Pinterest, Instagram and Twitter, where we use and monitor the hashtag #NYTCooking. (If you get jammed up with anything along the way, either with our site or apps, please reach out for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.) See you out there.

Now, have you read Neal Gabler on the financial impotence of a great many middle-class Americans, in The Atlantic? Do so now. And we’ll see you on Wednesday.


