


“I’m a little unnerved,” the playwright Mac Rogers said.

A swarm of robots arrayed in blue and green LED lights was pursuing Mr. Rogers around a small platform in the basement of the Museum of Mathematics in Manhattan. Mr. Rogers, wearing jeans, a checked blazer and a black backpack affixed with sensors, staggered away. But the robots — about the size of guinea pigs and only slightly more menacing — kept coming. One began to glow red.

“In the movies, when one of them gets a different looking light, that means things are about to get bad,” Mr. Rogers said.

Mr. Rogers would know. He has spent a lot of time with robots, imaginatively anyway, while readying a new draft of his play “Universal Robots,” which opens at the Sheen Center on Monday, June 6, and is directed by Jordana Williams.

His works, maximally imaginative science-fiction plays designed for minimal budgets, teem with insectlike aliens (“The Honeycomb Trilogy”), futuristic drones (“Asymmetric”) and mad scientists (“Frankenstein Upstairs”).

His General Electric-sponsored podcast, “The Message,” was described by The Atlantic as “Serial” meets “The War of the Worlds.” It attracted more than four million downloads and landed in the No. 1 slot on iTunes for a time.

Having escaped the small automatons he had come to the museum to see, Mr. Rogers toyed with a puzzle wall and glanced at an exhibit on fractals before settling upstairs to discuss his work. At 41, he is disarmingly boyish, with a cherub’s fleshy face and a tendency to gabble enthusiastically when a subject excites him.

A lot of subjects excite him. “I’m sorry,” he apologized after one especially animated speech. “I had caffeine this morning.”

Mr. Rogers grew up in North Carolina and got hooked on science fiction early, after viewings of “Sesame Street” and “The Electric Company” gave way to “Doctor Who.” A Dungeons & Dragons period followed, as did immersion in the works of Isaac Asimov and Ray Bradbury. “I was definitely a complete and total dork,” he said.

He became involved in youth theater, but it wasn’t until after college that his interests in playwriting and science fiction coalesced. Until then, he said, he had written “the kinds of plays that young guys write, three-hour plays about how girls don’t get me.” Then one day, during a miserable run of a more or less realistic play, Mr. Rogers had a revelation: “Maybe I should actually write stuff that I would like to watch.”

Mr. Rogers began that process in the early 2000s, but he and several colleagues recognize “Universal Robots,” first produced in 2009, as a leap forward. Based on Karel Capek’s 1920 play “R.U.R.” (or “Rossum’s Universal Robots”), it imagines a world in which a reclusive scientist invents a breed of intelligent, humanoid robots that eventually turn against their masters. In Mr. Rogers’s reimagining, Capek himself appears as a character, as does his sister, Jo (modeled on Capek’s brother and collaborator, Josef) and a friend, Tomas Masaryk, the first president of Czechoslovakia.

In the play, the Capek character makes a plea for theater as amusement and pleasure. “It’s theater,” he tells a rival. “Of course it’s supposed to be fun! The theater cries out for the unreal!”

This is pretty much Mr. Rogers’s dictum. Since the first production of “Universal Robots,” his works have grown more gleefully unreal, perhaps culminating in “The Honeycomb Trilogy,” an audacious, engrossing and sneakily sophisticated three-play epic about one family’s response to an extraterrestrial invasion. The project was mounted in full last year.

His works are deeply philosophical and often surprisingly moving. Beneath the carapace of popcorn genre writing is a sensitive intelligence. As Sean Williams, who met Mr. Rogers in college and went on to found the theater company Gideon Productions with him and Ms. Williams (now his wife), explained, “Mac wants you to come and see a play about giant aliens and then walk away thinking about everything else.”

For a man who apologizes a lot, Mr. Rogers is unrepentant about his genre of choice. Science fiction, he said, “makes tackling challenging ideas a lot more fun. You can get into the allegorical, plus you can have cool stuff like robots and aliens.” He resisted applying to graduate programs in playwriting because he feared that professors might urge him, he said, “to stop being silly and write some grown-up plays.”

Despite a recent upsurge, science fiction remains a comparative rarity in theater and is often played for laughs. Mr. Rogers isn’t sure why. “It’s still kind of silly to do a superhero play, whereas superheroes have more or less swallowed cinema,” he said.

But Mr. Rogers believes that as our reliance on technology increases, plays pondering that relationship will become more common. (He cites Anne Washburn’s “Mr. Burns, a Post-Electric Play,” Jennifer Haley’s “The Nether” and Jordan Harrison’s “Marjorie Prime” as promising examples.)

Yet in some ways, these intersections make the work of a playwright more difficult. Characters who spend hours hunched over a laptop or swiping at a smartphone are not especially interesting to watch. So he set “Universal Robots” in an era before personal computing and made sure that the aliens of “The Honeycomb Trilogy” destroyed all the technology.

Mr. Rogers counts himself among those hunched over laptops. He has a day job writing social media content for a number of gum and candy brands. (There is tentative interest in another podcast, and “The Honeycomb Trilogy” has been optioned by a small production company, but he is still very much dependent on copywriting.) He spends much of the rest of his time working on his plays, often from an office in the Long Island City apartment he shares with his wife, the set designer Sandy Yaklin.

They met during the New York International Fringe Festival in 2005, when Mr. Rogers asked her if she wanted to be in a musical about mud wrestling. “He’s not, like, the smoothest guy on the planet,” Ms. Yaklin said affectionately.

Mr. Rogers probably wouldn’t be much use if the robot hordes were to pounce. But he is confident he will have time for more plays before those androids become a real threat.

At a panel a few years ago, he listened to several scientists anticipate when the robots would rise up and take over — not in any foreseeable future, except the sort that a playwright might dream up. He gestured toward the museum’s innocuous bot swarm, which glowed in placid greens and blues. “If you know how long it takes to get a robot to cross a room,” he said, “the last thing you’re scared of is that they’re going to turn against you.”


