


The exultant winner was a franchise that had become a chronic loser, but Commissioner Adam Silver appeared suddenly on stage on Tuesday after the N.B.A.’s annual draft lottery show to remind us of why the Philadelphia 76ers, despite having landed the No. 1 pick, should hold off on plans for a championship parade.

“Sure, it’s great to get a top draft pick, but it takes much more than that,” Silver said, while on a big screen to his left, LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers were laying waste to the Toronto Raptors in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals.

Exhibit A in Silver’s case are the owner Dan Gilbert’s Cavs, who in 2011, 2013 and 2014 enjoyed an unprecedented run of lottery night No. 1 luck and still were essentially nowhere until James surrendered to homesickness and returned to his native Northeast Ohio.

At the bottom end of the Eastern Conference, under the new father-son management team of Jerry and Bryan Colangelo, the 76ers now have a presumed choice of one-and-done prodigies, Ben Simmons of Louisiana State or Duke’s Brandon Ingram, with their first pick, though both would add more inexperience to a team that has mainlined it in recent seasons to the point of overdose.

Silver has played much defense on the subject of the 76ers and their alleged tanking to stockpile high picks. Lest the league get dragged into another conspiracy, his staff even had to put out a public relations fire after Dikembe Mutombo mistakenly posted congratulations to his former team for winning the lottery — hours before the drawing was held.

“I don’t think improvement can just be measured by wins,” Silver said of the 76ers. “What people are seeing around this league is there are no shortcuts. It’s about building a culture. Players are attracted to teams where there is a commitment, a philosophy they can buy into.”

(Somewhere, Phil Jackson nodded and resumed sketching triangle formations for his draft-pick-less Knicks on the nearest napkin.)

In the 31-year history of the lottery, only one franchise has actually won a title with its No. 1 pick. The San Antonio Spurs landed David Robinson in 1987 and Tim Duncan a decade later, with their first Champagne bath coming in 1999.

Let’s face it: Guesswork is the companion of analytics. Workouts and character evaluations notwithstanding, many players drafted lower (Stephen Curry went seventh in 2009) have turned out better than those erroneously projected for shoe company sainthood.

Kevin Durant was the second pick in 2007 behind the injury-prone Greg Oden. A year later, Russell Westbrook was taken fourth, trailing Michael Beasley and O. J. Mayo. In 2009, James Harden was third behind the immortal Hasheem Thabeet.

The former Seattle SuperSonics thus became a thundering presence in Oklahoma City. But a loss in the league finals to Miami in 2012 was followed by a questionable trade of Harden, an assortment of injuries and a plateauing that was persistent until, well, now.

In the playoffs’ second round, the Thunder won twice in San Antonio, where the Spurs had lost once all season. In Game 1 of the Western Conference finals, Oklahoma City won at Golden State, where the Warriors had lost just twice in 2015-16.

For all the attention on Westbrook and Durant, who deserve it, it has taken the figurative growth of the young centers, Steven Adams and Enes Kanter, to create a more physical, diverse style and to temporarily suppress anticipation of a Cleveland-Golden State finals rematch.

N.B.A. championship chemistry is an elusive concept, almost impossible to deduce until a Dave DeBusschere replaces a Walt Bellamy with the late 1960s Knicks, or a Draymond Green (the 35th pick of the 2012 draft) supplants a David Lee for the Warriors in 2014.

And that explains why, most often, really important matters are not settled with Ping-Pong balls. Losers generally rule the lottery and, as Silver said, the best players — with the obvious exception of Carmelo Anthony — have become more wary of whom they commit to.

“There was a time in this league where players gravitated to certain markets just because they were bigger markets, but I think those days are over,” Silver said.

Asked why, he cited the last collective bargaining agreement, which, he said, brought “elements to keep teams that are over the cap from being able to add additional players.”

Mindful of excess management touting, Silver pointed to Durant’s mammoth shoe deal, saying, “Purely from an economic standpoint, those teams that perform best are going to get the most exposure, not necessarily the teams that are in the largest market.

“And then when you add social media to that, a player like LeBron James in Cleveland or Russell Westbrook in Oklahoma City, they can have huge global followings. The differences in market size between Oklahoma City and, say, Chicago become somewhat immaterial.”

Not the most optimistic of overviews for Jackson’s Knicks and Mikhail D. Prokhorov’s Nets, whose front offices and fans are among those fantasizing of luring a luminary such as Durant, a free agent this summer, or Westbrook, in 2017. Ditto the Lakers, who still managed to breathe easier after securing the No. 2 pick.

The night’s most compelling subplot involved 76ers Coach Brett Brown, and Lakers General Manager Mitch Kupchak onstage knowing Philadelphia would receive the Lakers’ pick if it fell below the first three.

It didn’t, so the 76ers’ night, while joyous, wasn’t perfect. They also still have two incompatible young big men in Jahlil Okafor and Nerlens Noel, and a third in Joel Embiid, who has not played a minute for them in two years because of injury.

Like the 76ers’ Brown, Kupchak hyped his largely unproven young talent while admitting that three years of record franchise losing has riled fans long spoiled by Showtime, Shaquille O’Neal and a healthy Kobe Bryant.

“We can’t continue to lose at this pace,” Kupchak said. “Now that we have the pick, I’ll get back to Los Angeles, and we’ll go through the different options — drafting a player or trading a pick, or a combination of the two. It’s all possible.”

For the sake of their fans’ sanity, Jerry and Bryan Colangelo will have to at least consider similar options. Lottery luck may be grand, but rare cases aside, it is only prelude to the art of design.


