


Since ending his turn as an amiable wizard in a certain long-running film franchise, Daniel Radcliffe has played an accused rapist with horns growing out of his forehead (“Horns”), a morphine-addicted physician during the Russian Revolution (“A Young Doctor’s Notebook”) and the beat poet Allen Ginsberg (“Kill Your Darlings”).

But until now, Mr. Radcliffe had never tackled a character who wasn’t, in the strictest sense, alive.

In “Swiss Army Man,” Hank (Paul Dano) is stranded on a deserted island when Manny, played by Mr. Radcliffe, washes ashore. Although lacking a pulse, Manny’s otherwise lifeless body can be used to fish, chop wood and hunt wild game. “You just sort of have to use your imagination when you’re playing something that doesn’t exist,” he said. “But that’s a good thing. As long as you’re giving the directors what they want, there’s no really wrong answer.”

Mr. Radcliffe explained recently how to bring to life a not-quite-dead guy. Here are edited excerpts from his tips.

Find your voice. I started out wheezy, like if a bellows had a voice box. Then I had to imagine that rigor mortis has set in, so his jaw is kind of stiff but starts loosening up as he comes more to life.

Work on your dead guy stare. Maybe have one eye really big, like an owl, and the other one nearly closed. I came up with [that] when I was playing around with stupid facial expressions in the mirror. I thought it was [something] everybody could do, but when I showed it to the directors, they were like, do that!

Keep your face really still. There’s really no trick. You just do it. There was also an element of not wanting to [mess up] the take and ruin Paul’s beautiful performance.

Know when to go to the stunt corpse. We used a dummy when the raccoon was attacking Manny. The moment they set [the raccoon] free, it would just jump on the dummy’s face and start scratching at his eyes. Raccoons are vicious.

Embrace your postlife superpowers. Paul uses my teeth to shave. That one was actually my idea. I ended up with a load of fake beard in my mouth.

ROBERT ITO


