


LONDON — Saracens have been to the semifinals of the European Rugby Champions Cup before, but this time the circumstances are subtly different.

In fact, when the London club faces Wasps in Reading Saturday it will be in the tournament’s final four for the fourth consecutive year. But this time Saracens are clearly the quartet’s heavyweights.

The French duo of Toulon and Clermont Auvergne has dominated the past three seasons, but neither is there. Wasps and Leicester, which plays Racing 92 in the other semifinal in Nottingham on Sunday, are two-time winners, but neither has made the final four this decade. Racing 92 is making its first appearance in any decade.

“Every semifinal is a one-off,” said the veteran Saracens back Chris Wyles, captain of the United States team in the Rugby World Cup last fall. “But we hope that our experience of big occasions will mean that we can focus on ourselves and our performance and not get sucked into the pressure and the sheer size of the match.”

There is very little in the way of home advantage. It would be hard for Reading to be more neutral. It is 46 miles from Saracens’ home in the North London suburb of Barnet and 37 from Wasps’ weekday training base in West London.

And there is a clear mutual respect between teams that are first (Saracens) and second in the current standings of the English Premiership, where Saracens are reigning champion.

“You have to take it to the Saracens and physically impose yourselves,” Wasps’ veteran English flanker James Haskell told the Guardian Monday. “But Sarries are very proud. It is going to be some battle.”

“Wasps have played really well this season and are in terrific form,” added Wyles. “They’ve made some key signings who have worked out for them very well, like George Smith.” Smith, a 35-year-old flanker who appeared in 111 test matches for Australia, is such a master of winning possession at the breakdown after a tackle that he was called in to advise the England team before the recent Six Nations tournament.

Saracens have won every Champions Cup match so far this season, with 9 points as the smallest winning margin, and are aiming to record the first perfect season in the tournament’s 21-year history. Wyles has made no small contribution to that. His five tries are second only to six by Leicester’s Vereniki Goneva, while flyhalf Owen Farrell leads the tournament point scorers with 92.

Four Saracens — Farrell, lock forwards Maro Itoje and George Kruis and No.8 Billy Vunipola — are on the 12-man short list for European Player of the Year. Wasps have three — Smith, center Elliot Daly and Charles Piutau, a wing who has 16 New Zealand All Blacks appearances under his belt.

“We hope that experience of the previous semifinals will help us,” said Wyles. “Since we lost two of them it has been painful experience, but we feel we have learned about what makes the difference between winning and losing, and how you cope with the crucial moments which make that difference.”

Wyles has been one of a stable core of players who have sustained Saracens throughout those European Cup runs. But there has also been change, with players like the 20-year-old Itoje adding fresh power and impetus.

“We always knew that he had a formidable rugby talent,” Wyles said of Itoje, who went into the Six Nations as a rookie and ended it as a Grand Slam winner hailed as possibly already the finest lock forward in Europe. “What we didn’t foresee was the speed with which he would improve and become the player that he is now.”

At 32, Wyles is unquestionably in the veteran class. He quit international rugby after the World Cup, ending with 54 caps for the Eagles. “I’m incredibly grateful for all the opportunities USA Rugby gave me, but I felt that it was the right time to move on and give the next generation its chance,” he said.

But that does not mean he will not be seen again in U.S. colors, since he is bidding to become a member of the American sevens squad at the Rio Olympics.

“I know it will be very tough to win a place. There is an established sevens squad, which has had some great results,” Wyles said. “But I know I’ll be given a fair shot, and I think I can bring something extra to it.”

But that’s on hold until the end of the European season, where there is no doubt about his most cherished desire.

“You want to win every match, and we really want to win the English championship again. You don’t get ahead of yourself, and you need to stay humble and focused on the next match,” he said. “But after all those semifinals, Europe has a feeling of unfinished business.”


