


As hundreds of newly anointed graduates of John Jay College of Criminal Justice made their way across the commencement stage at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday, the college’s president, Jeremy Travis, beamed with pride at one particular student. The graduate, a 34-year-old Bronx woman named JoAnne Carpenter, had taken a remarkable, circuitous route to the ceremony.

In the years leading up to the festivities, Ms. Carpenter nearly fell through the holes in the threadbare safety net of social services. Her mother struggled with drug addiction, and her father deserted the family for years. By 16, she was a mother to a baby boy whose father also abandoned her.

Ms. Carpenter followed a familiar descent into a trying circle of group and foster homes, but she clung to the hope that she could reverse her course through education.

“I knew school was the only way out,” she said. “I just kept telling myself the obstacles would make me stronger.”

Despite long hours spent working and raising her son, Ms. Carpenter received her high school diploma, and, at the urging of a foster parent, she applied to John Jay, part of the City University of New York system. “The acceptance was a huge surprise because no one in my environment even thought past high school,” Ms. Carpenter said. “They talked about college like it was a foreign word.”

Getting into college, it turned out, was easier than staying there. Ms. Carpenter remained determined in her studies, but she faced a multitude of hurdles: a troubled child, bouts of depression, the diagnosis of her bipolar disorder and an array of part-time jobs to pay the bills.

In 2003, The New York Times profiled Ms. Carpenter as part of its annual Neediest Cases series. The article highlighted her fortitude and said the Jewish Child Care Association of New York, a social service agency supported by the Neediest Cases Fund, had provided Ms. Carpenter money to pay the deposit and rent for an apartment for her and her son, Stephon. The Times publishes dozens of such stories every year from November to January and has been encouraging readers to contribute to the Neediest Cases Fund for more than a century.

Donors typically write checks directly to the fund, but Ms. Carpenter’s story struck a chord with Dick Tarlow, an advertising executive turned philanthropist from Shelter Island, N.Y. He read the report and wrote in to offer to cover her tuition.

“I was amazed by what she’d done despite it all,” Mr. Tarlow said. “How many of us born with a silver spoon haven’t even done that well?”

Ms. Carpenter was overjoyed, but that largess did not propel her to academic success immediately. Overwhelmed by the responsibilities of classes, work and motherhood, she dropped out of John Jay to gain control of her life. She said she faced up to a drinking problem that she had ignored for years, arranged for her son to receive therapy for emotional and behavioral problems, and moved to a new apartment to cut ties with an environment she found toxic.

Newly sober and ready to resume her studies, Ms. Carpenter enrolled at Hostos Community College in the Bronx. For nine years, from 2005 through 2014, she alternated between classes and jobs, calibrating the load so that she could afford care for Stephon. She also gave birth to another child, a daughter named London, now 3.

Ms. Carpenter received an associate’s degree in criminal justice from Hostos in 2014, but she still had her sights set elsewhere. “The goal from the beginning was to get back to John Jay,” she said.

Ms. Carpenter re-enrolled through John Jay’s Second Chance Policy, which allowed her to start with a new grade point average. From January 2015 through December, she completed two years’ worth of courses, finishing with a 3.4 G.P.A. and honors in her major. Stephon, now 18, attends college in Virginia, she proudly reported.

“When I met her, I told her, ‘You’re my hero,’” Mr. Travis said. “I know she’ll have a great future and inspire the next cohort of students.”

Although Ms. Carpenter fell out of touch with Mr. Tarlow, his confidence in her remained an inspiration. As she prepared to graduate, she sent him a letter, thanking him for his support.

Ms. Carpenter hopes to pursue a career as a civil rights lawyer, helping people fight housing and employment discrimination. “I read through Neediest Cases every year, and I see stories just like mine,” she said. “Not everyone gets an article in The New York Times, though.”

These days, Ms. Carpenter spends most of her time with London in their two-bedroom apartment on Fillmore Street in the Bronx. The two of them sit side by side at the kitchen table, Ms. Carpenter reviewing her used study guide for the law-school entry exam and her daughter leafing through “Green Eggs and Ham.” Though London can barely make out Dr. Seuss’ words, she often peers over at the study guide and insists on trying to read the legalese.

“She wants to be a lawyer already,” Ms. Carpenter said. “But I just tell her to take her time.”


