


What is happening on Friday?

Track and field’s governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations, will announce if Russia’s track and field team will be barred from the Olympics this summer in Rio de Janeiro.

The entire track team?

Yes, that is what is being considered. Even athletes without past drug violations would not be permitted to compete.

Where and when will the decision take place?

At a meeting of I.A.A.F. officials at the Grand Hotel Wien in Vienna. A news conference is expected at about 11 a.m. Eastern time (5 p.m. local time).

What led to this?

In December 2014, the German broadcaster ARD released a documentary that said the Russian government had helped procure drugs for athletes and cover up positive test results.

A World Anti-Doping Agency commission then released a report in November 2015 that described systematic, state-sponsored doping in Russia. The findings were largely focused on track and field athletes.

After that report, Russian athletes were suspended from international competition, including the indoor world championships in Portland, Ore., in March.

What were the report’s revelations?

Members of Russia’s secret service intimidated workers at a drug-testing lab to cover up top athletes’ positive results. They impersonated lab engineers during the Winter Olympics in Sochi in 2014. A lab once destroyed more than 1,400 samples. Athletes adopted false identities to avoid unexpected testing. Some paid to make doping violations disappear. Others bribed antidoping authorities to ensure favorable results, and top sports officials routinely submitted bogus urine samples for athletes who were doping.

What was Russia’s response?

The Russian Ministry of Sport vigorously denied many of the allegations. But Russian sports officials have grown more contrite in recent months after hiring crisis communications experts out of Washington. Russia has said it is working tirelessly to improve antidoping efforts, insisting that its track and field athletes should be cleared to compete in Rio.

Hoping to influence Friday’s vote, the Russian track and field federation announced last month that if its athletes were allowed to compete, no athlete with a history of doping violations would be chosen as a member of Russia’s Olympic team.

What are the latest revelations?

WADA released more information about Russia this week, charging that a track and field athlete tried to smuggle in a clean urine sample for drug testing, concealing a container inside her body and offering a bribe when her scheme failed. It also said that armed police officers threatened drug testers who showed up to collect athletes’ urine, and packages containing doping samples were tampered with by customs workers.

Such behavior was happening as recently as this month, WADA said.

If Russia is barred, which top medal contenders will miss the Games?

Russia won four medals at the 2015 world championships, two of them gold — Sergey Shubenkov in the men’s 110-meter hurdles and Mariya Kuchina in the women’s high jump.

Russia won 18 medals, eight of them gold, in track at the 2012 London Olympics, though some of those athletes have been implicated in the doping scandal and might not be allowed to participate anyway, including the women’s 800-meter winner, Mariya Savinova, the women’s steeplechase winner, Yuliya Zaripova, and the women’s hammer winner, Tatyana Lysenko.

Russia’s highest-profile track athlete is Yelena Isinbaeva, who won pole vault gold in 2004 and 2008 and is hoping to participate in her fifth Games. In an Op-Ed article in The New York Times on Wednesday, she pleaded for a chance to compete, noting that she had never failed a doping test.

Weren’t top I.A.A.F. officials involved in the scandal?

The former I.A.A.F. president, Lamine Diack, was suspended and then resigned from an emeritus position in November amid accusations that he had taken bribes to cover up Russian drug cheating. The French authorities opened a criminal case against him and his son — Papa Massata Diack, who worked as a marketing consultant for the I.A.A.F. — in connection with those accusations.

The former head of Russia’s track and field organization, Valentin Balakhnichev, also served as treasurer of the I.A.A.F. He resigned from the I.A.A.F. after the 2014 ARD report, amid allegations that athletes were being made to pay bribes to cover up dirty drug tests.

The allegations have also called into question the integrity of the I.A.A.F.’s current president, Sebastian Coe, who has repeatedly denied knowledge of wrongdoing.

And haven’t the antidrug agency’s actions also been called into question?

The antidoping agency WADA mishandled allegations of corruption, failed to investigate rigorously and was hampered by politics to the point that it was largely ineffective in its mission to protect the integrity of sports, The Times reported this week.

What are they saying in Russia?

Russian athletes like Ms. Isinbaeva have pleaded to be allowed to compete. The Russian Olympic Committee athletes’ committee sent a letter this month to the president of the International Olympic Committee asking for his support.

Among the people who signed the plea was Alexander Zubkov, a Russian bobsledder who won gold at the 2014 Games in Sochi. Russia’s former antidoping lab director, Grigory Rodchenkov, who ran the Sochi lab, told The Times that he had surreptitiously substituted Mr. Zubkov’s urine samples during the Olympics, to keep his steroid use from disqualifying him.

Mr. Zubkov has denied Dr. Rodchenkov’s claims.

Have other teams or countries ever been kicked out of the Games?

In general, nations have been barred because of geopolitical considerations, not doping.

After both World Wars, the losing nations were kept out of the next Games. South Africa was barred from 1964 to 1988 because of its policies of apartheid. Yugoslavia was prevented from entering team events in 1992 because of United Nations sanctions over the war in the Balkans.

What happens next?

The I.O.C. is meeting on June 21, four days after the I.A.A.F. vote, to discuss athletes who are eligible for the Rio Games.

It remains to be seen whether the I.O.C. can or will amend the I.A.A.F.’s decision on Russian athletes; Olympics officials have said they are waiting for the result of Friday’s vote.


