


Among the more polarizing sights in Manhattan this spring were the Madison Avenue windows of Barneys New York, an unlikely showcase for a series of mannequins. They were ringers for the real-life models who stalked the Hood by Air men’s runway in January, right down to their elaborate tattoos and the uncanny grillwork distorting their grins.

During a recent week, passers-by stood welded to the spot, challenged to make what they could of the scene, a curious hybrid of street theater and fashion porn. “Obviously, this was done by an artist,” Paul Roberts, a visitor from Edinburgh, said appreciatively. “It goes beyond window dressing, doesn’t it?”

But Claudia Brien, a young Upper East Side matron, pronounced those vitrines “beyond disgusting.”

“I pass them most days, but I go out of my way to keep my children away,” Ms. Brien said.

Love them or loathe them, the windows, their mannequins lurching toward spectators, lips ringed in jeweled pacifiers, “skin” elaborately inked, were a come-on. They were as surely a testament to a widening fascination with body modification in its most eye-popping extremes: allover tattoos, subdermal implants, piercing, stretching, scarring, branding and the like.

Shayne Oliver, the chief creative force behind Hood by Air, has been quick to exploit that fascination. Of a piece with his musical collaborations on and off the runway, the display was a calculated provocation, in tune, as Mr. Oliver likes to say, with “the language of flamboyancy, the language of exaggeration.”

At the same time, the windows “opened a door to a very interesting dialogue,” said Dennis Freedman, the Barneys creative director. “You start to become familiar with something that at first might be frightening. But I suspect that, over time, people do acclimate.”

As they say, the eye adjusts. Facial and body piercings, ear gauging, dental grills and tribal ink were once the province of so-called deviant or subversive subcultures. Explorations of extreme body modification, a practice so widespread in some circles that it was deemed a movement, have been lavishly documented in books like the 1989 body-mod bible “Modern Primitives.”

Inspired by Fakir Musafar, a performance artist and leading proponent of the modern primitive movement, the book is filled with photographs of Mr. Musafar recontouring his waist and extremities with tight metal bands, or hanging by flesh hooks from a tree.

There are images as well of Leo Zulueta, a tattoo artist stamped with a brash chevron-like pattern that enhances the contours of his back.

Tattooing and high-visibility piercing, resurgent in the early 1990s as the seditious insignia of proud outliers, are now being revisited in unlikely quarters.

“We’re seeing a lot of people who probably would have never set foot into a piercing studio,” said Miro Hernandez, a spokesman for the Association of Professional Piercers and a partner in Dandyland, a piercing studio in San Antonio. “We’re seeing business professionals, doctors, nurses and teachers more discerning about what to look for and what to choose.”

Indeed, the continuing appropriation — commodification, some might say — of this former taboo by fashion designers, celebrities and civilians alike suggests that it has made deep incursions not just into the mainstream, but also into the consciousness, and the pocketbooks, of a moneyed elite.

“In an era of excessive individualism, our markings and modifications are viewed not as a sign of freakishness or outlier tendencies but as an expression of personal taste,” Christine Rosen, a cultural historian, wrote last year in The Hedgehog Review, a journal of cultural criticism. Ms. Rosen went on to suggest that tweaking the skin one is in has become a leisure pursuit no more alien or off-putting than, say, a Botox party.

“Today ‘it was spring break’ is just as likely to be the answer to the question of why someone got tattooed as ‘I was in prison’ was for previous generations,” she writes.

No one, of course, would argue that uptown matrons will be besieging their dentists for grillwork any time soon. But there is plenty to suggest a widening acceptance of body mod’s more subtle arts: fake and real septum rings, quarter-size ear gauging, tattooed “sleeves” on the upper arms.

Fashion has certainly played a part: at Givenchy’s spring 2016 show, models’ ears were encrusted in crystals and studs, their faces covered in glued-on jewels, beads and swaths of lace; at Rodarte, models’ eyebrows were embellished with rows of tiny hoops, while those at Dries Van Noten wore long, fitted gloves stenciled with tattoo-like markings.

Then there are the show people: Rihanna and FKA Twigs, gracing the covers of the fashion glossies; Kendall Jenner, who wore a silver-dollar-size ceremonial nose ring at Coachella in 2014; and Justin Bieber, showing off a small freshly inked cross beneath his left eye on his Instagram feed.

Those kinds of subtle markings work “for every walk of life, whether you’re a model or a barista at Starbucks,” JonBoy, Mr. Bieber’s tattoo artist, told Pret-a-Reporter this week. “It’s like you can wear an accessory and look elegant and sophisticated and sexy at the same time.”

The other day, Catherine Hay, a 45-year-old marketing and communications specialist with a corporate clientele, lay stretched on a surgery table at the End Is Near, an upmarket piercing salon in Park Slope, Brooklyn. After months of deliberation, she had decided to have her navel pierced.

“This may sound shallow,” Ms. Hay said, “but I do a lot of Pilates, and I just think my ring will look pretty at the gym.”

Craig Rodriguez, the owner of the End Is Near and Hand of Glory, both in Brooklyn, spoke in a radio interview in the early ’90s of just how common piercing had become.

“It was popular then,” Mr. Rodriguez recalled last week. “But knowing what I do now, I think I underestimated its impact.

“These days the question is not ‘Is it mainstream?’” he added, “but how far are people willing to take it.”

Far enough, it seems, that Mr. Rodriguez, who sells jewelry from about $60 to $1,500 for a custom piece, will soon venture to Midtown Manhattan, with its expanse of luxury shops. In a June collaboration with Sydney Evan, a fine jewelry firm based in Los Angeles, he will offer his expertise to the free-spending customers of Bergdorf Goodman.

“Ear piercing is such a big trend right now, especially with so many new earring designs,” said Elizabeth von der Goltz, a Bergdorf senior vice president. “Whether people want to mix and match their jewelry or have multiple earrings all the way up their ears, more is more.” The store hopes to draw a mix of stylish younger customers and those like her, who, she said, “have kept their main ear hole and want at least one more additional piercing.”

Multiple piercings in and around the ears, formerly the mark of mall rats and club crawlers, appeal to a wider audience now, said Maria Tash, the owner of Venus by Maria Tash, an upscale piercing salon in NoHo. “We’re noting more women in their 40s, 50s and 60s getting piercings in unusual places,” she said — the nipples and septum among them.

They are lured as much by the jewelry — gold and diamond cuffs, studs and conches — as by the groovy maverick associations.

“From most of our clients, we don’t hear, ‘I’m worried about what people at my job will say,’” Ms. Tash said. “Those clients are either so established that they have the liberty to do such things, or they’re attracted to the nature of the jewelry — so subtle and small they don’t worry that they won’t be taken seriously.”

On Saturday, Jenny Camillieri, a middle school assistant principal in her 40s, was having her forearms inked at the End Is Near, the fresh designs an extension of a fretwork of tattoos snaking toward her shoulder. “The kids, when they see them, all assume I’m, like, really cool,” Ms. Camillieri said, nonchalantly. And the parents? “They assume I’m a little harsh,” she said. “But, it’s all good.”

Jamie Hall, 48, a doctor with a family practice in downtown Detroit, is about 50 percent covered in tattoos. “Some have marked certain periods of my life, and some are strictly adornment,” Dr. Hall said. His other embellishments include outsize plugs in his lobes, hooks that penetrate his ear cartilage and, he said, “a couple of spikes on the top of my ear.”

“Certain piercings I take out for work, mostly for convenience,” he said. “But some have been accepted over time.”

Reactions, he said, vary widely, from “Are you a doctor?” to “You’re the coolest doctor I’ve ever seen.”

Still, he is on occasion overcome by nostalgia. “Lately tattooing has slipped to the norm,” Dr. Hall said. “I miss the days when bikers were tattooed and athletes weren’t.”

“Now, he added, “attorneys on red Harleys are tattooed.”


