


The sickening feeling in the gut of Yankee fans is an unpleasant sensation shared by Brian Cashman.

Cashman watched as the Yankees were swept in Boston over the weekend and used words like horrific to describe the season, a term uttered infrequently in his 19 years as their general manager.

As the slumping Yankees paused Monday before heading into the teeth of a withering schedule, Cashman expressed deep frustration over the state of the team and sounded as if his patience was running out.

Although major changes are not on the horizon, if the Yankees continue to disappoint, something will have to change.

“There’s only so long you can allow it to go on before tinkering,” Cashman said in a telephone interview. “But it just needs to stop.”

The Yankees are 8-15 and in last place in the American League East. They have lost five in a row to fall seven games under .500. They have not been that far under .500 since 2007, when they opened the season 21-29.

Cashman said “very few” players on the roster could look in the mirror and say they had lived up to expectations. The rest are significantly underperforming.

He said he would prefer that this group of players turned things around and played up to the levels they had established in their careers. But if they don’t, he or Manager Joe Girardi will act.

“I’ve done this job a long time and I put this roster together,” Cashman said. “I feel it’s significantly better than it has performed, and when it doesn’t perform up to expectations over the course of time, I have a history of making changes. I would rather not go that route, but when you are forced to do so, you are forced to do so.”

Cashman said that the coaching staff and Girardi were not in danger. He also said he was limited by what kind of moves he could make to adjust the roster or the lineup, in conjunction with Girardi and the staff.

If outside help is available, he will consider it. But early May is not typically a prime time to make trades. Cashman would not rule out calling up a player or two from the minor leagues, but he stressed that the talent on the major league roster should be able to play up to that standard.

Using unusually strong language to describe the state of the team, Cashman said that there had been lean times in the past several seasons, including the Yankees’ three 8-14 stretches last year. That team rebounded to make the playoffs, as did the 2007 squad.

But he added that since he had taken over as general manager, he had never seen the Yankees open the season so poorly, and he is tired of watching it.

“It’s really frustrating,” he said. “This team scored the second-most runs in the American League last year and we’ve added Starlin Castro to it. To come off a horrific month of April like we have, it is pretty hard to stomach.”

Cashman said he would be in Baltimore for the three-game series starting Tuesday with the Orioles, a visit that he had scheduled before the lost weekend in Boston.

Three games in Baltimore is difficult, but the schedule is unrelenting after that series. The Yankees return home for another weekend series against the Red Sox, then host the World Series champion Kansas City Royals and the Chicago White Sox, who are in first place in the A.L. Central.

Cashman was encouraged by the offensive performance on Sunday night, when the Yankees scored seven runs. But they still lost, 8-7. Alex Rodriguez seems to be coming out of his offensive funk, hitting two home runs and a double, and driving in five runs, in the Boston series.

Others have not done as well.

“Some leashes might be shorter than others,” Cashman said.

He could have been referring to Chase Headley, who has been woeful. Headley is batting .156, and his slugging percentage is the same because all 10 of his hits have been singles.

Cashman sounded eager to get Aaron Hicks more at-bats, even though he is batting only .077 (2 for 26), because he had hit the ball hard. As for minor league players like Aaron Judge, Cashman would carefully weigh him and other options, too, if the situation did not change.

“This group needs to self-correct,” he said. “To the degree it doesn’t, then yeah, I’ll look for alternatives to get us going. I’d rather not do that.”

Pitching has been a cause for concern. Starters Michael Pineda on Saturday and Nathan Eovaldi on Sunday struggled. Reliever Dellin Betances gave up a home run in each of his last three outings, two of them game-deciders in Boston. One was by David Ortiz on a breaking ball on Friday and the other was by Christian Vazquez on Sunday.

Cashman said Betances might be tipping his pitches, so the coaching staff will be evaluating that carefully over the next few days. Then again, so will the Orioles.


