


NEW HAVEN — After a decade of planning, eight years of renovation and a 16-month closure, the Yale Center for British Art — one of the half-dozen or so masterpieces designed by the Philadelphia architect Louis Kahn during the last 15 years of his life — reopens to the public on May 11. And for those who have loved this award-winning museum since it first opened in 1977, showcasing Paul Mellon’s superb collection of British art, the good news is that you can barely see the difference.

Much of the woodwork has been refinished to give it renewed warmth. The aging fabric that covered the exhibition walls has been exchanged for new white Belgian linen. Nearly invisible sprinkler lines have been applied to the crossbeams of the roof, and synthetic carpeting, added during an earlier remodel, has been replaced by undyed wool carpets in the color and texture specified by Kahn.

The master’s voice also remains audible in other ways. In converting the Long Gallery on the fourth floor from a series of blocked-off units to a single gorgeous stretch of salon-style exhibition space, the renovating architects were following one of Kahn’s original working drawings. And when it came time to remodel the “pogos” — those movable walls inside the galleries — the architects found a drawing from February 1974, just a month before Kahn died, where it was clear he intended the pogos to be lifted off the ground so they appeared to float.

“If you’re not an idiot and you just look, the building tells you what to do with it,” said Jock Reynolds, director of the Yale University Art Gallery, a 1953 Kahn building across the street that went through its own renovation process about a decade ago.

George Knight, the architect hired by the Yale Center to oversee its conservation project, put it slightly differently. “It’s sort of a whisper that you hear,” Mr. Knight said. “There’s a phenomenal understated quality to this building. It’s always” — he drops his voice — “Are you sure you want to do that?”

Mr. Knight was aided by a 200-page “road guide” drawn up by Peter Inskip and Stephen Gee, two British preservation architects who unearthed historical details and supplied broad policy recommendations. One of the essential principles was that there could be no cheating on Kahn’s materials. “We could have stained all the wood to match the original, and it would have been indetectable,” Mr. Knight said about the refurbished white oak. “But he really would not have done that. And so we have situations where old wood and new wood are right next to each other, and we just had to be kind of brave about it and recognize that in time they will become closer together.”

This meshing of the original designer and his collaborators (among whom he would have counted materials as well as people) had been part of the process from 1969, when Kahn first met with his patron to understand the collection as Mellon himself saw it. Then he worked closely for years with Jules Prown, the first director of the Yale Center, who helped shape Kahn’s design in ways that even the architect acknowledged were useful.

By the time Kahn was awarded the contract, he was famous within his profession. (These days, he is perhaps best known through his son Nathaniel Kahn’s acclaimed 2003 film, “My Architect.”) Despite his terrible business habits (he was to die half a million dollars in debt) and his modest, up-from-the-neighborhood manner, Kahn’s small Philadelphia firm had become known as the place where architectural history was being made.

He had not yet won his lifetime Gold Medal from the American Institute of Architects — that came in 1971 — but several of his designs, including the recently completed Salk Institute, had already garnered enormous praise, and the Museum of Modern Art had devoted a whole exhibition to his Richards Medical Research Laboratory, the first structure ever to be honored individually in this way. Kahn was hard at work on a number of other late masterpieces, including the Phillips Exeter Library in New Hampshire, the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad and the Bangladesh Parliament building in Dhaka.

In spite of these distractions, the Yale project remained a priority, especially given his long-term connection to the university, where he had begun his teaching career in 1947.

But in March 1974, Kahn, a vigorous 73-year-old, died of a heart attack in New York’s Penn Station, leaving unfinished the Yale Center, along with the Bangladesh project and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park on Roosevelt Island in New York.

These three major projects managed to reach completion only through the strenuous help of his colleagues and friends.

Marshall Meyers — a former Kahn employee whose firm, Pellecchia & Meyers, finished the Yale Center over the subsequent three years — compared the difficulty of the assignment to “restoring a building that hadn’t been built yet.” He added, “Sometimes there was a document or drawing Lou had done that showed his intent. In other cases one could only rely on recent precedent.” Describing their “gentle collaboration,” Mr. Meyers (who died in 2001) said in a 1983 interview that Kahn “never worked alone. He couldn’t. He needed to talk to someone; he needed a dialogue.”

As it emerged from its final design, the Yale Center looked unlike any previous Kahn building. From the street, it could almost be an expensive office complex, with its alternating panels of matte gray steel and shiny glass.

You enter the four-story structure from the corner, through a dark and somewhat forbidding external foyer, but once inside, you are rewarded with a beautifully proportioned atrium where light floods down from above. The materials that make up this interior have a smoother, sleeker look than anything in Kahn’s other buildings. It’s not just the dark-hued steel, a new addition to his palette; even the oak, travertine and concrete, though similar to what Kahn employed elsewhere, seem more elegantly finished. The galleries, as they rise floor upon floor, are perfectly tailored to their purposes: a light-filled space for special exhibits; a darkened level for drawings and prints; and, finally, a grandly coffered upper gallery, where glorious natural light pours in on glorious Turners. The whole place has the feel of an English gentleman’s club that has been hijacked for artistic purposes.

Nowhere does this come through more clearly than in the long, high, second-floor Library Court. With its paneled walls, its muffled skylights, its comfortable leather sofas and its large Persian rug, the room invites one to sit and rest. On the walls hang Paul Mellon’s largest and in some cases most treasured British paintings. (That Kahn envisioned this arrangement from the start is demonstrated in an early sketch of his that shows Stubbs’s gigantic “Lion Attacking a Horse” on exactly the wall where it ended up.) This room is the pinnacle of gentleman’s-club perfection.

And yet Kahn allowed a primeval intruder to venture into this sanctuary. At one end of the long court, visible from every point within and around it, stands a massive concrete cylinder that seems to have flown in from another universe entirely. This wide gray column, which houses a staircase leading up to the higher galleries, is like a piece of the ancient world plunked down in an upscale London interior. The curved windowless facade that it presents to the room, textured as only Kahn’s concrete can be textured, is implacable, indomitable, unforgiving of the niceties of club behavior. It is the memorable thing about the room, and its gesture toward the harshly archaic gives it a strength that the merely beautiful lacks.

“When you look out into the great court,” said Amy Meyers, the Yale Center’s director since 2002 and the motivating force behind the conservation project, “you see this extraordinary free-standing object. And it draws your eye successively up, floor by floor, through those parts of the building that display works of art. And it stands in conversation with those works as a great modern work of art. And it reminds you that the building itself is a work of art in its own right.”


