


MERCEDES-BENZ makes vehicles with cutting-edge design. The G550 isn’t one of them, and that gives it a war horse appeal. With an architecture that has remained much the same since its inception in 1979, the G-Class, also known as the Gelandewagen, could be the touchstone that spawned the phrase “old school.”

Consider this: The frame is welded up using fully boxed sections of steel for strength, then flooded with hot wax to prevent corrosion. Certainly it has been refined over the decades with new engines (currently a 4-liter biturbo V8 with 416 horsepower and 450 pound-feet of torque) and modern technology (stability control and adaptive cruise control). Remember that when studying the exposed door hinges and solid axles.

Lore has it that the shah of Iran wanted a vehicle that could go anywhere, and Mercedes saw the value in such a vehicle. Pressed into military and rescue service, the G supposedly scales 80 percent inclines, up or down. It has been battle-tested all over the globe and even used by the Marine Corps.

Touching the G-Wagen reveals its primal appeal. The thing feels like an anvil. The heavy doors close with authority. Power locks have a steampunk “kerthunk” action. An analog machine in a digital world, it’s your father’s Rolex on wheels.

The unibody construction of a GLE or GLS class helps to provide a serene driving dynamic. The G-Wagen? It’s a body-on-frame truck, albeit a very nice leather-lined one, and it requires a driver’s attention with constant small steering wheel corrections, especially at freeway speeds. At 5,800 pounds, it’s the weight of two compact sedans, but it roars to 60 miles an hour in 5.8 seconds before capping out at 130. Does anyone really want to go that fast in a Brink’s truck? Its toolshed shape doesn’t create much wind roar, making the G more or less quiet at speed.

The 550 feels most at home on craggy roads deep in the wilderness. A 7-speed automatic transmission has three locking differentials and a low range. There’s comfort in knowing you could claw your way out of Hades with precious little head bob. The operation is simpler in a Range Rover because of its Terrain Response system, though.

The glass and metal box that holds occupants is lined with quality hides, climate-controlled seats and a sound system worthy of the musicians who buy G’s. The Comand user interface isn’t the latest version, but it beats anything from the 1980s. The single cup holder up front looks like a basketball hoop. Direct marketing toward N.B.A. players? Well played, Mercedes, well played.

The second row — there is no third — has room for three adults, both in length and girth. A time machine touch includes ashtrays along with seat heaters and cup holders. Folding those seats to maximize the cargo room requires a certain amount of effort, but once it is done, plenty of provisions can be stuffed in through the back door. Yes, a door, not a hatch (which would protect from the rain). At least it opens on the correct side for loading stuff to and from the sidewalk.

Prices begin at $120,000; the version I tested runs $123,000. Mercedes has signaled an end to production of this legend over the last decade and yet it soldiers on. A combination of luxury, utility, status, pop culture, capability and automotive paleontology, nothing makes people say “gee” quite like the G-Wagen.


