


GENEVA — An employee of the law firm at the center of the leaks of the Panama Papers, which have revealed offshore wealth held in secretive accounts worldwide, has been arrested here on charges of data theft, one of the employee’s lawyers, Romain Jordan, said on Wednesday.

It was not immediately clear what connection, if any, the person might have had with the Panama Papers, a trove of 11.5 million documents from a Panama-based law firm, Mossack Fonseca. A consortium of news organizations began publishing findings from the documents — some dating to the 1970s — in April, and the disclosures have prompted investigations of politicians and other prominent figures around the world.

On Wednesday, the Swiss newspaper Le Temps reported that an information technology employee in the Geneva office of Mossack Fonseca had been arrested on suspicion of stealing confidential information. Computer equipment was seized as part of the inquiry, Le Temps reported.

Asked about the report, a spokesman for Claudio Mascotto, the chief prosecutor in Geneva, declined to comment. The spokesman said only that the office had opened a criminal investigation based on a complaint filed by Mossack Fonseca. The employee’s name was not made public, and the lawyer did not give his client’s name or provide any detail about him.

Le Temps quoted a lawyer for Mossack Fonseca, Thierry Ulmann, as saying: “What we know is that the data were removed from his computer in Geneva and that this I.T. worker had full access privileges.”

The law firm filed a complaint against the worker for illegal removal of data and for violating the confidentiality of the law firm, Mr. Ulmann told Le Temps.

Mr. Ulmann could not be reached for comment on Wednesday evening.

Mr. Jordan, reached by phone, confirmed that his client had been charged with data theft but said only, “I can confirm that my client is denying all the charges made against him.”

The Panama Papers leaks originated with an anonymous source who approached the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. Daunted by the volume of data involved, the newspaper turned for help to the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, a nonprofit group in Washington that has coordinated several global projects on financial data leaks.

The New York Times, which was not initially part of the consortium but now has access to the documents, reported this month that Mossack Fonseca had at least 2,400 clients over the past decade who were based in the United States, and that it had set up at least 2,800 companies on their behalf in the British Virgin Islands, Panama, the Seychelles and other jurisdictions that help individuals or corporations to hide wealth.

In a statement last month, under the pseudonym John Doe, the source offered to come forward if offered immunity from prosecution.

Bastian Obermayer, an investigative reporter at Süddeutsche Zeitung who received the original leak on the Panama Papers, said on Wednesday that the man arrested in Geneva was not his source who leaked the documents, but left open the possibility that there might be more than one person behind the leaks.

In a phone interview, Mr. Obermayer said of the man arrested in Geneva, “We can say that it is not the person that we have been in contact with,” a statement he also made on Twitter.

It remains possible, Mr. Obermayer said, that the arrested man might have been involved in procuring the information — and that several people might have been involved in securing the information that was ultimately released.

But Mr. Obermayer emphasized that this was speculation. He said that he only had contact with a single source and that he was confident that that source had not been arrested.

“There is still a theoretical possibility that John Doe is many persons, and one of them might be this person,” Mr. Obermayer said.

Marina Walker Guevara, the deputy director of the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, said on Wednesday that she could not comment on the arrest in Geneva.


