


FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Saturday in connection with an article about the reactions of some readers to the revelation that their ancestors had been among slaves sold in 1838 to help save Georgetown University misidentified two ancestors of Sandra Green Thomas. The two, whose portraits are shown hanging over her mantel, are her great-grandparents, not her great-great-grandparents.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 24 about signs of illegal logging in the exclusion zone surrounding the nuclear reactor at the Chernobyl plant in Ukraine referred incompletely to a typical radiation reading in the zone. It is about 100 microsieverts per hour, not “100 microsieverts.”

•

An article in some editions on April 24 about President Obama’s scheduling of meetings with Western European leaders amid a growing sense in his administration that Europe is faltering in the face of multiple challenges misstated the day on which he was scheduled to give a speech in Germany. It was Monday, April 25, not Sunday, April 24.

•

Because of an editing error, an article on April 23 about a heroin prescription program in Vancouver, British Columbia, that has been successful in keeping addicts out of jail and away from emergency rooms incorrectly rendered the name of a Canadian medical journal that published a study in 2012 estimating that an untreated, severe opioid user costs taxpayers at least $35,000 a year in medical care, jail and other expenses. It is the Canadian Medical Association Journal, not the Journal of the Canadian Medical Association. The error was corrected online after the article was published, but editors failed to follow through with this print correction.

NATIONAL

An article on Friday about a federal judge’s order in a case involving executive actions by President Obama on immigration misstated the government’s actions regarding a program designed to protect unauthorized immigrants from deportation. The Department of Homeland Security reversed about 2,500 three-year grants to participate in the program that were mistakenly issued after a federal judge’s injunction in February 2015; the government did not reverse about 100,000 of the grants issued before the injunction.

Because of an editing error, an earlier version of the above correction erroneously stated that the article had been published in print on Thursday.

NEW YORK

An article on May 14 about the death of Susannah Mushatt Jones, the world’s oldest person, attributed an erroneous distinction to her successor, Emma Morano. She is the last woman to have been born in the 1800s, not the 19th century — which officially did not end until 1901.

BUSINESS DAY

An article on Monday about sexual harassment and discrimination on Wall Street 20 years after the filing of an explosive class-action lawsuit referred incompletely to Pamela K. Martens’s role in the lawsuit. While she was the lead plaintiff, she later opted out of the settlement and received no money as a result of the suit.

•

A picture caption with an article on Saturday about the closing of The Tampa Tribune misspelled, in some editions, the given name of a Tribune features reporter. She is Cloe Cabrera, not Cole. The article also misstated the founding date of The Tampa Bay Times, which closed The Tribune after buying it. It was founded in 1884 as The West Hillsborough Times, not in 1898 as The St. Petersburg Times, a name by which it was also known before changing its name to The Tampa Bay Times in 2012.

THE ARTS

An article on Monday about the winners at the Cannes Film Festival misidentified the award given to the director Xavier Dolan. It was the Grand Prix, not the best director award. (As the article correctly noted, that award was shared by Cristian Mungiu and Olivier Assayas.)

•

A picture caption on Monday with a television review of “The Return,” a “POV” documentary on PBS, was accompanied by a credit that misspelled the photographer’s surname. He is Mario Furloni, not Furlani.

•

A music review on Saturday about the Met Orchestra, at Carnegie Hall, misspelled the given name of the piano soloist in Rachmaninoff’s Piano Concerto No. 2. He is Evgeny Kissin, not Yevgeny.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Saturday about the actor Alan Young misstated his role in the 2002 remake of the 1960 movie “The Time Machine.” He played a flower store worker; he did not play David Filby, the part he had played in the original film.

•

An obituary on Saturday about Patricia Derian, who was President Jimmy Carter’s chief advocate on behalf of human rights abroad, erroneously attributed a distinction to the South Korean dissident Kim Dae-jung. He was the second civilian president elected in South Korea after years of military dictators, not the first. (Kim Young-sam was the first.)

•

A picture caption on Friday with an obituary about Marlene Marder, the guitarist with the Swiss post-punk band Liliput, misidentified her. She is in the center of the photo, taken from the cover of a Liliput record — not on the left. (The woman on the left is Chrigle Freund, the band’s singer at the time.)

OPINION

An Op-Ed article on May 18 about transgender access to bathrooms gave the wrong title of the author’s most recent book. It is “Why Government Fails So Often, and How It Can Do Better,” not “Why Government Fails, and How It Can Do Better.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


