


PORTLAND, Ore. — As his team gathered for practice Friday morning, Terry Stotts, the coach of the Portland Trail Blazers, cited one of the luxuries of the N.B.A.’s protracted playoff schedule: more time to study game tape.

But with three full days to digest his team’s most recent loss to the Golden State Warriors in the Western Conference semifinals, Stotts did not have to make many hard choices about whether to cue up all the good stuff his players had done Tuesday in Game 2 or let them study everything that had gone wrong. The Trail Blazers had plenty of time for both.

On Thursday, Stotts chose to dig into the fourth-quarter breakdowns — all the missed shots, turnovers and defensive miscues that had allowed the Warriors to escape with a 110-99 win. On Friday, Stotts focused more on the first three quarters — all the crisp passes and cohesive plays that had put the Blazers in control before everything went sour.

“For the most part, we did a lot more good things than not,” Stotts said. “So reinforcing the positives and showing them what needs to be done is probably more effective.”

The Trail Blazers, facing a 2-0 series deficit ahead of Game 3 on Saturday at Moda Center, are in some trouble, but at least they have survived similar situations in the not-so-distant past. In the first round, they fell into a 2-0 hole against the Los Angeles Clippers before winning the final four games of the series. Granted, the Trail Blazers benefited from the injury-induced absences of the Clippers’ Blake Griffin and Chris Paul, but they still had to win high-pressure playoff games.

To be sure, Portland has thrived as an overlooked, overachieving team that had to reassemble the pieces after losing four starters to off-season moves last summer.

C. J. McCollum, the team’s starting shooting guard, recalled some of the familiar narratives: “We’re not supposed to win a lot of games. We’re not supposed to make the playoffs.”

So the team’s current predicament feels like more of the same.

“We feel good,” the reserve guard Gerald Henderson said. “We’ve left the last two games behind us.”

The Warriors will once again be without Stephen Curry, who did not play in the first two games of the series because of a sprained right knee. On Friday, Steve Kerr, the Warriors’ coach, ruled him out of Game 3 and indicated there was a small chance he could play Monday in Game 4.

“I think they’re an elite team with or without Steph,” the Trail Blazers point guard Damian Lillard said. “Obviously, with him, they go to a new level. But nothing ever changes for me. I’m going to be my same self regardless of who’s out there. I’m going to go out there and attack and try to help my team win the game.”

Lillard pointed to some of the series’ odd dynamics. From the start of the second quarter of Game 1 through the end of the third quarter of Game 2, the Trail Blazers actually outscored the Warriors by 17 points. But the first quarter of Game 1 and the fourth quarter of Game 2 were unmitigated disasters for Portland.

“Here in the old N.B.A., it’s four quarters,” Henderson said. “We’ve got to sustain our play for the whole game.”

On Tuesday, the Warriors went into the fourth quarter trailing by 11 and outscored the Trail Blazers by 34-12 the rest of the way. Lillard finished with 25 points but missed all three of his field-goal attempts in the fourth quarter. His takeaway from Thursday’s film session?

“Hesitation,” Lillard said. “We just weren’t sure of that same play. As the game tightened up, it kind of seemed like we were having second thoughts about making the simple plays that we had already made.”

The general takeaway was that the Trail Blazers have reason to believe they can compete with the Warriors, that their game plan and defense are solid. Stotts observed how his players had limited the Warriors to eight 3-pointers in Game 2, a modest total for them.

“We played three-and-a-half very good quarters,” Stotts said. “When all is said and done, it’s a tie game with four or five minutes to go, on the road, against Golden State. You want to be in that position.”

But even without Curry, the Warriors are in firm control. If the Trail Blazers were to advance past them, it would be vaguely comparable to Leicester City taking the Premier League title.

“They’re historically good,” Stotts said. “There’s no denying that. And I know they’ve had critics, for whatever reason. But I don’t think you can deny what they’ve done over the last two years.”

Henderson was asked to compare the Warriors to other great teams he had faced in his career. Were they the best he had seen?

“If I thought that, I probably wouldn’t tell you that today,” he said. “Maybe at the end of the series.”

The challenge for the Trail Blazers is figuring out a way to prolong it.


