


Another dwarf planet has a moon.

Astronomers announced on Tuesday that they have spotted a small moon around Makemake, one of the icy worlds beyond the orbit of Neptune.

This distant region of the solar system, known as the Kuiper belt, has been one of intriguing mysteries. When the International Astronomical Union demoted Pluto in 2006, it created a new category of celestial classification: dwarf planets, which are big enough to be round, but not big enough to be the gravitational bullies of their orbits.

In addition to Pluto, three other Kuiper belt objects have been recognized as dwarf planets: Haumea, Makemake, Eris.

Pluto has five moons. Haumea has two moons. Eris has one moon. It had seemed that Makemake, (pronounced MAH-kay MAH-kay), 890 miles wide and the largest Kuiper belt object after Pluto and Eris, had none.

“Makemake was the odd one out,” said Alex Parker, a research scientist at the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colo. “Makemake was the only one that didn’t have a moon.”

Michael E. Brown, a professor of planetary astronomy at the California Institute of Technology who led the team that discovered Haumea, Makemake and Eris, and the moons of Haumea and Eris, had looked for moons around Makemake, too. He did not find any, but that was not necessarily the end of the story. “I’ve always been suspicious in the back of my mind,” he said.

Astronomers led by Marc W. Buie of the Southwest Research Institute decided to use the Hubble Space Telescope to take a closer look and see what might have been missed. They found a dot next to Makemake — the moon, which, for now, is designated S/2015 (136472) 1 and nicknamed MK 2.

“When the moon turned up in the data, it was not actually that faint,” said Dr. Parker, who performed the image analysis. (For the astronomers, 1/1,300th the brightness of Makemake is considered not that faint.)

The moon’s orbit is almost edge-on when seen from Earth. In the earlier observations, the moon was, by chance, too close to Makemake and obscured in the glare, Dr. Parker said.

The astronomers estimate that MK 2 was about 13,000 miles from Makemake and orbits about once every 12 days. More observations will enable them to precisely trace the orbit, and that will give an accurate measure of the mass and density of Makemake.

The discovery should also help resolve one of Makemake’s mysteries: Temperature data has indicated that most of the surface is bright and cold, but some of it is dark and comparatively warm.

Yet the brightness of Makemake does not change as would be expected if the dark spots were rotating in and out of view.

Perhaps the dark, warm signal emanates not from Makemake’s surface, but from a moon covered with a charcoal-dark material circling Makemake. A dark, warm moon about 100 miles wide would largely agree with the observations, Dr. Parker said.


