


A 51-year-old man shot and killed five people in the unincorporated East Georgia community of Appling on Friday night, officials said, before fatally turning a gun on himself in his garage.

Capt. Andy Shedd of the Columbia County Sheriff’s Office said the suspect, Wayne Hawes, lived in the neighborhood, about 25 miles west of Augusta, where he carried out the shootings at two houses, killing three adults in one of them and two in the other.

Relatives said one of the victims, Reba Dent, was Mr. Hawes’s mother-in-law, and Vernon Collins, the Columbia County coroner, said Mr. Hawes’s wife was in protective custody on Friday night.

The shootings occurred about 35 minutes apart, Capt. Shedd said.

The captain said the police were called to 3162 Johnson Drive about a shooting at 7:54 p.m. He said two victims were declared dead at the scene; a third died at a hospital. One man and two women were killed, he said.

Mr. Collins said the man who was shot was also found with his throat slit.

At 8:32 p.m., the police were called to a shooting at 5581 Washington Road, about half a mile away from the scene of the first shooting.

At that second site, a woman and a man were found dead of gunshot wounds, he said.

Mr. Collins and Harriett Garrison, the county’s deputy coroner, identified the five victims. Ms. Dent, 87, was found at the scene of the first shooting, as were Roosevelt Burns, 75, and Trequila Clark, 31. Ms. Clark was discovered alive but wounded, and was taken to a hospital where she was pronounced dead.

Discovered at the second scene were the bodies of Shelley Williams, 63, and his wife, Lizzie Williams, 60. Each died from a single gunshot wound to the neck. They were sitting on a sofa when they were killed, Ms. Garrison said.

Sheriff’s deputies found Mr. Hawes’s body in his house about midnight. He died of what appeared to be a single gunshot wound to the head and had apparently tried, and failed, to set the house on fire, Capt. Shedd said.

A resident of the neighborhood, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the gunman was still being sought at the time of the interview, said she was home with her mother when they heard four gunshots in the first shooting.

“My mother was like, ‘That’s a whole bunch of shooting,’ ” the resident said.

At first, she said, they thought it was someone hunting in the woods.

“We just kind of peeked out,” she said, adding that they saw a man leave from the victims’ home in a car. “After we saw him go off, we were like, ‘That’s not right.’ ”

Then, she said, another resident — a relative of the victims — who had gone to the house to investigate started screaming, “Call 911! Call 911!” she said.

The resident said she entered the home with the relative and could see two people in chairs were already dead and another person was slumped over and bleeding profusely.

She said the road late on Friday was teeming with police officers, some of them with assault rifles.

The location where three of the victims were shot is set amid a cluster of small one- and two-bedroom clapboard homes in a historically African-American neighborhood called King Villa.

The other home, where the second shooting occurred, is on a high embankment.

A woman named Tonya Dent was leaving the house on the embankment Friday night. She appeared sad but calm and offered scant detail, though she did say, “A husband and wife were killed here.”

She also said that all five victims were members of her extended family.

“All I know is my family’s gone,” she said.

On Friday night, a group of about 30 people stood in the yard, apparently gathered in prayer, illuminated by a single streetlamp and the flickering blue lights from sheriff’s cruisers.


