


When Michael Pomeranc was growing up in the mid-1960s in Rego Park, Queens, his parents and their friends spent countless evenings discussing their harrowing experiences in World War II. All were survivors of the Holocaust, and Mr. Pomeranc often saw them chain-smoking and crying late into the night. The absence of anything tangible from their histories plagued him most.

“Not having the ability to understand where everybody went was very, very traumatizing,” Mr. Pomeranc, 58, a prominent New York City hotelier, said recently as he sat in the lobby of his hotel, Sixty SoHo. “What happened to the cemeteries of my great-grandparents? Where are my grandparents and my aunts? Can you go there? Would you see anything? It was like they were talking in an abyss.”

The Pomeranc family is well known in New York real estate circles. Jack Pomeranc came to America after the war and amassed a fortune building residential properties and airport hotels, mostly in New Jersey. Now 88, he still spends most days commuting from his Fifth Avenue apartment to his office in Fort Lee. His sons Larry, Michael and Jason, the youngest and a frequent presence in the style pages, built up a national chain of celebrity-friendly boutique hotels.

But the past was always with them, particularly for Michael, who spent nearly three decades working to uncover the fate of his murdered relatives, last seen in Adampol, a Polish agricultural town near Belarus. In the 1990s, he began searching historic records and tracking down leads across Europe. It was not until this year, when Caroline Sturdy Colls, a forensic archaeologist he had hired, completed three years of research, that his efforts led him back to Adampol.

In January, Dr. Sturdy Colls, an associate professor of forensic archaeology and genocide investigation at Staffordshire University in England, published the first full-scale investigation of Adampol. According to her findings, as many as 1,000 Jewish victims are buried there in mass graves, beneath farmland, woodland, rubbish heaps and a shooting range. Because of Mr. Pomeranc, efforts are now underway to erect a monument and protect the site from development.

“Adampol is significant,” said Paul Shapiro, the director of the Jack, Joseph and Morton Mandel Center for Advanced Holocaust Studies at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington. “To really know — not to guess — where these sites are is huge. And of course that poses the question: Once we know, what will the world do about it?”

In recent years, researchers have uncovered a vast network of more than 42,000 relatively unknown Nazi camps and ghettos, many of which were behind the Iron Curtain or had few surviving eyewitnesses who could tell their stories. Most of the sites remain unmarked, neglected and poorly documented. Attempts to mark these areas are increasing, and are also often controversial.

“The reality is that today, in some little town, someone decides to build a supermarket and when they go to dig, they find human remains,” Mr. Shapiro said. “Unless something is done, you have the prospect of the remains of the victims of the Holocaust simply strewn across the European continent, and ultimately, built on top of.”

Preserving an area for remembrance can be a complex process that necessitates cooperation from local authorities and the Polish government. The chief rabbi of Poland, Michael Schudrich, who must also sign off, is currently reviewing the Adampol findings.

It is not only in the Pomeranc family that Adampol looms large. Survivors settled in various countries, including Britain, Canada and Israel, and many have since reconnected via Facebook and other online outlets.

“Adampol was a horrible catastrophe, and yet no one has ever heard of it,” said Helen Maryles Shankman, who lives in Teaneck, N.J.

She turned her mother’s stories of surviving Adampol as a child into several fictionalized retellings, including “In the Land of Armadillos,” her most recent book, published this year by Scribner.

For Arie Hochberg, who was born just after the war in Lublin, a town to the south of Adampol, the discovery offers a flicker of hope. “It is very possible that my grandmother and aunts and uncles were buried there,” said Mr. Hochberg, who lives on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.

His mother, Anna Yuchtman, was a 20-year-old nurse when the war broke out and survived by escaping to Russia. She returned after the war to discover just one sister still alive. “The rest of her family disappeared,” said Mr. Hochberg, who runs a business importing Israeli wines and sits on the board of the Blue Card, a Holocaust organization. “Until her death in 2004, she didn’t know where or how they died.”

Adampol featured a landed estate owned by a Polish prince, which was converted during the war into a slave labor camp. Jews worked the estate’s fields and slept in its barns and stables. At first, Jews from the surrounding areas flocked to Adampol, driven by the mistaken notion that it would be safer than staying in the towns and ghettos where executions and deportation to the nearby Sobibor death camp were increasingly common. Like many others, the Pomeranc family, including Jack, his parents and five of his siblings, sought refuge there (an older sister, Chaja, had earlier fled to Belarus).

Adampol turned out to be far from the safe haven the Pomeranc family had hoped. The conditions of the camp were undeniably harsh, with endless hours of manual labor and meager food rations. The constant threat of mass shootings was most terrifying.

“We were afraid every minute of every day,” Jack Pomeranc said. “Every few months there were shootings. We never knew when. They would suddenly appear and everyone would try running and hiding. We were lucky the woods were nearby.”

In those woods, which were large and deep and still border the town of Adampol, hid a ragtag group of Jewish partisan fighters. The young men and women, starving and poorly armed, raided farmhouses in search of food and supplies and conducted missions to free fellow Jews. Jack and his older brother Jurek often sneaked out of the camp and stayed with the partisans.

In September 1943, Jurek and his cousin returned to Adampol for Abram, Jack’s 8-year-old brother. Before the boys could return to the woods, another mass shooting began. They scrambled to safety but their parents and two youngest sisters, who were probably ages 3 and 4, were shot and thrown into shallow graves.

Jack, his brothers and their sole surviving sister, Cesia, remained in the forest with the partisans for the rest of the war. Death was always near. In one instance, Jack was shot in the back during a raid, and he hid in a dirt hole for weeks while Cesia tried healing him with salves made from leaves.

Jack survived the war, but those he lost were never far from his mind. “We were not the typical American family,” said Michael Pomeranc, who recounted the family stories Jack had told him. “When my father came home from work and would see all of us around the dinner table, he would get very emotional. We lived two lives — the public life and the private one.”

To provide a modicum of healing for his father and some resolution for himself, Mr. Pomeranc set out to uncover as much as he could about the family. He searched for birth certificates, school papers and other personal documents. He hired researchers to interview townspeople in Adampol and villages where his family lived before the war. He offered rewards — no questions asked — if they returned items that had once belonged to Jews. He unearthed a few photographs, but nothing more.

Then Mr. Pomeranc hired Dr. Sturdy Colls, who had conducted similar research at Treblinka, a Nazi extermination camp in Poland. Because Jewish law forbids disturbing the dead, archaeological excavations of Holocaust sites is not possible. Instead, she combed through thousands of pages of postwar trials, witness testimonies and government papers, unearthing stories of camp life and the murders that occurred there.

She visited Adampol, hoping to spot evidence with her naked eye, and was successful: “Next to one of the buildings someone had dug a pit for a drain pipe and in the soil there were burned bone fragments that were quite easy to see, and you could see there were additional bones, so it was likely they were scattered,” she said.

Dr. Sturdy Colls also employed advanced technologies like light detection and ranging, or lidar, which shoots pulsed-laser beams from sensors mounted on aircraft or satellites to measure the height of the ground surface, and produced detailed three-dimensional maps. She uncovered several large depressions indicating mass graves and one area where the graves were perfectly aligned in straight rows. “I think there could be in the region of 800 to 1,000 mass graves, but it could be more,” she said.

While Dr. Sturdy Colls has finished her report, Mr. Pomeranc would like her to go back to Adampol to uncover more definitive proof of the grave sites. But first they must obtain Rabbi Schudrich’s approval.

“People wonder, why dig so deep into this past?” Mr. Pomeranc said. “The truth is, we never left the past. We’ve never entirely been able to leave the death camps, and the partisans and the forests behind.”


