


The Los Angeles Kings and the Chicago Blackhawks, who accounted for the last four Stanley Cup championships, departed in the first round of the N.H.L. playoffs this year. The St. Louis Blues eliminated their archrival, Chicago, exorcising some playoff demons, which included three consecutive first-round exits. The San Jose Sharks also erased a sour postseason memory by putting away the Kings in five games.

The Pittsburgh Penguins are the only remaining team that has won the Cup in the past decade, and four teams in the second round have never won a championship. (Full playoff schedules can be found here.)

Dallas Stars vs. St. Louis Blues

These two clubs finished first and second in the West, jockeying for the top spot down the stretch. Each had a long, unpredictable first-round playoff series. The Stars had difficulty hanging on to leads. They were ahead, 4-0, in the third period of a clinching Game 6 win against the Minnesota Wild, which was a centimeter from going to overtime tied at 5-5.

The Blues held a 3-1 series lead against the defending champion Chicago Blackhawks but needed seven games and two strokes of puck luck — wing Troy Brouwer tapping in his own rebound as it sat on the goal line and Chicago defenseman Brent Seabrook’s shot clanging off two posts — to advance.

Despite their similar paths through the opening round, the two teams possess contrasting identities. The Blues (49-24-9) are a stodgy defensive team with tremendous depth on the blue line, led by defenseman Alex Pietrangelo. They clog the neutral zone and Coach Ken Hitchcock plays all of his players situationally. That included their 40-goal scorer Vladimir Tarasenko, who logged fewer minutes than his regular-season average time on ice in all but one game, which went to double overtime, against the Blackhawks.

The Stars (50-23-9) were the N.H.L.’s highest scoring team during the regular season and they play an open, freewheeling game. Defenseman John Klingberg gambles aggressively on offense, and their captain, Jamie Benn, leads the league in playoff points with 10. The offense has carried the club as Coach Lindy Ruff has used two goalies, Kari Lehtonen and Antti Niemi.

The Blues battled a multitude of injuries throughout the season, but they head into this series with their personnel intact. The Stars have been without the star forward Tyler Seguin, who is still pushing to return from an Achilles injury. He and Benn were the highest-scoring forwards duo in the league last season.

San Jose Sharks vs. Nashville Predators

These teams have deep lineups, but their distribution of scoring and style of play are quite different. Playing in the airtight Central Division, Nashville (41-27-14) earned a wild-card berth with a strong start and a solid finish, and some meandering in between. Nashville led the N.H.L. in scoring by defensemen, anchored by the most productive duo in the league, Shea Weber and Roman Josi. Like Weber, the Predators’ rugged captain, the forwards are pugnacious, with scorers like right wing James Neal and center Mike Ribeiro agitating opponents on a nightly basis.

San Jose (46-30-6) is a strong skating and highly skilled team. Forwards Joe Thornton and Joe Pavelski were the second-highest scoring tandem behind the Blackhawks wings Patrick Kane and Artemi Panarin. On defense, Brent Burns was second among N.H.L. defensemen in points with 75, trailing only Ottawa’s Erik Karlsson. Burns may not have even been the Sharks’ all-around top defenseman, as Marc-Edouard Vlasic has performed brilliantly across roles and situations.

The Sharks’ speed and array of weapons proved too much for the Kings, but Nashville vanquished a similarly deep Ducks squad that had no shortage of scoring punch and was the best defensive team in the league this season. Goaltender Pekka Rinne, a former Vezina Trophy finalist, has had mixed results the past two seasons, but was at his best late in the series against Anaheim. The Predators will likely have to increase their offensive production to top San Jose; they scored just 14 goals in seven games against Anaheim.

The Eastern Conference semifinals feature three recent finalists for the league’s most valuable player in Alex Ovechkin, Sidney Crosby and John Tavares; two of the N.H.L.’s top goalies in Braden Holtby and Ben Bishop; and four teams hoping to shake postseason disappointments.

In their first season in Brooklyn, the Islanders won their first playoff series in 23 years. The league-leading Washington Capitals have had tremendous regular-season success before with Ovechkin and his crew, but the team has not advanced beyond the second round since 1998. The Pittsburgh Penguins captured the Stanley Cup in 2009, but that glory has faded after first-round exits the past two seasons and a sweep by the Boston Bruins in 2013 in Pittsburgh’s only recent trip to the conference finals. The Tampa Bay Lightning lost in the Stanley Cup finals last season.

Washington Capitals vs. Pittsburgh Penguins

There should be no shortage of animosity in a series featuring the Penguins and the Capitals, who have met eight times in the playoffs since 1991, with Pittsburgh winning seven series.

The careers of Ovechkin and Crosby have been intertwined since they made their N.H.L. debuts in 2005, but their teams have met only once in the postseason. Beginning Thursday in Washington, the Capitals and the Penguins will face each other for the first time since the 2009 conference semifinals, a thrilling series in which Crosby and Ovechkin scored dueling hat tricks in Game 2. Pittsburgh won the series in seven games on the way to capturing the Stanley Cup. This season, both teams have serious aspirations of hoisting the Cup.

The Capitals (56-18-8) coasted to the Presidents’ Trophy this season as the league’s top team and were able to hit cruise control down the stretch. The Penguins (46-28-8) struggled early but reconfigured their team with a coaching change and some late-season call-ups. They won 14 of their final 16 games and finished with the second-best record in the East, then defeated the Rangers in five games in the first round.

Pittsburgh won three of the teams’ five regular-season meetings, including two late in the season. Washington may be without defenseman Brooks Orpik, the former Penguin who sustained a concussion in the first-round series against the Philadelphia Flyers. The Penguins got center Evgeni Malkin back, but remain without their No. 1 goaltender, Marc-Andre Fleury, who sustained a concussion late in the regular season.

The rookie Matt Murray was able to best Henrik Lundqvist in Round 1. Murray, who started Games 3, 4 and 5, allowed only four goals after he returned from an injury sustained in the Penguins’ final regular-season game. Now Murray will face Braden Holtby, who gave up five goals in six first-round games, carrying over his dominance in net from the regular season.

Tampa Bay Lightning vs. Islanders

The Islanders took two of three regular-season meetings from the Lightning and finished with a higher point total, but qualified for the playoffs as a wild card, so Tampa Bay has home-ice advantage.

The Isles (45-27-10) played in the East’s most thrilling first-round series, a six-game triumph against the Florida Panthers that included three overtime victories. Their captain and leading scorer, John Tavares, had five goals and four assists in the series, including the dramatic tying and winning goals in the clinching Game 6. They also got overtime winners from unlikely sources: forward Alan Quine and defenseman Thomas Hickey.

The Islanders’ pieces seem to be locking into place at the right time. They have defensive depth and a shutdown center in Frans Nielsen. The Isles have relied on their fourth line for big shifts after goals, energy during lulls and help protecting leads. Goalie Thomas Greiss has also been outstanding, posting a .944 save percentage in the playoffs. Greiss, playing in place of the injured starter Jaroslav Halak, logged 186 minutes in the final two games of the series, which each went to double overtime, and compiled a staggering 0.65 goals-against average and a .978 save percentage in those two contests.

Beginning Wednesday in Tampa, he will be opposed by Ben Bishop, who anchored Tampa Bay all season and posted lean numbers in the first round at the Detroit Red Wings. His .950 save percentage and 1.61 goals-against average were complemented by outstanding performances from right wing Nikita Kucherov (five goals and three assists) and center Tyler Johnson (two goals and seven assists).

The Lightning (46-31-5) were missing their leading scorer and top center, Steven Stamkos, and defenseman Anton Stralman, but they still dispatched Detroit in five games. Stralman may be ready to return soon from a broken leg, while Stamkos remains sidelined after having surgery to remove a blood clot.

The Islanders and the Lightning have met only once in the playoffs, in 2004, when Tampa eliminated the Isles in the opening round and went on to win the Cup.


