


CLEVELAND — A series of delays and questions about security and fund-raising are causing Republicans to scramble as they finish planning their nominating convention just weeks before the party gathers in Cleveland.

Among the complications facing Donald J. Trump, the presumptive nominee, and his team is that only on Friday were they finally able to gain access to Quicken Loans Arena, where the convention will be held, because it was being used by LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers, who won Game 6 of the N.B.A. finals there on Thursday night. (The series will end on Sunday night, with a decisive Game 7 on the Golden State Warriors’ home court back in California.)

“LeBron, good luck in the series,” Mr. Trump said the other day as he noted the predicament with a sense of resignation. “Of course, the longer it goes, the less time we have. But that’s O.K.”

Mr. Trump will have only four weeks to convert the sports arena into a red, white and blue-decked theater for his political ambitions. Usually, the Republican National Committee likes to allow campaigns six weeks to prepare, and at this point in 2012, Mitt Romney’s campaign had been in place in its arena for weeks. Republican officials, though, said they planned to move quickly.

“We can literally be in the arena within hours of the last game,” said Kirsten Kukowski, a spokeswoman for the Republican National Committee. “Our trucks will be pulling in as the ESPN trucks are pulling out.”

But even if the arena was not still covered in Cavaliers signs and advertisements for Budweiser, Mr. Trump and the Republican Party would have a lot of ground to make up before the July 18-21 event.

The convention’s host committee is short of its $64 million fund-raising goal. Shortly after Mr. Trump became the presumptive nominee in April, one major sponsor rescinded a contribution of about $1 million. Though the committee said it had since made up that amount and more, it still had to collect $7 million, as of last week.

There is also some concern about security, as the city prepares for large protests similar to the one that erupted in San Jose, Calif., this month. The head of Cleveland’s largest police union has repeatedly criticized local officials for being slow in their efforts to train and equip officers. Several cities, including Cincinnati and Greensboro, N.C., have decided against sending members of their own police forces to assist — support that local law enforcement was counting on.

The Trump campaign, whose team of about a dozen staff members arrived in Cleveland after Memorial Day, is still working on its plans for where Mr. Trump will deliver his speeches. (He has said he may speak each night from a different city before arriving here.)

As for the convention program, the lineup of speakers is still very fluid. During meetings last week, staff members for the Trump campaign and the national committee sat down to draft a wish list of celebrities and prominent political figures they would contact. They broke it down into ones Mr. Trump should call himself (Dick Cheney and Condoleezza Rice, for example) and those who would be left for aides to handle (Kenny Rogers, Jack Nicklaus and Diamond and Silk, the African-American sisters who gained notice after making YouTube videos praising Mr. Trump), convention planners said.

The building of the stage, usually one of the most extensive mechanical undertakings of any convention, is taking place at an undisclosed location outside of downtown, and the stage will have to be moved into the arena in pieces shortly.

One recent afternoon, a walk through the arena bore no signs that the Republican National Convention was coming to town. Crews of workers were not only preparing for the Cavaliers’ return, but also setting up for one of the final games of the season for the Lake Erie Monsters, a minor-league hockey team. Like the Cavaliers, they also made their league championship, giving Republicans one more logistical headache. (The Monsters won on Saturday, capturing the American Hockey League’s Calder Cup.)

The club-level bar where Mr. Trump and his family will sit during the convention smelled pungently of popcorn and was covered in advertisements for Effen vodka and its sponsor, the rapper 50 Cent. The large scoreboard and video display known as the humongotron will need to be hoisted higher into the rafters once Mr. Trump’s team moves in. And the suite at the top level of the arena that will be handed over to radio hosts and producers is for now still the Budweiser Penthouse.

The production teams for major arenas and the convention producers that the national committee use have plenty of experience under tight deadlines. Programs and events are regularly scrapped and upended at the last minute, as happened in both 2012 and 2008 because of hurricanes.

But a higher-than-normal level of uncertainty has surrounded this year’s convention, in no small part because of how many people in the Republican Party object to Mr. Trump’s candidacy. That has hurt fund-raising efforts, with corporate sponsors like Microsoft, Coca-Cola and Hewlett-Packard either declining to give or significantly reducing their contributions.

David Gilbert, chief executive of the Cleveland host committee, said donations had slowed down after Mr. Trump became the presumptive nominee. And one giver, whom he declined to name, pulled out of a nearly $1 million contribution.

“It’s fair to say that the effect of the presumptive nominee was fairly small for our overall fund-raising effort,” Mr. Gilbert said, adding that he was confident the committee would hit its $64 million target.

Still, he said, “Obviously, you’re never breathing easy until every dollar is raised.”

By their telling, the dozen newly dispatched members of the Trump campaign in Cleveland are working closely and collaboratively with the national committee’s staff members who have been in place here for months.

And despite Mr. Trump’s reputation for being a demanding micromanager, he has taken a fairly hands-off approach so far, aides said.

“They haven’t changed a thing,” said Ms. Kukowski, the R.N.C. spokeswoman.

Actually, there was one thing. After he reviewed the designs for the stage, Mr. Trump sent them back for unspecified revisions.


