


TAMPA, Fla. — Shane Prince scored twice in a three-goal first period, and John Tavares had a goal and an assist as the Islanders defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning, 5-3, on Wednesday night in Game 1 of their second-round Stanley Cup playoff series.

Taking up where he left off in helping the Islanders advance beyond the first round for the first time in 23 years, Tavares, the team’s captain, assisted on a Travis Hamonic goal to erase an early deficit.

Tavares also scored his sixth goal of the postseason, on a blistering shot from the left circle that gave the Islanders a 4-1 lead midway through the second period.

The Islanders needed overtime to take three of their four victories over the Florida Panthers in the opening round. This one, though, was never seriously in doubt after the Islanders wiped out the 1-0 lead that Tampa Bay took on an Ondrej Palat goal just over three minutes into the game.

“I think our group’s got a great mind-set. A lot of confidence, obviously,” Tavares said. “We’re all very familiar with one another and just want to keep rolling.”

Tampa Bay closed the gap to 4-3 on third-period goals by Nikita Kucherov and Valtteri Filppula before Cal Clutterbuck scored an empty-netter in the final minute to seal the victory.

Thomas Greiss, who won one game in overtime and two in double overtime against Florida, finished with 33 saves for the Islanders, who were outshot, 28-10, over the last two periods.

Game 2 is Saturday at Amalie Arena.

Lightning goalie Ben Bishop — who was superb against Detroit in the opening round, allowing no more than two goals in any of the five games — yielded four goals on 13 shots by the Islanders before being replaced by Andrei Vasilevskiy.

“He’d probably like to have one back, but at the end of the day he’s going to bounce back,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said of Bishop. “He’s a great goaltender. It’s a long series.

“It’s just one game. But whatever guy’s in there, we’ve just got to continue to do what we need to do and get pucks and bodies to the net. Some of our shots had eyes. Again, you need some puck luck in this game if you’re going to win, and we had that tonight.”

Tampa Bay entered the series following a six-day layoff, but the benefit of the extended rest was debatable after the Islanders overcame the early deficit to take a two-goal lead into the first intermission.

Prince scored twice in the final 2 minutes 32 seconds of the opening period.

First he camped out alone in front of the net to deflect a pass from Ryan Strome past Bishop, a Vezina Trophy finalist. Then Prince beat Bishop again with a wrist shot from the right circle with 2.1 seconds left in the period.

The Islanders built a 3-1 lead despite failing to capitalize on their first two power-play opportunities. Given a third chance with a man advantage, the Islanders struck, with Tavares’s goal making the score 4-1 and ending Bishop’s night.

“One of those nights where nothing goes your way,” Bishop said. “You just have to move on from it. It’s not about the last game, it’s about the next one, so I need to focus on that.”

The Islanders’ three-goal opening period ended a streak by Bishop, who had allowed two or fewer goals in eight straight playoff games, dating to last year.

Capuano took a puck to the face in the third period but returned to the bench before the end of the game.

Islanders center Josh Bailey did not play after leaving the team’s first-round clinching victory with an upper-body injury. The Lightning were without their captain, Steven Stamkos; defensemen Anton Stralman; and right wing J. T. Brown.


