


If you are unhappy with the underwhelming picks your team made in the N.F.L. draft last month, there is still hope. In the days since the draft, all 32 teams have been scrambling to sign more players, ones who were not quite good enough to have their names called on television.

Most teams have signed a dozen or more, some from powerhouses like Alabama, and others from programs not at the top level, such as Duquesne, Florida Tech and the University of the Cumberlands.

Most of these players will never be heard from again; others will have brief careers. But a number of them will outperform expectations and become regulars, stars or Hall of Famers.

For every standout who was drafted No. 1, such as Peyton Manning or John Elway, there was a player who slipped through the cracks but eventually showed the scouts that they were wrong.

Here are 10 of the best undrafted players:

TONY ROMO Romo was a three-time Ohio Valley Conference player of the year, but it was at Eastern Illinois, not Illinois, so every team passed on him in 2003. The Dallas Cowboys quickly picked him up as a free agent, and he went from third-stringer to backup to starter in three seasons. Romo has his detractors, but he is the Cowboys’ career leader in passing yards, touchdown throws and other statistics, surpassing Troy Aikman, Roger Staubach, Danny White and Don Meredith.

WARREN MOON Moon was the Rose Bowl’s most valuable player in his senior year at Washington, but teams, perhaps influenced by a longstanding bias against black quarterbacks, passed on him in the 1977 draft.

He headed to Canada for six seasons with the Edmonton Eskimos, winning five Grey Cups, before the Houston Oilers finally gave him an N.F.L. shot at age 27. In 10 seasons with the Oilers, Moon turned Houston from an also-ran into a playoff team. He was still playing for the Kansas City Chiefs at 43. Despite his late start, he was third in career passing yards when he retired, behind Dan Marino and John Elway, both first-rounders. He was elected into the Hall of Fame in 2006.

PRIEST HOLMES Though they have now fallen slightly out of vogue, running backs for decades were the stars of the draft, and most of the good ones were high selections.

But not Holmes, whose years at Texas impressed none of the 1997 drafters. The Baltimore Ravens grabbed Holmes as a free agent, and he won a Super Bowl in 2000 with them, but he did not excel until signing with the Chiefs. He led the league in rushing yards in 2001 and rushing touchdowns in 2002 and 2003.

WILLIE BROWN Overlooked in 1963 after playing at Grambling, a historically black college, Brown was cut by the Oilers before catching on with the Denver Broncos. After four years, he was traded to the Oakland Raiders and went on to rack up seven straight Pro Bowl selections. He played until he was 38 and earned a spot in the Hall of Fame. His most famous moment may have been his interception for a 75-yard touchdown in the Raiders’ victory in Super Bowl XI.

ANTONIO GATES A high school standout, Gates chose to play basketball at Kent State. The San Diego Chargers took a shot on him in 2003, and he has rewarded them with 13 seasons as a tight end, including eight Pro Bowl selections. He also passed Lance Alworth as the team’s career leader in reception yards.

DICK LANE Lane, known as Night Train, joined the Army after high school and did not try out for the league until he was 24. In 1952, his first season with the Los Angeles Rams, he set a record with 14 interceptions. Traded to the Chicago Cardinals and then the Detroit Lions, Lane intercepted his way to seven Pro Bowl selections and eventually the Hall of Fame.

JOHN CARNEY Kickers are often passed over in the draft, even ones from storied programs like Notre Dame. Carney signed with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 1987, but he was cut. He eventually re-signed and played in his first game the next season. He played 23 years with seven teams, notably the Chargers and the New Orleans Saints.

JOHN RANDLE Randle, a defensive tackle, was overlooked coming out of little Texas A&I (now Texas A&M-Kingsville) in the 1990 draft. The Minnesota Vikings were smart to give him a chance as an undrafted free agent, and he went on to six straight Pro Bowl selections before finishing his career in Seattle and making the Hall of Fame.

ROD SMITH Another small-college standout, at Missouri Southern State, Smith, a wide receiver, was passed over for seven rounds in 1994 and signed as a free agent with the Broncos. By 2006, he was the team’s leader in career receptions.

KURT WARNER Warner was passed over in 1994, after playing at Northern Iowa. A tryout with the Green Bay Packers led nowhere in the N.F.L., which led to time with the Iowa Barnstormers in the Arena Football League and a stint stocking groceries. He finally made the N.F.L. with the St. Louis Rams in 1998 and was an almost instant success, making two Super Bowls in three years. In an improbable final act, he returned to the Super Bowl seven years later with the Cardinals at age 37.

Maybe the next Romo or Warner is buried in the list of free agent signings this week. It is enough to give hope to any player still waiting in the green room.


