


LOS ANGELES — C J McCollum scored 27 points, Damian Lillard added 16 of his 22 in the fourth quarter as Portland pulled away, and the Trail Blazers capitalized on the absence of the injured Chris Paul and Blake Griffin to beat the Los Angeles Clippers, 108-98, on Wednesday night in Game 5 their first-round series.

The Blazers are up by three games to two and could close out the best-of-seven series on Friday in Portland. If Game 7 is needed, it would be on Saturday back at Staples Center.

Maurice Harkless added 19 points and 10 rebounds, and Mason Plumlee had 10 points and 15 rebounds for Portland. The Blazers made six 3-pointers in the fourth, with Lillard hitting five of his six as they outscored the Clippers, 37-27.

J. J. Redick led the Clippers with 19 points. Jamal Crawford, the sixth man of the year, added 17 points starting in Paul’s place. Jeff Green also had 17 off the bench, and DeAndre Jordan had 16 points and 17 rebounds.

Try as they might, the Clippers could not overcome the double whammy of losing their two biggest stars. Paul is out indefinitely after breaking his right hand on a freak play in Game 4. In the same game, Griffin aggravated a left quadriceps injury that had kept him out for three months during the season. He will not be back in the postseason.

Lillard, who had 6 points through the first three quarters, led the Blazers in the fourth. He opened with a 3-pointer, hit another one and then dunked off his steal from Pablo Prigioni. The Blazers ran off 7 straight points, capped by Allen Crabbe’s 3-pointer, to go up by 90-77 for their first double-digit lead of the game.

“I’ve always been able to put the first three quarters behind me and come up big when my team has needed it,” Lillard said. “It wasn’t even so much missing the shots that were bothering me, it was just that I couldn’t get any attempts because they were so aggressive. But I stayed with it, kept my mind right and I saw one go in. That was it.”

They were not done.

Lillard and McCollum, the league’s most improved player, combined for an 8-0 run, with both hitting 3-pointers that extended Portland’s lead to 102-86.

McCollum scored 10 points in the third as the Blazers took a 71-62 lead. The Clippers answered with a 9-0 run, getting a dunk and 3-pointer from Green, to tie it at 71-71 going into the fourth.

“We’ve got a unique opportunity to play an elimination game at home, and now we want to make sure we take full advantage of it,” McCollum said.

The Clippers controlled the second quarter, leading by 50-45 at the half with six players scoring. Without Paul to control the offense, they kept the ball in motion. They rallied for an 18-18 tie to end the first quarter on Austin Rivers’s dunk.

“We just made some simple mental mistakes, and with Blake and Chris out, we cannot really afford to make mistakes,” Rivers said. “We played pretty good defense over all. I just think we need to be better offensively.”


