


FRONT PAGE

An article on March 11 about the grueling cleanup work that continues at Fukushima Daiichi, the radioactive nuclear power plant in northeastern Japan, five years after an earthquake and tsunami caused a meltdown referred imprecisely to the 2,000 tons of water that is released into the ocean every week after being scrubbed of most radioactive particles. It is groundwater that has seeped into the reactor buildings; it is not the water that is pumped through the reactor cores to keep melted fuel from overheating. A reader alerted The Times to the imprecision shortly after publication, but editors failed to follow up with a correction.

NEW YORK

A picture caption in some editions on Wednesday with an article about speculation over why dozens of law enforcement officials descended on a yeshiva in Kiryas Joel, N.Y., misspelled part of the name of the main synagogue there. It is Yetev Lev, not Yutev Lev.

BUSINESS DAY

Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about giant food companies’ investments in start-ups misstated, in some editions, the role of General Mills in an $18 million investment in Kite Hill. General Mills is the lead investor, not the sole investor.

SPORTS

A picture caption on Thursday with an article about the success of Finland’s hockey teams at international tournaments this year described incorrectly the actions of Finland forward Sebastian Aho, using information from Agence France-Presse — Getty Images. He was reacting to a goal by a teammate; he had not scored the goal.

•

An article on Thursday about the San Jose Sharks’ efforts to rejuvenate their fan base misstated, in some copies, the year in which the Sharks lost a playoff series to the Los Angeles Kings after winning the first three games. It was 2014, not 2013.

OBITUARIES

An obituary on Friday about David King, a graphic designer who amassed one of the world’s largest collections of Soviet political art, misstated the original date of publication of his book “The Commissar Vanishes: The Falsification of Photographs and Art in Stalin’s Russia.” It was 1997, not 2014.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


