


It takes about three hours and 15 minutes to watch the London production of Annie Baker’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play “The Flick,” about employees at a seen-better-days movie theater. A chunk of that time is spent watching the actors leisurely sweep up trash. With over 100 seats on the set, that’s a ton of tidying.

But in a recent production of “The Flick” at the tiny Threshold Repertory Theater in Charleston, S.C., audiences were in and out in just over two hours. That’s what happens when your fictional movie theater has just 24 chairs.

“They didn’t spend a lot of time cleaning up,” said Courtney Daniel, the theater’s executive director. “Obviously we’ve got popcorn and things they have to pick up because it’s essential to the show, but I think the audience got it: You’re cleaning.”

Since the play had its debut at Playwrights Horizons three years ago, it has been produced some 50 times, with about 12 professional productions in North America this season (including one in an actual movie theater). Here, eight set designers talk about how they made their cinema worlds feel real on budgets that ranged from big to barely there, and reveal exactly where they got all those seats.

SEATS 111

The show’s European premiere is the third production of “The Flick” overseen by David Zinn, a Tony Award nominee this year for his set design of “The Humans.” The chairs in London are the same he used for the show’s 2013 premiere at Playwright Horizons — there were 105 seats there — and for its commercial transfer last year at the Barrow Street Theater, which featured 77 seats. They came from the Great Eastern Seating Company, a Pennsylvania company that sells new and used chairs.

“We added some gum to them in the front row, but all that wear is how they came, which is why we love it so much,” Mr. Zinn said. “It’s nice to know that there’s a warehouse somewhere filled with dirty movie theater seats.”

The on-set projector, flown overseas after being used at Barrow Street, proved to be a challenge, and not just because London theaters run on a different voltage than those in the United States.

“What’s complicated is that we are asking a film projector to behave unlike a film projector: Start immediately and shut off immediately,” he explained. “We had to Frankenstein projectors together to allow that to happen.”

SEATS 330

This site-specific production is being mounted by Mad Cat, a resident company at the Miami Theater Center, in a space that often doubles as a movie theater, almost eliminating the need for a manufactured set (or set designer) or theatrical lighting. The audience of about 62 sits on a riser on the stage. The doors on the “set” lead to the actual lobby, where there’s a working popcorn machine and restrooms for the real and fictional movie “theaters.” (“It’s all very meta,” said Paul Tei, the artistic director of Mad Cat.) It takes about 16 seconds for the show’s female character to walk up the stairs to the projection booth.

“In the script Annie says she disappears for like 15 seconds,” said Mr. Tei. “Here you don’t have to act. You just have to walk up the stairs.”

The actors, who actually clean the theater during performances, are in good favor with the janitorial staff. “We sweep up just like the cleaning crew does after us,” said Mr. Tei. “We tell them, look, we’ve already cleaned it for you. But please don’t throw out the trash. We need it for props.”

SEATS 24

This 99-seat theater, in a storefront space between a Chinese restaurant and a sandwich shop, featured a micro-cinema-size set, without the center aisle typically built in elsewhere. The audience in the front row sat about five feet from the stage.

Mike Kordek, the set designer, got the seats free from a theater in Savannah, Ga., that posted an ad on Craigslist. The back wall consists of flats with painted-on curtains. Total expense: about $500.

“Because we are such a small theater, we try to keep costs down as much as possible,” Mr. Kordek said. “I checked the price of curtains, and it was outrageous.”

The 8-millimeter projector and film canisters in the booth were donated by Trident Technical College in Charleston, S.C. During scene changes, the actors threw bags of popcorn and other garbage on the floor.

“We ate a lot of Starbursts to have the wrappers,” Mr. Kordek said of the now-closed show.

SEATS 40

Markas Henry said he had no specific theater in mind for his design. “I grew up in the country, so going to the movies was a once-a-year kind of experience,” he said. The biggest challenge was designing for a theater, a former church, that has no wing, fly or backstage space. “If something needs to be moved onstage, you have to build it into your design,” he said.

Mr. Henry spent about $800 on the ’50s-style seats, found through a Craigslist ad. Their curved plywood backs have a golden varnish; the upholstery on the cushions was a pale-blue gray with some tan and brown, colors that inspired the rest of the set. Two colors of inexpensive Home Depot carpet line the walls. The rest of the set cost an additional $2,500.

Pieces of an old projector, seen inside the booth, were accentuated with painted fake parts to gave it the hefty appearance of a 70-millimeter projector. “It’s all smoke and mirrors,” Mr. Henry said of the play, now closed.

SEATS 60

There’s dingy, then there’s Chet Longley’s design, which was inspired, he said, by a “worn-out mall where you got your potato skins at Bennigan’s before watching a movie.” The seats were given to the company by Spotlight Cinemas, a dollar movie theater in Columbia that was going digital. Most of the set, which had a budget of about $1,200, was assembled from “freecycled sources,” as Mr. Longley put it.

The coverings at the top of the seats are some sort of vinyl fabric that Mr. Longley figures were added by Spotlight Cinemas to extend the life of the fabric “and hide dirt and stains.”

Spotlight also lent the theater a 35-millimeter projector, reels and film canisters. The projector and the reels have to be returned, but the seats are going to a scrap salvager after the run ends.

SEATS 124

Jack Magaw visited some of Chicago’s grandest movie theaters to assess what he didn’t want to incorporate into his design. “It was more about cheesy ceiling tiles, the suburban equivalent of a single-screen theater,” he said.

The chairs were purchased off eBay from a former church in Indiana for about $2,000, and the carpeting is from Exposition Carpet, on Chicago’s North Side. Steppenwolf hired Julian Antos, a projectionist from the Music Box, as a consultant.

The backs of the chairs were outfitted with small boxes filled with prop garbage; electromagnets controlled by the stage manager released the contents onto the floor during blackouts. “When the lights come up they have more stuff to clean up,” said Mr. Magaw. “When I saw a video of it, I thought it as the coolest thing I’d ever seen.”

SEATS 68

“Wouldn’t it be nice if this theater was built in the ’60s and ’70s and survived this long with minimal upgrades over the years?” That was how James Kronzer approached his set design to go into Signature’s black-box theater. The chairs were a donation from Laurel Haunt, a haunted house in Laurel, Md., that takes places in an abandoned movie theater. The original chairs were light blue metal with dark blue upholstery, and since Mr. Kronzer’s design called for black metal and red upholstery, they were reupholstered and repainted. In total, the chairs cost around $4,000, about half of the show’s props budget.

Mr. Kronzer said eagle-eyed audience members will spot hyperrealistic touches on the set, including dust on top of the exit lights, dried mop water in the corners and gum in the carpets. “This is not a highly skilled work force that works in this room,” he said of the characters.

SEATS 50

The set designer Robert Winn said the biggest challenge was putting a movie theater in the company’s small basement space, which has 90 seats and concrete columns every 15 feet. “It’s intimate,” he said. He was inspired by the Art Deco touches of the Arlyne Theater, a movie house built during the oil boom of the early ’30s in Longview, Tex., where he grew up, but as if retrofitted during the 1970s.

For $300, Mr. Winn got the seats from an abandoned movie theater in Austin that has had other lives as a Mexican wrestling venue and a bazaar. As part of the deal, he also got the curtains, mop buckets and film reel canisters.

Peeking out from the booth window is a 16-millimeter projector and posters of “Beach Girls and the Monster,” a ’50s horror movie, and Wes Anderson’s “Bottle Rocket,” which was shot in Dallas.


