


Leslie Odom Jr. was leaving nothing to chance.

It was the fall of 2013, and Lin-Manuel Miranda had emailed, inviting him to an early workshop of the show that would become “Hamilton.” Just an informal gathering — a bunch of actors around a table at a rehearsal studio, reading aloud for the first time from the musical’s second act. Mr. Odom could play Aaron Burr.

It had been only a few years since he shot a TV pilot for a show that did not get picked up, leaving him so disheartened about acting that he started applying for jobs as a hotel clerk. But he had been moved to tears as an audience member at a reading of the first act earlier that summer at Vassar’s Powerhouse Theater.

So he leapt into action. He learned Burr’s big songs. He read up on Hamilton. He dressed to kill.

“You have to walk toward the things that make you alive,” he said.

The show’s director, Thomas Kail, took note. “He was coming to play,” he said. “He was inspired.” But, just in case, Mr. Odom aggressively pursued Mr. Kail as “Hamilton” progressed. “I didn’t hide any of my cards,” he said. “I would text Tommy after every single reading: ‘I love this part.’ ‘I want to stay with this part.’”

Three years later, “Hamilton” is a huge hit, and Mr. Odom, 34, is its ambitious antihero. Night after night, re-enacting the most famous duel in American history, he slays the show’s title character. And now he is a Tony nominee, competing, in life as in the show, against the show’s creator and star, Mr. Miranda.

His performance, as a strategic striver, a jealous rival and a doting father, is magnetic. He owns the one razzle-dazzle showstopper, “The Room Where It Happens.” And he is not only the show’s antagonist (“I’m the damn fool that shot him,” he sings in the opening), but is also a rueful commentator (“I survived, but I paid for it,” he sings. “Now I’m the villain in your history.”)

Oh, how Mr. Odom hungered to be that villain.

“This is the show I was waiting for my whole life,” he said early one Sunday at a recording studio in Long Island City, where he was spending a day off from “Hamilton” working on a coming solo album of jazz standards. He was wearing a gray sweatshirt and a black fur-lined hat with giant earflaps as he and his band worked through the Jule Styne classic “The Party’s Over,” trying to find the right bossa nova rhythm.

Some days later, pacing around his well-appointed dressing room at the Richard Rodgers Theater, he took that thought even further. “There is a chance that this is the greatest role I might ever have in my life,” he said. “And that’s O.K. If this is the greatest role I ever have in my life, thank God I got to do it.”

Mr. Odom not only had to persuade Mr. Miranda and Mr. Kail he was right for the role, but then, as “Hamilton” moved toward an Off Broadway production, he also had to get out of a television show that was taping at the same time.

His part on NBC’s “State of Affairs,” produced by and starring Katherine Heigl, would have been far more lucrative than playing Aaron Burr, but he had no doubt what he wanted. He emailed Robert Greenblatt, the chairman of NBC Entertainment, and begged to be let out of his contract; happily, Mr. Greenblatt a theater fan and producer who later invested in “Hamilton” himself, gave his O.K.

Mr. Odom hungered to join the “Hamilton” cast because he recognized the ambition of the lyrics, the appeal of the music, the drama of the story. But there was something else, too.

He remembered the envy he had felt in a production of “Jersey Boys,” realizing that “there’s going to be four really lucky white guys, all over the world, that are going to get to play these parts.”

“As a black actor, I can just tell you that I saw the potential to turn what is expected of us so often on its head,” he said. “We’re oftentimes asked to stop the show, or to make ‘em laugh, but we’re very rarely asked for vulnerability, very rarely asked for complication. And here was a role where he got to do ‘Room Where It Happens’ and he gets to do ‘Dear Theodosia.’ You just don’t find parts like that. You don’t.”

After more than two years with Aaron Burr, Mr. Odom has developed a bit of sympathy for his character. “None of us wants to be judged by our worst act on our worst day, and we consistently judge Burr for that,” he said. “He was not a perfect man, but he’s not a villain. He’s a dude, just a guy.”

Like the character he plays, Mr. Odom is deft, stylish and charismatic. “He was always sure of himself, sure of his abilities, passionate and driven, knowing what he wanted to accomplish and setting out to do just that,” said the Tony-winning actress Patina Miller, who Mr. Odom mentored when he was a senior and she was a freshman at Carnegie Mellon University. (He specifically asked to be assigned to advise a student of color, saying, “I know what it’s like to be ignored; when I got to L.A., I longed for somebody who looked like me to show me the ropes.”)

He believes deeply in focus — clearing away whatever he doesn’t need to worry about so he can concentrate on his art — and now has a retinue of helpers. He gets three meals delivered each day, so he doesn’t have to think about food; he has a stylist and a nutritionist and a trainer, and he’s become a practitioner of cryotherapy — standing in a chamber cooled by liquid nitrogen — to ease the aches and pains from dancing up and down the staircases on the “Hamilton” set.

He is also determined to use the voice he has gained with his newfound celebrity. He was one of the “Hamilton” cast’s most vocal champions of profit-sharing — successfully insisting that the actors who helped develop the show should benefit financially from its enormous success. “It almost broke our company, and almost broke our show, because we couldn’t reconcile the beauty and love with the business,” Mr. Odom said. “But we found our way through it.”

He grew up in the East Oak Lane neighborhood of Philadelphia, the son of a salesman and a nursing-home recreation director. At 5, he got a tape recorder, and he would listen to himself sing for hours; a few years later, he graduated to a karaoke machine. His first performances were in a Baptist church.

School was a bit rough — academics came easy, though young Leslie had a problem with authority and was often in trouble. But one year, as a prize in an African-American history oratory competition, he was awarded a summer scholarship to Freedom Theater, which focused on the African-American tradition. He was 13, taking acting and movement classes, and hooked; he began doing school plays, with a first role as a slave in “The Miracle Worker.”

“People just kept pointing me to the stage, thank God,” he said.

And then, one night, he saw a TV report on “Rent.” He had never been to Broadway. But he was stunned — he found it sexy, and rebellious, and joyful, and he wanted in.

“That was the bat signal for me — ‘Rent’ changed my life,” he said. “It took me years before I got beyond that show.”

Of course, lots of teenagers loved “Rent.” But Mr. Odom, all of 17 and still in high school, actually auditioned and got himself cast in the show — he was a replacement member of the ensemble, but he was on Broadway.

Even as he enrolled at Carnegie Mellon, he was offered a role in another Broadway musical, Disney’s “Aida,” as Mereb. His parents were determined for him to get a college education, but said they would defer to his choice, and he chose Broadway. Then his mother called him, crying over his decision.

He turned down the role and stayed in school. It would be nearly 15 years before he found his way back to Broadway, but he says she was absolutely right.

By the time he arrived at that fateful New York Stage and Film reading at Vassar, he had spent nearly a decade in Los Angeles, working mostly in television, but also singing in clubs. It was there that he met the woman who would become his wife, the actress Nicolette Robinson, while working on a production of “Once on this Island.”

He moved to New York for “Smash,” a television series about the making of a musical, with a recurring role as the love interest of Christian Borle. (“The most important thing about that for me was that I did not want it to be titillating,” he said. “I wanted everyone to understand why those two men were falling in love, and that it was just like any other relationship you’d ever seen. That’s all I cared about.”) There was a short-lived musical, “Leap of Faith” on Broadway, and roles on “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit” and “Person of Interest.”

When he saw the early version of “Hamilton” at Vassar, he assumed there was no room for him in the show — he knew Mr. Miranda had a bit of a posse and tended to collaborate with his friends, one of whom played Burr there. But the role had become more vocally demanding with the development of the show’s second act, and Mr. Odom seemed like a good fit.

Mr. Odom instinctively understood both the language of Mr. Miranda and the psyche of Burr. “He has a soulfulness underneath that matches Lin’s writing style — even when Leslie’s not dancing, you can see the beat happening in his body,” said Andy Blankenbuehler, the show’s choreographer.

Mr. Blankenbuehler recalled how, while developing “The Room Where It Happens,” he wanted Burr to own the scene by placing his palms on a desktop and leaning over it, like a king. Mr. Odom chose instead to sit behind the desk, leaning back, with his feet up on the surface, like a boss.

“His position was so much more powerful than mine,” Mr. Blankenbuehler said. “My position was pushing power — his was, ‘I don’t even have to do anything to own you.’”

Mr. Odom, whose contract with “Hamilton” expires in July, said he does not know whether he will stay with the show, or what will happen next. “I don’t have any control over the offers that are going to come to me, or not come to me,” he said. “But I can’t go backward, and so that’s what’s tricky. After Aaron Burr, it’s got to be a good part, it’s got to be an interesting part.”

In the meantime, he is still trying to improve his performance in the show he fought so hard to join. “Until I levitate, I have work to do,” he said. “That’s the day I’ll retire. When I actually fly.”


