


PARIS — The Drench Open dried out considerably on Wednesday, and after two days of open umbrellas and covered clay, the results, and not rain, came pouring in for a change.

It was sometimes worth the wait: See the first two sets of Andy Murray’s 5-7, 7-6 (3), 6-0, 6-2 victory over Richard Gasquet in the quarterfinals.

It was sometimes one-way traffic from the start: See Murray’s soon-to-be semifinal opponent, Stan Wawrinka, and his 6-2, 6-1, 7-6 (7) manhandling of Albert Ramos-Viñolas, the last Spanish man and the last left-hander remaining in the singles.

But at least they were playing instead of complaining, even if it had to be under a leaden sky that made spotting the Eiffel Tower from the upper reaches of the Philippe Chatrier Court an impossibility.

It has been an overcast, downcast French Open thus far, nicely encapsulated by Frédéric Bernes of the sports newspaper L’Equipe in his opening paragraph Wednesday: “It’s less fun, Roland Garros at the end of November. Rain poncho, rubber boots, the smell of wet dogs. The idea at this stage is no longer to be chic and classy on center court but simply to avoid catching pneumonia.”

Suffering is relative in sports, of course. Soccer players and American football gladiators play on in the rain and sometimes the snow. Tennis players do, too — on clay, at least.

“We had to play in Munich when it was snowing; we’re not a winter sport, you know,” Ernests Gulbis, the outspoken Latvian, said after losing his fourth-round match to David Goffin after it resumed on Wednesday.

But Gulbis was not in the snow in Munich for long before play was halted. Tennis is a game of precise timing and bounces galore, a game in which the racket is an extension of a player’s hand and in which the players — princess-and-the-pea style — can sense the slightest changes to the equation.

“Today, I had a bit of pain in the elbow because of the balls,” Roberto Bautista Agut said.

Others have complained of sore shoulders and wrists in the heavy, humid conditions. But the last few days have been as much about the internal tussles as about the muscles. (There was more running dialogue in the Murray-Gasquet match than in a Tarantino film.)

Thus, it should come as no surprise that Novak Djokovic, despite not yet playing his best, has found a way to muddle through.

“Still alive, still alive,” he said to a friend in the stands as he exited the Chatrier Court on Wednesday afternoon after finishing off the speedy Bautista, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1, 7-5.

“Of course I know that I can play better, and I have a couple more gears,” Djokovic said later. “That excites me actually, motivates me to work and get myself in maximum speed hopefully for the next match, and see where it takes me.”

The Djokovic-Bautista duel, originally scheduled for Monday, did not start until Tuesday because of the weather. Even on Tuesday, Djokovic and Bautista began in the rain, with Bautista winning the first set. Play was suspended and, during the wait, Djokovic came on court, borrowed an umbrella from a fan and did a Gene Kellyesque tour of the court without singing or stomping in any puddles before eventually resuming play for a brief period.

Keeping the mood as light as possible seems a good approach for Djokovic at this stage as he chases the only Grand Slam singles title he lacks. But the conditions on Tuesday were no joke, and some players felt they were being pushed on court so the organizers could avoid giving refunds to spectators.

Simona Halep and Agnieszka Radwanska complained about the conditions after losing on Tuesday, and David Ferrer joined the chorus Wednesday.

“It was a way to save the day and make money and not have to refund the tickets,” Ferrer told the Spanish website El Español. “In my view, it doesn’t seem right. It seems like it’s a rip-off for the people.”

Ferrer played briefly against Tomas Berdych on Tuesday before losing their fourth-round match, 6-3, 7-5, 6-3, on Wednesday.

Tuesday’s timing certainly could raise eyebrows: There were 2 hours 1 minute of play on the Chatrier Court, just over the two-hour limit for refunds. But there was also less than two hours of play on the other courts, which meant a 50 percent refund for those ticket holders.

Guy Forget, the new tournament director, defended the scheduling.

“Respect for the game always takes precedence,” he said in a statement. “If what we are being accused of were true, it would have been in our best interests as organizers to stop play before the 1-hour-59-minute mark as our insurer would have been responsible for ticket reimbursement. However, that was not the basis of our decision. Our aim was to play for as long as possible, even if that meant being criticized for playing in difficult conditions.”

Gulbis and Halep’s coach, Darren Cahill, made the same fair point: Players should not be asked to start a match when it is raining, but should be expected to play on when reasonable on clay. It is hard to imagine that the French Open organizers would have put anyone on court Tuesday if they had not already lost a full day of play on Monday.

But the most pressing clay-court questions now are whether anyone can find a way to stop Serena Williams as she tries to match Steffi Graf’s Open era record of 22 Grand Slam singles titles and whether anyone can find a way to stop Djokovic one more time in Paris.

Two of his prime challengers — Rafael Nadal and Kei Nishikori — are gone. Nadal pulled out midtournament with a wrist injury, and Nishikori lost to Gasquet. But other threats remain, along with the physical challenge of having to potentially play three best-of-five singles matches in four days.

With more rain in the forecast for Thursday, more changes, including a Monday final, are possible.

For now, what is much clearer than the skies over Roland Garros is that Djokovic will face seventh-seeded Tomas Berdych in the quarterfinals. The winner will face either the young Austrian Dominic Thiem or David Goffin of Belgium.

Get to the final, and Djokovic will face either Murray, who beat him in the Rome final last month on red clay, or Wawrinka, the defending French Open champion, who stunned Djokovic here in last year’s final and appears to be again approaching ramming speed.

Either Murray or Wawrinka, in the less weather-beaten half of the draw, should also arrive at the final better rested.

“Right now, tennis players in these events have to be selfish and look at their own matches and try their best to get through them,” Murray said. “It’s been a tough few days for everyone, but especially the players in the top half.”

No one ever promised Djokovic that winning the French (or the Drench) would be easy. In truth, deep in his competitive and complex soul, he might just prefer that the title that has eluded him for so long come only after quite a sweat-stained, clay-stained struggle.


