


There are cages. There are escalators. Sometimes there is claustrophobia. Usually there are children milling about, and in at least one instance, the whole setting (purposely) looks like a mine shaft.

In most sports, the tunnel area leading from a stadium’s locker room to the field or court is a sacred space. The final few moments before top athletes head out to compete are, generally, a private preserve of calm introspection or frothy expectation, a sanctuary free from scrutiny where participants can engage in a final motivating message or a last, quiet confrontation with their nerves.

Except in soccer.

In high-level soccer — whether it is the World Cup, this summer’s Copa América Centenario in the United States, the European Championships being played throughout France or just about anywhere else that games are on television — the tunnel is a show. This area once reserved for players and officials has become, in recent years, a voyeur’s paradise.

It is unavoidable. The broadcast of seemingly every game begins with several minutes of live images of the players lining up in the tunnel, the cameras — and often microphones — trained squarely upon them. The players fidget. They stretch. They adjust their shirts. They talk (mostly genially, though there have been confrontations). They banter with officials. They adjust their shorts. They stretch some more. They attend to any children who might be walking out alongside them. They adjust their socks. They take deep breaths. And then, finally, they walk out to play.

All of it is captured in high-definition, and nothing — nothing — gets missed. A star-struck child. A cheeky slight. Not surprisingly, nose-picking gotcha has become a bit of a cottage industry on the internet: For example, Spain’s Iker Casillas was once vilified after speculation arose that he had wiped something on a transfixed child’s face. Germany’s Per Mertesacker was similarly hounded amid allegations he ran his post-pick fingers through a child’s hair.

Stars are scrutinized the most. When Manchester City’s Yaya Touré gave Chelsea’s Eden Hazard a clip around the ear in the tunnel a few years back, the video was quickly and widely viewed online. And when Argentina’s Lionel Messi did not shake the hand of one of the child mascots before a World Cup game, angry videos exploded all over the internet, many of them juxtaposing Messi’s seemingly innocent oversight with images of Portugal’s Cristiano Ronaldo playfully fawning over children. Messi found the child later to make amends.

“It’s not strange anymore,” Germany’s Thomas Müller said of the tunnel’s ubiquitous cameras. “It wasn’t always that way, but by now everyone understands there is a camera there.”

Müller said he enjoyed the wide variety of demeanors in the tunnel. Some players stay light, he said, embracing a former teammate on the opposing team or chatting to pass the time. Others, however, are jarringly serious.

“Like Badstuber,” Müller said, referring to Holger Badstuber, his teammate with Germany and Bayern Munich. “He is the kind of guy where you make a joke to him and he looks at you and doesn’t laugh.”

Part of what makes the tunnel footage so compelling is the scenery. While some stadiums have a clean, nearly antiseptic runway to the stadium, many tunnels have distinctive characteristics. At the Santiago Bernabéu in Madrid, for example, a sturdy metal screen separates the players and creates the impression of being in a cage (or, for the visiting team, perhaps a prison). Berlin’s Olympiastadion has an escalator to bring players down from the locker rooms, which are a level up. At Selhurst Park, in London, players have to come out single file because the tunnel is so narrow.

The strangest setup may be at Schalke’s Veltins-Arena in Gelsenkirchen, Germany. Since the team is nicknamed the Miners, the club darkened the hallway used to enter the field and made the walls look like rocks to simulate a mine shaft.

At other stadiums, the history of the tunnel can be palpable. Ray Hudson, the former midfielder who is a commentator for BeIN Sports, recalled a day early in his career with Newcastle when he and his teammates walked into the tunnel before a match against Liverpool.

“We were coming down into that drop in the steps, and there’s that iconic sign, ‘This Is Anfield,’ ” Hudson said. “And Malcolm Macdonald, who was a great superstar for Newcastle, he tapped it and says, ‘Hey lads, we’ve found the right place.’ ”

Hudson laughed at the memory of Macdonald’s icebreaker, which for a teenager making his first professional visit to Liverpool was vital to easing his nerves. “I wish a camera had been there when he’d said it, because it was the disdain — ‘All right, this is Anfield, yeah, yeah, we get it’ — and it was a precious moment.”

The routine of the tunnel has become such an embedded part of the game that the governing body responsible for soccer’s rules recently revamped its regulations covering prematch discipline.

Previously, the ability of the referee to discipline a player began on the field. Now, a referee is empowered to show players a red card — and eject them — if they fight or engage in other unsportsmanlike behavior in the tunnel.

Peter Walton, a former referee in England’s Premier League who now oversees professional officiating in the United States, said he enjoyed the banter in the tunnel but noted that some players would not hide their feelings upon seeing a particular referee waiting to lead the teams out.

“A lot of times, this was the first moment a player would find out who was refereeing their game,” Walton said, “and so you’d get the odd ‘Oh no, it’s you again.’ ”

For viewers wondering why it frequently seems that everyone in the tunnel is waiting for an official to arrive before starting the walk out on to the field, Walton said that typical protocol was for the referee and one of his assistants to stand at the front of the line while the second assistant goes through and does a final check of the players, making sure that all their equipment is compliant.

The assistant also makes sure there are 11 players lined up on each side.

“I remember one game where we walked out with 10 players on one side,” Walton said, laughing. “The other player was stuck on the loo. I think he got out just before kickoff.”

Many clubs and federations, sensing a demand, now record and post their own tunnel videos on YouTube. But the precise history of televised tunnel coverage is difficult to pinpoint. Occasional access for cameras had been sporadic — as in other sports — but Amy Rosenfeld, a longtime producer of soccer broadcasts who is leading ESPN’s coverage of the Euros, said it appeared that more universal access started at the 2006 World Cup.

Since then, the gladiator moment has spread to virtually all top leagues and tournaments, with every match featuring a version of the tunnel gathering, the walkout and the referee’s plucking the ball from a podium along the way. Rosenfeld said the importance of the tunnel sequence had even affected the way she and other producers planned their pregame shows.

“Now, we actually mandate that our producers have to be wrapped up and done and we’re getting to the site 10 minutes before kickoff, because we want to be in the tunnel even as the players are just filtering in,” Rosenfeld said. “At this point, I think viewers would feel cheated if they didn’t get to watch the tunnel. It’s just become part of the game.”


