


PITTSBURGH — The annual baseball draft, which starts Thursday night, blends instincts, hustle and happenstance like nothing else in sports. Most of the prospects are years away from the majors. So much can change on a path that often starts on a high school diamond.

Two first-round picks from the 2010 draft opposed each other at PNC Park on Wednesday. Jameson Taillon made his major league debut for the Pittsburgh Pirates against Noah Syndergaard, a second-year sensation for the Mets. Both worked six innings and allowed three runs in the Mets’ 6-5 victory in 10 innings.

Taillon was chosen second over all in 2010, right between two future superstars: Bryce Harper of the Washington Nationals and Manny Machado of the Baltimore Orioles. Taillon once seemed like a sure thing, but he missed the last two seasons with Tommy John surgery and a sports hernia.

“As a young 18-year-old, I didn’t think this was that path I saw myself taking,” he said after arriving Tuesday. “But it’s my journey. It’s what I’ve had dealt to me.”

Steve Miller remembers Taillon, who starred for The Woodlands High School near Houston. How could Miller forget? He never saw Taillon pitch in high school, but he knew all about him. Everybody did.

“There was talk he could be the first high school right-hander in the history of the draft to go 1-1,” Miller said, referring to the first overall pick. “I kept hearing: ‘Jameson Taillon, Jameson Taillon, Jameson Taillon.’ He was the guy everyone was talking about.”

Not many scouts were talking about Syndergaard. He pitched for a high school near Dallas — Legacy High, in Mansfield — and was chosen 38th over all by the Toronto Blue Jays. They traded him to the Mets in the R.A. Dickey deal after the 2012 season.

Miller is the man who found him. He was speaking by phone Tuesday from the airport in Dallas, on his way to Monterrey, Mexico. He is now an international cross-checker for the Tampa Bay Rays, but in 2010 he scouted for the Blue Jays, covering North Texas for the first time.

The year before, Miller had been responsible for a vast swath of the country: the Dakotas to Kentucky, and everything in between. But under Alex Anthopoulos, then in his first season as Toronto’s general manager, the Blue Jays had overhauled their scouting strategy. They hired more scouts and gave them much smaller territories to cover.

Miller could have taken something closer to Kansas, where he grew up. But he wanted to scout the best players and chose the baseball hotbed of North Texas. He began with a list of prospects to follow that did not include Syndergaard.

Miller’s road to discovery began on a soggy February morning, just outside Waco, where he had gone to see a high school pitcher named Trae Davis, who would play for Baylor. It was close to game time, but nobody was getting loose. A rainstorm the night before had pushed back the start time.

This was a problem, because Miller also wanted to see a pitcher named Zach Cates — now a Class AA reliever for the Chicago Cubs — in the second game of a doubleheader at a community college in Mount Pleasant, about three hours away. He watched Davis for three innings, got in his car and called a San Diego scout, Jeff Curtis, a friend who knew the area better than Miller.

Bad news, Curtis told him: Cates had pitched in the first game. There was nothing for Miller to see in Mount Pleasant. He pulled over and consulted a master schedule of high school games. Nothing stood out. Then he looked at a local newspaper another scout had left behind. He asked Curtis if there was anyone worth seeing.

“Looks like there’s a kid named ‘Snydergrass’ listed here — you know anything about him?” Miller said.

Curtis gave a thumbnail sketch: right-hander, 86 to 88 miles an hour, heading to Dallas Baptist University in the fall, did not make the Area Code Games as a junior. Miller went to a high school game at the Texas Rangers’ ballpark instead, but kept an open mind.

He stayed one inning in Arlington, watching each pitcher and taking a cursory look at the up-the-middle fielders. Finding nothing appealing, Miller drove 20 minutes or so to see the Snydergrass kid in Mansfield. His first impression still resonates.

“At Legacy, you park beyond the outfield and kind of walk around from center field and down the third-base line,” Miller said. “So as I crossed the left-field foul pole and was walking down the line, I saw this big, beautiful guy on the mound, with a good delivery and good arm action. I’m like, ‘Oh my God, who is this?’ I didn’t see any scouts there.”

Miller was entranced. The velocity was just as Curtis had described it, nothing special. But Syndergaard — he knew the name now — looked so smooth, with precision command of a fastball and changeup and a curveball that could develop into a power slider.

Miller learned from the coach that Syndergaard was an exceptional athlete and a good hitter; he could have been the team’s best third baseman, but he wanted to save his throws for the mound. Miller spoke with Syndergaard’s parents, who said their son had grown six inches, to 6-foot-5, over the previous 18 months.

“Then it hit me: I just saw a guy who had grown so much in such a short period of time, but could control his body so well,” Miller said. “It all came together. I was in awe.”

Miller called his superior, recommending the Blue Jays take a closer look. This was pivotal, because there were many better-known pitchers in the area, and Miller needed time to build a case for him with his bosses.

Three other Toronto scouts came to see Syndergaard, twice each. Each time, he threw a one-hitter. “One time we didn’t even see any three-ball counts,” Miller said.

Other teams noticed, Miller said, as Syndergaard added velocity that spring. But the preseason opinion persisted. When Syndergaard told a rival scout that he hoped to be picked in the first three rounds, the scout warned Syndergaard that he might scare off teams with such expectations.

The Blue Jays spent their first pick, No. 11, on a Georgia Tech right-hander, Deck McGuire, who now pitches in Class AAA for St. Louis. They spent their next pick, No. 34, on Aaron Sanchez, a high schooler from Barstow, Calif., who is now one of the Blue Jays’ best young starters.

The year before, Miller had recommended James Paxton, a left-hander from the University of Kentucky who now pitches for Seattle. The Blue Jays took Paxton with the 37th pick in 2009, but could not sign him. As compensation, they received the 38th pick in 2010 – and chose Syndergaard.

“I went from crying about losing Paxton to being elated about getting Noah,” Miller said.

The Los Angeles Angels had actually been the first team to contact Syndergaard, he said Wednesday night, but they passed on him for the fourth time right before Toronto called his name. Syndergaard signed for $600,000, well below the typical bonus of $900,000 for that slot.

“I just wanted to start my career as soon as possible,” Syndergaard said. “I didn’t want to mess around with three years of college. A lot can happen in three years.”

A lot did. By 2013, Miller and Syndergaard would both be gone from the Blue Jays. Toronto revamped its scouting department and let Miller go. Syndergaard, by then, was working his way through the Mets’ farm system. He would soon become a star of his draft class and a pillar of the Mets’ success.

The Pirates want the same from Taillon. They waited six years for the prospect who could not miss to make it to Pittsburgh. A new batch of hopefuls arrives on Thursday.


