


The shift in American fashion continues. Diane von Furstenberg, creator of the wrap dress, empowerer of women and founder of the company that bears her name, has named a presumptive heir — and he is a man.

On Monday, Ms. von Furstenberg announced that she had appointed the Scottish designer Jonathan Saunders as chief creative officer. As such, he will be in charge of all aspects of design for the company — including fashion, art direction and advertising — and work with the chief executive, Paolo Riva, who joined DVF a year ago.

“It is time to reboot, and in a fresh way,” Ms. von Furstenberg said. “I have been looking for someone to be my heir for years, and now I have found him.”

Though Ms. von Furstenberg, 69, will continue as chairwoman, the appointment will free her “to use my voice more,” she said. “I want to focus on my work with women, public speaking and philanthropy.”

She is also thinking about her legacy and how she wants to be remembered.

One answer is “as someone who told women they could be the woman they wanted to be,” she said. Another may be as the founder of a brand who prepared for the future of that brand, a transition that has not traditionally been a strong point in the industry. Recently, though, that has begun to change.

Before his death, Oscar de la Renta named Peter Copping as his successor, and though the adjustment at that label is ongoing, the sheer fact that it planned for the future was an important development. Given the number of labels with mature founders at their helm (Giorgio Armani and Ralph Lauren spring to mind), that Ms. von Furstenberg is thinking the same way is significant. And it is bound to be noted.

“I will be there to give them the juice, of course,” Ms. von Furstenberg said, “but I will absolutely let them run the show.”

Whether this is true remains to be seen. It is a complicated emotional proposition to hand over to another the reins of a company you built. After Hubert de Givenchy sold his company to LVMH, he was critical of their stewardship; ditto Yves Saint Laurent, who often dismissed Tom Ford’s work when he was creative director of YSL. (Granted, neither Mr. de Givenchy or Mr. Saint Laurent had any say over their brands at that point, so their powerlessness may have had something to do with their comments.)

Ms. von Furstenberg has worked with other artistic directors, most recently with Michael Herz for two years, and before that with Yvan Mispelaere, from 2010 to 2012, and she had been enthusiastic about their potential before breaking up with them. But this is the first time she has publicly ceded the creative leadership of her label, which suggests she is serious. “It is a big commitment,” Mr. Riva said.

Ms. von Furstenberg said, “It’s all in the timing.”

The move follows the retirement of Donna Karan and the refocusing of the company on the contemporary line DKNY under designers Maxwell Osborne and Dao-Yi Chow, as well as the recent decision by PVH to consolidate Calvin Klein under a single designer, as yet unnamed.

Less dramatic, but also significant, is the addition of Laura Kim and Fernando Garcia, founders of the buzzy new label Monse (and Oscar de la Renta alumni) to oversee the team at Carolina Herrera.

Together the moves add up to a potential redefinition of New York fashion under a new generation of designers.

Still, the choice of Mr. Saunders, 38, suggests that, at least for DVF, a radical rethink is not in order. Mr. Saunders, born in Glasgow and trained as a furniture and textile designer at the Glasgow School of Art, and Central Saint Martins in London, introduced his own label in 2003 and became part of a new wave of London designers including Christopher Kane and Peter Pilotto.

Like Ms. von Furstenberg’s work, Mr. Saunders’s has been marked by vibrant shades and fluid prints, as well as an easy silhouette that placed pattern at the core of its identity, though he also has a more architectural sensibility that may help to modernize the brand. Aesthetically, the appointment makes a lot of sense.

“I’ve had my eye on him since he started,” Ms. von Furstenberg said. “I think his sense of color is better than anyone else in the world.”

Yet despite the endorsement of figures like Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, and Diane Kruger and an investment from the financier Eiesha Bharti Pasricha, Mr. Saunders closed his doors last December for what he identified as “personal reasons” (they seem to have had a lot to do with the perennial complications that come from outside funding). Ms. von Furstenberg came calling soon after.

“When I heard what happened with the company, I thought, ‘We have to meet,’” she said. They finally sat down last month, and agreed that Mr. Saunders would embark on a limited consultancy for DVF.

“I thought we should get engaged before we got married,” said Ms. von Furstenberg, who tends to talk about the designers she works with in relationship metaphors. “But he came for the weekend, and we all fell in love. It felt so right. We talked until 3 in the morning, and I thought, ‘I can’t lose him.’” After a whirlwind few days, the contract was signed.

Despite the fact that he has never worked full time for anyone else’s label before, Mr. Saunders seemed in a similar swoon. “Both of us felt immediately aligned, as people, in our thoughts about the industry and where it is heading,” he said.

Ms. von Furstenberg added: “I am so happy, I will be able to sleep now. If something happened to me today, they would be able to handle it.”

Mr. Saunders is in the process of relocating to New York. His first collection for DVF will be shown during New York Fashion Week in September.

Last season Ms. von Furstenberg invited guests into her studio to experience “vignettes” of models in her clothes instead of holding a traditional runway show, and she has been vocal about her belief that the system needs to change. But as to what form the September show will take, Mr. Riva indicated that it’s too early to say. “We’re discussing it a lot,” he said.

On his first day at work, however, Mr. Saunders was less restrained. “You’re definitely going to see something different,” he said.

It may well become the motto for the entire season.


