


When Joyce A. Rivera decided in 1990 to confront the AIDS epidemic that had claimed her brother’s life, she teamed up with unlikely allies: two drug dealers in the South Bronx. First, she educated them on how dirty needles and unprotected sex spread H.I.V., which causes AIDS. Then, she wound up distributing clean syringes to their customers in Mott Haven.

“I put my time and effort into seeing the drug dealers as real persons who had access to so many users that I could make a dent in the epidemic if I won them over,” she said. “I never said they were nice guys. But they were educable.”

Back then, her needle exchange program — St. Ann’s Corner of Harm Reduction — operated on the fringes of an impoverished minority community. The public saw her efforts as enabling drug users who would be better off behind bars. Today, her methods are viewed as part of an effective public health strategy that prevents the spread of disease and offers addicts help.

She suspects that her once-unorthodox approach has gained acceptance now that opioid and heroin addiction has exploded in white, suburban communities (almost 90 percent of new users are white, according to one national study). Compassion, rather than criminalization, is the keyword, with some police departments and politicians reassessing strategies developed during the war on drugs (which one former aide to President Richard M. Nixon was reported to have said had been mounted, in part, to target African-Americans).

“It had been a really big problem for years, but nobody cared because people had a very specific idea of what a drug user looked like,” said Dr. Chinazo O. Cunningham, a professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx who has worked extensively on harm reduction. “It’s about time to see the shift from incarceration to treatment. But it’s bittersweet because it’s clear the reason it’s happening now is that it’s affecting communities that are white and affluent.”

The number of H.I.V. infections and AIDS deaths was already staggering by the time Ms. Rivera started her needle exchange. It had been enough to divert her from pursuing a doctorate in political science and devote herself to public health at the grass-roots level. Her decision was reinforced by more family tragedies, when she lost two more close relatives to AIDS.

Still, she hit resistance. Politicians were wary of her work, as were the police who were racking up arrests of low-level dealers and users, while residents whose neighborhoods were plagued by drugs saw her as enabling criminals.

“When my brother died, the policies against drug users were shocking,” Ms. Rivera said. “The opposition to giving out syringes was such that they preferred to see drug users die. When you challenge the status quo with a more humane way of dealing with the problem, there are many constituencies invested in preventing change. It was about scapegoating the traditional bad guys.”

She stuck with her approach, helped by New York State health officials and other allies who saw needle sharing as a public health emergency.

She said she welcomed the changing attitudes among white suburbanites and looked forward to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly this week on the global drug problem, where advocates for harm reduction hope their experiences will influence policy makers from around the world.

“Change has to include coalitions among many people and many groups,” Ms. Rivera said. “Without that majority, you’re only going to be making change at the margins.”

Not that her work is marginal. At its regular sidewalk locations, her group distributes clean syringes, paraphernalia, condoms and naloxone, a drug that counters the effects of an opioid overdose. Inside its offices on Westchester Avenue, St. Ann’s Corner offers social and medical services, and clients come in for not only meals and showers, but also acupuncture and a quiet space to mediate. The organization’s goal, she said, is to let people get help, get stable and sort out their challenges.

Camille Lipscomb was still using heroin when she arrived at St. Ann’s Corner almost two years ago. A decades-long addict, she had lost her freedom after several arrests. It had even cost her her home, landing her in a shelter. But the hardest part for Ms. Lipscomb, who was raised by parents who were professionals, was losing her grandson’s respect.

“He said his grandma was thugged out and bugged out,” she recalled. “To hear him say that, I knew I had to do something.”

She stopped using heroin seven months ago. She has received a housing voucher and looks forward to having her own apartment once again. She still goes to St. Ann’s Corner, eager to help others as she was, rather than judged.

“This was a place for me to be still and gather my thoughts,” Ms. Lipscomb said. “What I really liked here was the camaraderie. People don’t look down at you here.”


