


Liverpool Sound City Liverpool Waters, Bramley-Moore Dock, May 28 and 29

Some of Britain’s liveliest pop acts will appear at this music festival, which takes place on docklands in Liverpool’s rapidly regenerating center city. Acts in the lineup include the Edinburgh hip-hop group Young Fathers, who scooped the prestigious Mercury prize in 2014; the gritty rocker, Pete Doherty; and the British rock group Hot Chip who have crafted some of the top dance hits of the past 15 years. A string of lesser-known local acts will appear alongside the headliners. liverpoolsoundcity.co.uk

Manet: Painting the Gaze Hamburger Kunsthalle, May 27-Sept 4

One of the most distinctive aspects of Édouard Manet’s art was the steady stare of the French painter’s subjects. It was an element that sometimes made his work a cause for scandal in the Parisian salons of the late 19th century. This show includes “Nana,” “Le balcon” and “Le déjeuner sur l’herbe,” among other paintings, and examines how the seemingly innocuous gaze of Manet’s subjects signaled a radical turn for art. hamburger-kunsthalle.de

Stars of the White Nights Festival Various venues, May 26-July 24

This lineup of classical music, opera and ballet is organized by the Mariinsky Theater to mark the summer solstice. Two ballets — set to music by Prokofiev, and choreographed by Anton Pimonov and Maxim Petrov — are to premiere. The Mariinsky’s director, Valery Gergiev will conduct several performances, including a new production of Saint-Saëns’s “Samson et Dalila,” and Prokofiev’s “Peter and the Wolf.” Well over 150 performances are showing in all. mariinsky.us

Christianity in Asia: Sacred Art and Visual Splendor Asian Civilizations Museum, May 27-Sept. 11

The rise of Christian art in Asia from the 1200s to the present is the subject of this exhibition. It will feature work produced in Asia as Christianity gained traction across the east. acm.org.sg

100 Years of Chinese Art: Opening Exhibition of Long Museum Chongqing Long Museum Chongqing, May 27-Aug. 28

From 2012 to 2014, the billionaire Chinese couple Wang Wei and Liu Yiqian opened two Long museums in Shanghai. Now, a third space is set to open in Chongqing, a city of 30 million about 1,000 miles away. The museum’s opening exhibition will feature Chinese art from the past 100 years. The show includes a section that explores the early Western influence on Chinese art in the wake of the Xinhai Revolution of 1911, a section on art from the time of the Cultural Revolution and one on the rebellious art of the 1990s. thelongmuseum.org

Apollinaire, the Eyes of the Poet Musee de l’Orangerie, through July 18

The French critic, journalist and poet Apollinaire was born in 1880. Wounded in World War I, he died just days before the war’s end in 1918. In his short but successful writing career, Apollinaire championed many of the major artists of his day — most notably Picasso, whom he defended as the voice of a new generation. This exhibition looks at his influence, displaying works by the artists he cheered, like Matisse, Braque and Rousseau. musee-orangerie.fr

Vivid Sydney Various venues, May 27-June 18

This spectacle of “light, music and ideas” includes concerts, outdoor light shows and a series of lectures by prominent speakers. Concerts are wide-ranging, but focus on contemporary music. They include a tribute to house music, a concert by Bon Iver and the Australian debut of the multi-instrumentalist Esperanza Spalding. One of the artworks that will be shown is “Lighting the Sails,” which will be projected onto the sail-shaped sides of the Sydney Opera House. The light designs were made by artists from Aboriginal communities. vividsydney.com

Cindy Sherman Queensland Gallery of Modern Art, May 28-Oct. 3

Cindy Sherman has built a decades-long career with distinctive self-portraits, which show her dressed as clowns, actresses and socialites. Most recently, Ms. Sherman, 62, has focused on aging. This show, which includes some work not yet shown outside of the United States, features around 50 of her photographs and focuses on her output over the past 15 years. qagoma.qld.gov.au


