


PARIS — Ernests Gulbis, a semifinalist at the French Open two years ago, has since seen his ranking yo-yo from the top 10 to outside the top 100 to his current position at No. 80. After his second-round win Thursday against 26th-seeded Joao Sousa, Gulbis spoke about building a team for success, karma, and the various clouds overshadowing sports this year. He will face sixth-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the third round. (This interview has been edited and condensed.)

You split with your longtime coach, Gunter Bresnik, just before this tournament. You had shared him with Dominic Thiem — do you think it’s impossible for any players at this level to manage sharing a coach?

This is a good question, and I don’t want to say about any situation, because maybe some people can do it. But in our particular situation, there was no chance to continue. No chance. My character is a way that I understand if sometimes I need to be in the second place or even third place in somebody’s interests — O.K., but not for half a year or one year, and not when I’m 27 years old. When you’re 19, 20, and you’re growing up, then you can swallow certain things. But now I don’t have enough time to swallow. I have these four, five years left where I want my physio to be with me 100 percent, my coach to be with me 100 percent. This is what I have to do. It was a decision based on my interests, purely.

You’re 27, and so could be considered part of the generation below Djokovic and Murray, who are both 29. No one younger than them has been able to make a sustained breakthrough, or even to win a single Masters title. Do you feel that sort of collective block, that this older group is leading and there’s openness or nothing behind? And could that be good in terms of opportunity?

I’ve never in my life thought in terms of a collective way of thinking. I’ve never put myself inside a collective of a generation, of a country, of a region, whatever, so it’s very difficult for me to answer this. I think that these guys who are on the top, they’ve reached it, and they’re doing a lot of things right. They’re doing a lot of things right, and they have the ability to do them right. They have the money to back it up, because everything has costs: physio costs, massage guy costs, coach costs. And now an assistant coach? It’s a big thing to have two or three tennis coaches, which I don’t really understand, maybe because I am not experienced enough. You can back it up, and you just build everything up, up, up.

So the rich get richer.

Yeah, and then when you’re ranked 40, 30, 20, you still need to think about your bills. You’re not earning a crazy amount of money. You can make a decent living, but you have to really think about which coach you’re going to take, who is going to travel with me, et cetera, et cetera. All these things, they help the top players a lot because they’re in bad shape, they get out of these dumps very fast. One, two tournaments and they’re back, because they did the work. If you’re traveling alone like I did, for a period of time: I’m in a dump, O.K., and how do I get out of it? Trust me, it’s not the easiest thing, to go and practice when you have pain from an injury. To go and practice in that moment is difficult.

It’s been a year of a lot of negative news in sports, with all the attention on Russian sport and wider doping issues, as well as in tennis more specifically with the attention on match fixing. What do you make of this negativity around the sports?

I think that everything, what every individual does, it will come around. It’s not only about sports, it’s about in general. I truly believe that if you make your money the wrong way, you’re going to lose it, or something else bad. It’s a little bit out of Buddhist philosophy about karmic things, but I really believe it. I can only speak, again, not collectively but individually. I want to be without these thoughts. I want my karma to be bright, to be free of all these things. And if somebody wants to make a decision that they want to sell something or they want to cheat, what can you do?

You’re not cynical about seeing, for example, match fixing, the way some have become suspicious?

To be honest, I never saw it. Maybe it’s because people are scared to approach me because I always have this aura around me that I’m this rich guy from Latvia who doesn’t need money, and people who are doing these kind of things would be scared to approach me. They also know my character; maybe I’m going to take him by the neck and bring him to justice, you know? This is why I never got approached, and nobody ever spoke with me about this. I’m probably the most far away guy, except the top players, who have never gotten any knowledge about this.

There have also been accusations and suspicions and whispers regarding doping in tennis, especially regarding top players. What are your thoughts on this cynicism that comes with pretty much every sport today?

To be honest, I think tennis is really clean. It’s my honest opinion. I know, myself, how I felt when I was playing well. It seems to most of the players, even, that it’s impossible to play day after day: five sets, five sets, five sets. But when you’re fit, when you did your work, you are physically able. You are physically so strong that you’re able to continue in crazy circumstances. Like Novak and Rafa, or Stan, in Australia when they play these marathon matches. People are able to do it. It’s not necessary that if somebody did his work and somebody practiced more than you, you have to go and accuse somebody that they cheated. They just did it better. This is my opinion; I honestly don’t think that somebody in tennis cheats with this.


