


Who knew there were so many land-use lovers among us? Zoning can often be a dry topic, but when it plays such an outsize role in our daily lives — as highlighted in a recent Upshot article on the cover of Sunday’s Metropolitan section — how can you ignore it? Our exploration of the many ways in which New York’s 100-year-old rules are out of date, and out of sync with the city itself, seemed to raise as many questions for readers as it answered.

We have collected some of their thoughts, in the hopes of continuing the conversation about the unexpected and inexplicable ways in which zoning has shaped New York — and the ways it will no doubt continue to do so.

One big debate: Does the fact that 40 percent of buildings in Manhattan are out of compliance with current zoning rules mean the city should revise those rules? Many readers saw a need for an overhaul, while others feared the rampant development that could follow.

Aurther Phleger of Sparks, NV

I find it amusing to hear the same people who elect to live in the most dense city (NY) in the most dense borough (Manhattan) and even in the most dense neighborhoods (Village, Midtown, UWS etc.) then complain that it’s too dense and crowded without realizing that the high density and buzz is why they decided to live there in the first place. For me, most zoning laws in places like NY and San Francisco with the emphasis on low-rise buildings and “livable neighborhoods” create the worst of both worlds. They lack the buzz of a Midtown or Hong Kong but also lack the convenience and peace of the suburbs. Things are too far to walk but you can’t drive easily either. If you don’t like the density of Manhattan, then move to Brooklyn or further out. Don’t ruin a great city for the rest of us. Had NY been built with today’s zoning, it would be a very boring place.

Max Star of Murray Hill, Manhattan

I live in a 19th-century townhouse and hate the thought of tearing down pre-WWII buildings in New York. But, if they do, they should build big, dense buildings. And ones that are not even with the buildings around them. That makes it boring. Tearing down a six-story old building and rebuilding a six-story modern building just because they could rent a modern building for more seems like a shame. The worst example of this is on Eighth Avenue, where they tore down a block of beautiful old building to build a short black box that, I guess, is supposed to be invisible like a stealth bomber. If people don’t like tall, bulky buildings, why do they live in Manhattan? I think a lot of us like a very dense space. The Wall Street area is very popular now. If you like a lot of space and sunshine, people can move to Long Island.

George of Jochnowitz

New York City is underpopulated. Tall buildings make it possible for a higher percentage of people to be able to walk to work, and a still higher percentage to be able to use public transportation rather than cars. Suburbs necessarily have shopping areas with great big parking lots. Dense populations are good for the environment. Stores seem to be vanishing in this age of computers. Thickly populated areas can help to keep retail businesses alive.

George’s comment prompted a few incredulous responses:

Lou Andrews of Portland, Ore.

Are you serious? Even though I live in Portland, Ore., the stories I’ve read lately tells the tale that there is serious overcrowding, not underpopulation. Who needs an overpopulated city anyway, whether Portland or New York?

David Gottfried of New York City

Higher levels of density might be comfortable for ants, or dead sardines in a sardine can. Not for people.

Mr. Gottfried had more thoughts on this:

The author, like the building code, does not place enough of an emphasis on the health and well-being of people who have to exist in NY apartments. Perhaps more people can be housed if we did not worry about giving people adequate space, light and ventilation. But without enough ventilation, we could see a return of tuberculosis. The author made general references to zoning laws. Let me be more specific: The NYC Dept. of Buildings operates by a building code which governs NYC. If I recall correctly, the preface or preamble of the code states that it should be interpreted in a manner that facilitates commercial development, that ambiguities shall be resolved in favor of commercial enterprises and that health concerns shall not unduly circumscribe business activity. The author feels the same way, alleging that governing health concerns preclude the development of many buildings. But many people are suffering from sick building syndrome; infections from vermin; respiratory infections that might be alleviated with better ventilation; mold and depression augmented or caused by living in minute apartments.

Or, put more poetically...

Zane of NY

... and the sun ceased to shine; and the streets and alleys were cold; and no one could see beyond the next building; and the flora and fauna requiring full or partial sun began to die and all was replaced by shade plants that took a lifetime to take hold.

It was interesting to see people extrapolate the findings for New York to other areas. Houston, which is generally regarded as having very limited land-use restrictions, drew special attention.

Sally of Greenwich Village, NY

New York City has to look to Houston as the model to help level out or bring down the city’s lack of commercial and residential space. Houston has no zoning. People like to make all types of arguments for zoning; however the bottom line is that it causes massive market distortions to meet the demands of the city’s population; it also makes sure to keep the “gentrified” landlord class in power. Why? Because through another form of overregulating the economy, in this example creating mini-oligopolies, there isn’t market competition. China doesn’t have zoning — they can get things done like the people of Houston do. New York is simply using an outdated philosophy that really helps to keep the people down. Bill de Blasio needs to wake up and create less land regulation than more.

Testy of TX

This is a pretty common misunderstanding of what “no zoning” in Houston actually means. There is no distinction between commercial and residential, so a house with a family can be right next door to a house with a business in it. However, Houston has extensive land-use regulation, which is part of what people usually mean when they discuss zoning. Houston absolutely has required setbacks, maximum height restrictions, maximum floor to area ratios, and parking minimums, and the buildings described here could not be built in Houston either. Increased density can definitely be good for the environment and affordability, but Houston is far from the best example of how to do it.

Hguy NYC

Everything I’ve read has explained how much Houston is a mess because of this.

Another popular example, with much more in common with New York, was San Francisco:

Rick of San Francisco

Really interesting read. Here in SF the costs of residences (be they rentals or purchases) and zoning are daily discussions. NIMBY, neighborhood review, density bonus, variance, setback, micro unit, nonconforming, parking requirement vs. parking limit, infrastructure impact, open space, air, light, view, affordable housing; almost any angle is bandied about and used to support or argue against one project or another. Thanks for reminding us, or at least me, that our greatest city was the result of exceptions as much as rules.

John King, the architecture critic for The San Francisco Chronicle, and Alex Bozikovic, who has the same job at Canada’s Globe and Mail, were equally ambivalent:

Who could forget our rivals to the north?

And it’s not just big cities:

Jerry Gropp Architect AIA Mercer Island, Wash.

Mercer Island is going through all this a lot earlier in the game. I’ve sent this fine article to the City Council with the thought that this might help in their research. I’m a Seattle native; my wife’s Brooklyn born.

Some readers seemed to enjoy using the interactive map either to highlight their own buildings, or those of particular interest:

JA of New York

I wonder how this was done. I live in one of the buildings identified as having too many apartments. I wonder how three apartments in a four-story townhouse can be deemed as “too many.”

One landlord even made an interesting discovery:

Dominic of Astoria, NY

One of the most fascinating and inspiring aspects of our city is the architecture. It is diverse, quirky, both beautifully historic, and also innovative. We are truly fortunate to live in a city in which one can walk down nearly any block and find something interesting to look at. That is truly something to cherish. I recognize that progress always happens — it’s fascinating and jarring to look at photographs of the city from the late 19th century and compare what used to exist, with what exists in those locations today. At the same time, we seem to have been going through a major building boom in the past 10 years or so. Sometimes, these buildings replace dilapidated and unsightly edifices, so no big loss. Other times, however, we lose a bit of our history. A walk down 57th Street is a perfect illustration. I was lucky enough to have my first job in a townhouse next door to Rizzoli bookstore. Both of these buildings are now dirt lots, no doubt awaiting yet another sleek and cold glass tower. The illustrations of the Jones Street and 720 Park buildings are good examples. Sure, they don’t “conform,” but there is a certain unique vitality there, which adds to the dynamic and diverse nature of our city. You can have laws and guidelines without sacrificing artistry and soul.


