


The 1925 Upper East Side building where the celebrity stylist Jill Swid Rosen and her husband, Eric S. Rosen, a money manager, have lived for the last five years exudes prewar charm, with its limestone-and-brick facade and white-glove lobby. But inside their full-floor penthouse there is more of a contemporary, downtown vibe.

The co-op apartment, PHAB, at 791 Park Avenue, between East 73rd and 74th Streets and a quick stroll from Central Park, was completely overhauled in a nearly three-year renovation. It now has more of an open, loftlike aesthetic, along with numerous high-tech flourishes like surround sound, a humidification system, soundproofing and intercom monitoring.

The walls in the main entertaining space were also fortified to support the couple’s hefty and bold modern artwork.

“This is not your dad’s Upper East Side co-op,” said Mr. Rosen, the chief investment officer of Reef Road Capital, adding, “It was a gut renovation down to the studs. We had to take everything out and start from scratch.”

But now the couple plan to start over somewhere else. They are putting the residence on the market, in hopes of moving downtown to be closer to their children’s schools. The asking price for the nearly 4,300-square-foot, 16th-floor apartment, with a 3,000-square-foot terrace, is $26.9 million, said John Burger of Brown Harris Stevens, who is listing the property. The monthly maintenance is $9,485.

“It’s a young couple’s interpretation of a prewar penthouse,” Mr. Burger said. “It’s very livable and very user-friendly. This apartment also has light in every inch of it.”

One of the best features, he and the couple pointed out, is the connection to the outside space from nearly every room, along with the vast cityscape vistas, which include the Empire State Building, seen from the unit’s three dozen large windows.

“What I’ll miss the most is all the light — we don’t leave the lights on a lot,” said Ms. Rosen, a freelance stylist whose celebrity clientele has included the actress Uma Thurman and the television anchor Anderson Cooper.

The penthouse was a combination of two top-floor units when the Rosens, who previously lived in Greenwich Village, bought it in 2007 for around $9.8 million from Glenn R. August, the chief executive of the investment firm Oak Hill Advisors. Because of that, there are two entrances and two private elevator landings.

The main entry opens to a grand 12-by-13-foot gallery embellished with bronze moldings and floors of Italian limestone and white inlaid marble. On one wall sits a 1965 John Chamberlain sculpture of discarded car parts, one of the many pieces of midcentury artwork showcased throughout. (Mr. Rosen said he added the humidifying system and ⅝-inch-thick plywood in the walls to benefit the couple’s vast collection.)

Off the gallery is a 28-by-15-foot living room, with a wood-burning fireplace and a separate area carved out as a library. The space flows into the formal dining room and, beyond that, the eat-in kitchen with a six-foot granite island and a built-in bench for dining. Nearby is a wet bar and wine storage for up to 500 bottles. The floors in the kitchen are wide-plank white oak, and in the other entertaining rooms radiant-heated limestone.

Midcentury furniture by designers like Edward Wormley, Gio Ponti and René Gabriel abounds, mingling with paintings by Adolph Gottlieb, Norman Bluhm, William Anastasi and Richard Pousette-Dart. (The furnishings are not included in the sale, but may be purchased separately; the five built-in flat-screen TVs, however, will remain.)

The home has four bedrooms and four-and-a-half baths, connected with an in-wall intercom monitoring system. The master suite features a sitting alcove, two sizable dressing rooms and a custom limestone tub. There is also a soundproof playroom, where Mr. Rosen and his son and daughter often play music together.

In the winter, he said, “the kids had snowball fights on the terrace.”

Landscaped by Michael Walter of Lexington Gardens with an assortment of plants and flowers, including boxwood, hydrangeas, Japanese roses and ivy, the terrace has been the setting for both children’s birthday parties and fancy fund-raising soirees. Outdoor speakers pumped music to the guests.

The Rosens said they are looking to move to a place that needs little work. “I assure you now,” Mr. Rosen said, “that we won’t be gut-renovating another apartment.”


