


Dennis Webb, 22, is a forestry technician at Big Creek Lumber in Davenport, Calif.

Q. You work in the family business. What is that like for you?

A. My grandfather and his brother and their father and uncle started this company 70 years ago, and I like the sense of continuity. My family takes a lot of pride in working here. Besides this company, my father owns a cattle farm. At one point I wanted to be a cattle farmer.

What is your background for this job?

I studied forestry at California Polytechnic State University and was a logger here during the summers. I joined full time last June after graduating. I want to become a registered professional forester, but I need three years’ work experience. I also need to pass a test on forest practices and rules in California.

What will you be able to do when you’re registered?

I’ll be able to plan entire projects instead of working on pieces. We work on our own timberlands and those that others own. I’ll be able to plan where to build roads and how to protect streams and wildlife. Right now I do a lot of the legwork, like marking trees to be cut, drawing maps and helping to flag areas where we need to leave all the trees.

What kind of trees do you harvest?

California redwood and Douglas fir, which are often used in decks and outdoor furniture. We selectively harvest our forests. This means we thin each forest by cutting about a third of the bigger trees every 15 to 20 years, leaving the others to grow. Redwoods actually sprout, so when you cut one and leave the trunk, more trees will grow from it. You also want to select those that will help trees around it grow.

What have you learned from working in the woods?

If you pay attention, you can learn something new every day. It’s really remarkable. Certain plants will thrive in some environments and not others. For example, as trees grow, they create more shade, so shade-tolerant plants will grow and others won’t. Sometimes plants compete with each other, too, for water, light and soil nutrients.

What’s a recent project you worked on?

One we called the helicopter logging project. We wanted to manage a remote area that has no roads into it. We had to hike in to mark the trees to cut, and then the loggers hiked in to cut them. The only way we could remove the logs was to have a helicopter do it.


