


The renovation of the New York Philharmonic’s Lincoln Center home, David Geffen Hall, is the classical music equivalent of the Second Avenue subway. It is an enormous undertaking for a New York institution — one that has been discussed for years; tentatively begun and then shelved over cost concerns; and finally restarted by a new generation determined to get it done.

Now, with a key player on the project unexpectedly out of the picture, the responsibility for keeping it on track during a particularly crucial period has fallen largely to Katherine G. Farley, chairwoman of Lincoln Center.

“We’re moving full-steam ahead,” Ms. Farley said in a recent interview, sitting alongside members of the transition team that is leading Lincoln Center as it seeks a successor to Jed Bernstein, who stepped down as the center’s president last month after failing to disclose a relationship with an employee. Ms. Farley said that the project’s design team was preparing a preliminary concept and budget to present in June to officials at Lincoln Center and the Philharmonic, and that she expected that a fuller design could be shared with the board, and possibly the public, by the fall.

While officials have described the plan as likely to cost around $500 million, Ms. Farley said that the actual figure could be different. “It’s a number that passes the sanity test — it’s not a budget,” she said. “You don’t know what it’s going to cost until you know what it is.”

The hall was renamed for David Geffen last year after he made a $100 million gift toward the renovation. Since then, Oscar S. Schafer, chairman of the Philharmonic’s board, donated $20 million to be divided between the renovation project and the orchestra’s endowment, and a gala concert raised another $2.2 million toward the renovation. That leaves hundreds of millions of dollars to raise.

Vin Cipolla, a former president of the Municipal Art Society of New York who was brought on board to direct the capital campaign for the hall project, said that fund-raising was “right where we want it to be,” but he declined to provide a dollar figure, noting that the campaign was still in its “quiet phase.”

Ms. Farley said that there had been several other “significant gifts,” which had not been announced, and said that it should be easier to raise money for the redone hall than for some aspects of Lincoln Center’s $1.2 billion redevelopment project, which was completed in 2012.

“Last time there was a central mechanical plant — that was hard,” she said. “This time it’s a much sexier thing to raise money for.”

But it is undoubtedly a delicate moment to be without a president. Michael M. Kaiser, who led the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington for more than a decade, said that the timing of the transition was complicated.

“It’s obviously better to have a leader in charge when you’re doing the fund-raising and when you’re doing the actual design of the facility,” said Mr. Kaiser, now chairman of the DeVos Institute of Arts Management at the University of Maryland. “It doesn’t mean it’s impossible to do that without one. But certainly whoever comes in to become the president of Lincoln Center is going to want to play a role in this.”

Matthew VanBesien, president of the Philharmonic, said he was confident that the cooperation between the orchestra and Lincoln Center — something not always present in the past — would continue. He said that Jaap van Zweden, who will take over the orchestra’s music directorship in 2018, had met with the hall’s design team this spring in Dallas, where he is the music director of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra, to share his thoughts and priorities. (The Philharmonic is going through its own transition, with Alan Gilbert ending his tenure as music director after next season.)

“It’s always an unfortunate thing when there’s a departure like that,” Mr. VanBesien said of Mr. Bernstein. “But this has been a really collaborative team effort kind of from the very beginning, so I think that helps mitigate whatever complications might arise.”

The hurdles ahead are substantial. As the Philharmonic works to raise a share of the costs of the hall, it is grappling with its own financial challenges: It ran a $5.27 million operating deficit last year, up from $2.1 million the year before.

Ms. Farley, chairwoman of the board since 2010, noted that several transition team members had played important roles in the redevelopment of Lincoln Center, which included the well-received renovation of the smaller Alice Tully Hall. “In my day job I worked for 32 years at Tishman Speyer in the real estate business, and I’m an architect by background, so I’m very comfortable in this world,” said Ms. Farley, who retired this year from Tishman Speyer, where she was a senior managing director.

The current plan for the design team, Heatherwick Studio of London and Diamond Schmitt Architects of Toronto, aims at essentially creating a new concert hall inside the skin of the Max Abramovitz-designed building that opened in 1962 as Philharmonic Hall and was later renamed for Avery Fisher.

The most recent plans call for a modified version of a traditional shoebox-shaped hall, as opposed to the so-called vineyard-style seating that surrounds the stages at the Berlin Philharmonie, Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles, and elsewhere. Spaces for education and outreach programs are a priority, Ms. Farley said. Still to be decided are issues such as whether to include a pipe organ and whether to add a smaller space for more intimate concerts.

Lincoln Center has hired a search committee to find a successor to Mr. Bernstein, who was paid $1.16 million in salary, benefits and other compensation in 2014, according to the organization’s most recent tax filing, released this month. Center officials said that they were rethinking key aspects of one of Mr. Bernstein’s signature projects: creating a performing arts hall of fame. While they intend to go ahead with the project, they said that they had postponed a dinner for the first honorees, which had been scheduled for June, in the hopes of finding a better date. They also said they were moving away from plans to have the names of honorees etched in the stones around Lincoln Center’s fountain and to put displays in the lobbies of each of the center’s theaters.

For Ms. Farley, the quest for a new home for the Philharmonic has taken more than a decade. Earlier, when she was on the Philharmonic board, she led its building committee and worked on a plan to redo the hall by the architect Norman Foster, which was later unceremoniously abandoned. She was also involved in talks about moving the Philharmonic back to Carnegie Hall, which ultimately fell apart and caused some ill will with Lincoln Center. This time, she said, was different.

“We think the stars are aligned now,” she said. “This is the right time.”


