


Join us for New York primary live updates.

ALBANY — Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo is hardly known as a prolific or potent retail politician; his reluctance to campaign heavily for fellow Democrats has invited criticism from those who wished he would do more.

But during New York’s run as the center ring in the presidential primary circus, Mr. Cuomo has readily played the M.C. for Hillary Clinton, a fellow Democrat and his preferred candidate, promoting her bona fides at splashy campaign events, on cable television and in post-debate “spin rooms.”

Perhaps Mr. Cuomo’s prominent role in the campaign should not be surprising, given his personal and professional connections to the Clintons, which date back more than two decades to the governor’s previous life as a federal official — first as assistant secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and later as that agency’s leader.

His placement in both jobs was President Bill Clinton’s doing, and helped lift Mr. Cuomo from being best known as a son of Gov. Mario M. Cuomo to a fully formed political identity, with a national purview.

Mr. Cuomo’s political relationship with the Clintons is also complicated, however; Mr. Cuomo, who is rumored to have presidential ambitions, could conceivably have run in 2016, but may have deferred because of Mrs. Clinton’s looming campaign. Likewise, Mr. Cuomo decided against a run for Senate in 1999, clearing the way for Mrs. Clinton to run — and win — the following year.

Mrs. Clinton also enjoys the backing of another prominent Democrat in New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio. This relationship, too, is complicated.

Mr. de Blasio, who served as Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager in 2000, was a late endorser of Mrs. Clinton’s presidential ambitions. He was initially rebuffed in his efforts to help in Iowa in January, nor was he front and center after attention turned to New York in early April. An embarrassing interlude at the Inner Circle dinner — involving a racially insensitive joke as part of a skit — was an unwanted distraction to Mrs. Clinton. (Mr. de Blasio said the skit was satire, while Mrs. Clinton basically said the remark was his idea.)

But as the state churned toward its most competitive primary in years on Tuesday, both men continued to stump hard for Mrs. Clinton, though in distinct ways, with the governor taking advantage of the statewide scope of his office, and the mayor working the streets and airwaves of the city.

That upstate-downstate dynamic continued in last days of the campaign, as Mr. Cuomo barnstormed around two upstate cities on Monday with Mr. Clinton, while Mr. de Blasio went small, with a pair of local radio and television appearances in the city, after a Sunday afternoon spent speaking at churches in Brooklyn for Mrs. Clinton, and with the candidate at a get-out-the-vote event.

“For me this is like the old days,” Mr. Cuomo said in a phone interview between stops on Monday in Buffalo and Rochester, noting that he had worked and traveled extensively with the president and his wife during the 1990s. “So now it’s just me and him, and it’s a lot of fun.”

Mrs. Clinton’s campaign has not had occasion in the past primaries to lean so heavily on the combination of a Democratic governor and a big-city Democratic mayor. (Part of that is demographics: Mrs. Clinton has won only three states with Democratic governors, though one of those governors — Terry McAuliffe of Virginia — is an old friend.) And the power and peril of that one-two punch is evident: Both men’s words and actions — especially the racially insensitive joke — continued to provide fodder for conservative groups that sought to tarnish Mrs. Clinton by linking her to perceived missteps by the governor and mayor.

The furor over the joke did not result in exile: After a pair of stops at prominent African-American churches in Brooklyn, Mr. de Blasio advocated for Mrs. Clinton on Monday, appearing on Ebro in the Morning on the hip-hop station Hot 97, calling the candidate “the get-things-done lady.”

Chris Lehane, a longtime Democratic political operative and Clinton aide, said each man offered a different set of skills to the Clinton campaign, as she faces a last-minute surge from Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.

Mr. Cuomo acted as an effective amplifier of her message of pragmatism — “My sense is that there is a real mutual respect based on the fact they both share this toughness gene,” Mr. Lehane said — while Mr. de Blasio offered a surrogate who can “credibly communicate to those white liberals and millennials that are Sanders’ base voters while also retaining ties into the African-American and Latino communities that are already” in Mrs. Clinton’s corner.

And while Mr. Cuomo and Mr. de Blasio have repeatedly clashed in the past, for a moment at least both men appeared to be on the same team, with the same talking points.

“She is a results-orientated official,” the governor said. “And that’s what I believe in.”


