


Allison Jill Siegel, a daughter of Marjorie K. Slater of Nyack, N.Y., and David A. Siegel of Tarrytown, N.Y., is to be married May 1 to Michael Thomas McCullick, the son of David A. McCullick of Santa Rosa, Calif. Cantor Beth Hancock is to officiate at Perona Farms in Andover, N.J.

The bride, 28, works in Manhattan as a human resources analyst for Medidata Solutions, a company that provides software for clinical trials. She graduated from Binghamton University.

Her father is a telecommunications consultant in Tarrytown specializing in selling toll-free services. Her mother is an executive search consultant in Nyack, helping businesses find candidates for senior positions.

The groom, 26, is a petty officer first class in the Navy Reserves in the Bronx. He was on active duty from 2008-14 and was deployed to the Baltic region and South America for narcotics and counterterrorism missions. He is also a student at New York Institute of Technology in Manhattan.

His father, a former petty officer third class in the Navy, is now general manager of Magnolia Wellness, a medical marijuana dispensary in Oakland, Calif. He also teaches cannabis business classes at Oaksterdam University, a trade school in Oakland.

The couple met in 2011 at a bar in Manhattan’s Financial District during Fleet Week, when Navy and Coast Guard ships are docked around the city.

“I saw him walk by our table a few times,” Ms. Siegel said. “I said to my friend, ‘Oh, that sailor is so cute.’”

The sailors were used to the attention. “People come up to us and ask to take pictures,” Mr. McCullick said.

She caught his eye, too. “Her smile is absurd,” he said. “It drives me absolutely wild. She is a big ball of sunshine when she walks in the room.”

The couple talked until Mr. McCullick had to return to his ship before the midnight curfew. They exchanged numbers, hoping to meet again during his last few days ashore. But it didn’t work out.

Over the next few months they communicated almost every day, texting, emailing and by phone. And when Mr. McCullick learned his ship would dock in Jacksonville, Fla., he persuaded her to fly there.

“We had our first kiss in the airport,” she said. “We spent the weekend together and fell in love.”

They continued dating long distance for three and a half years, through two deployments for Mr. McCullick and back-and-forth weekends from Manhattan to Norfolk, where he was stationed.

“Sailors belong on ships and ships belong at sea, and the ship I was on was always out at sea,” he said.

Ms. Siegel was wary about dating a sailor. “I was supposed to find a lawyer or doctor, but I wasn’t taking it seriously,” she said. “But I realized I needed to go for this guy and give it everything.”

When it came time for Mr. McCullick to re-enlist, he decided to move to Manhattan to live with Ms. Siegel instead.

“People said it would be different with him living here,” Ms. Siegel said. “But it doesn’t feel different. It feels like what it’s supposed to be.”


