


DHAKA, Bangladesh — A doctor in western Bangladesh was killed by machete-wielding assailants as he rode to his clinic on Friday morning, the police said, the most recent in a string of such attacks in the country.

Sanaur Rahman, a homeopathic doctor, was on a motorcycle driven by a friend when three men on another motorcycle approached from behind, striking him in the head with a machete and killing him instantly, said Proloy Chisim, the superintendent of the police in Kushtia district, where the attack took place.

Mr. Rahman’s friend, Saifuzzaman, who goes by one name, was critically injured in the attack and sent to Dhaka, the capital, for treatment, Mr. Chisim said. Mr. Saifuzzaman is a professor of Bengali literature at the Islamic University in Kushtia.

The assailants escaped after the killing, and Mr. Saifuzzaman told the police there had been no witnesses.

The Islamic State later claimed responsibility for the attack, saying Mr. Rahman had “called to Christianity,” according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist websites.

The attack followed a pattern of similar killings in the country in the past two years, accelerating in recent weeks. Many of the attacks are linked to Islamic militants. The assailants have targeted secular bloggers, activists, religious minorities and intellectuals.

The Islamic State has claimed some of the killings on social media accounts linked to them, while others have been claimed by a faction of Al Qaeda. The Bangladeshi government has consistently denied the presence of foreign militants in the country.

Police officials, speaking before SITE reported the Islamic State claim, said that they did not know what had motivated the attack on Mr. Rahman and his friend, and that an investigation had begun.

Another police official in the district, Joynul Abedin, said that Mr. Rahman was a known enthusiast of the 19th-century Bengali poet and folk singer Lalon, whose songs promoted a secularist philosophy. Mr. Rahman often organized gatherings at his clinic, where people would sing Lalon’s songs, Mr. Abedin added, though he said that he could not be sure this was the motivation for the attack.


