


JERUSALEM — An Israeli court convicted a 31-year-old man on Tuesday of abducting and murdering a Palestinian teenager in 2014, rejecting his late-hour insanity plea and bringing to a close a case that has convulsed Israelis and Palestinians.

The Jerusalem District Court ruled that the man, Yosef Haim Ben-David, had been fully responsible for his actions when he and two teenage nephews snatched Muhammad Abu Khdeir, 16, off a street near his East Jerusalem home, drove him to a forest on the outskirts of the city, choked him, beat him unconscious and burned him to death in the early hours of July 2, 2014.

Mr. Ben-David told investigators during a recorded re-enactment of the crime that he had urged his young relatives, who struggled with their captive in the back of the car, to “finish him off.” Prosecutors are demanding a life sentence.

One of the teenage defendants was sentenced in February to life in prison, and the other to 21 years, after the judges determined that he had played a lesser role in the murder. Their names have not been made public because they were 16 at the time of the crime.

The murder took place at a particularly traumatic period in Israel’s recent history — a few hours after Israelis buried three teenagers who had been hitchhiking home from their yeshivas in the occupied West Bank when they were abducted, shot and killed by Palestinians. Their bodies were found in a shallow grave on a West Bank hillside after a wrenching 18-day search.

The Israeli authorities determined that Mr. Ben-David and his nephews intended to carry out a revenge attack, leading to Muhammad’s death. The kidnappings and killings roiled Israeli and Palestinian emotions, touched off riots in East Jerusalem and contributed to a spiral of tensions and violence culminating in the 50-day Gaza war that ended in August 2014.

Hussein Abu Khdeir, Muhammad’s father, who has closely followed the trial, attended dozens of court hearings and accused Mr. Ben-David of having faked an act of insanity, said he mistrusted the Israeli justice system because “it judges Arabs one way, and Jews another.”

After the ruling on Tuesday, Mr. Abu Khdeir said he wanted “justice all the way,” meaning a life sentence, no prospect of a presidential pardon and the demolition of Mr. Ben-David’s family home, “exactly like they do to Arabs, so that there is democracy.”

“We are tired of this,” he added. “Don’t ask how we feel. For the past year and nine months we haven’t gone to parties. My cousin got married two weeks ago, and we didn’t go. We can’t go.”

Waves of violence have shaken Jerusalem in the years since Muhammad’s death. Tensions over a contested holy site revered by Jews as the Temple Mount and Muslims as the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound reignited rioting in Palestinian neighborhoods of East Jerusalem and contributed to a surge of stabbing and vehicular attacks by Palestinians against Israelis that spread from Jerusalem to the West Bank and cities around Israel over the past six months. On Monday more than 20 people were wounded when a bomb exploded on a bus in Jerusalem — the first bus bombing in years.

Mr. Ben-David, a resident of a West Bank settlement who ran a glasses store in Jerusalem, did not testify during his trial. Asher Ohayon, the public defender representing him, said during the trial that his client was in “a state of denial” and unable to remember his actions or to communicate.

Mr. Ben-David, who had received psychiatric treatment in the past, including for obsessive-compulsive disorder, submitted a late opinion by an American psychiatrist after the main court proceedings were over. The psychiatrist told the court that while Mr. Ben-David understood what he was doing at the time of the crime, the manic and psychotic symptoms he displayed in the past might have affected his ability to control his actions.

The prosecution argued that Mr. Ben-David had worked up until the time of the killing, including that evening, and had acted normally and rationally during and after the episode. He made sure to destroy evidence of his crime — showing that he understood that his actions were unacceptable — and later gave a coherent account of the events of that night, during the re-enactment, prosecutors said.

A government-appointed Israeli psychiatrist found that Mr. Ben-David was aware of his actions and was not psychotic at the time of the crime, and the court agreed.

In addition to murder, the court convicted Mr. Ben-David of abduction for the purpose of murder, assault, attempted arson and attempted kidnapping. Mr. Ben-David and one of his nephews had tried to kidnap an 8-year-old Palestinian boy in the same area of East Jerusalem the night before Muhammad was killed, but the boy’s mother shouted and struggled with the kidnappers, and the boy got away.

“The acts the accused carried out are of the cruelest imaginable,” a state prosecutor, Uri Korb, said after the ruling. “He burned the victim while he was alive, all motivated by crazed revenge.”

The Jerusalem District Court also convicted on Tuesday an Israeli man, Yishai Schlissel, of premeditated murder and six counts of attempted murder for his deadly stabbing rampage at the city’s gay pride parade in July, when he killed Shira Banki, a 16-year-old Jewish girl. Mr. Schlissel, an ultra-Orthodox Jew, was released from prison shortly before the march, after having served 10 years for stabbing participants in the gay pride parade in 2005.


