


Admit it: You laughed. Like everyone else who clicked on the video of Candace Payne putting on a Chewbacca mask in a parking lot, you found yourself party to a spontaneous comedic chain reaction: Chewbacca roared, she laughed, and you joined her.

But … why? The setup was mundane: A woman in a van with a mask and a dash cam. The video, streamed through Facebook Live on May 19, was intended, at least initially, only for Ms. Payne’s friends. (The video has since been viewed over 150 million times, a record for a Facebook Live video, and that’s not counting the autotuned version.) It could easily be dismissed as another freak moment caught live.

But the video unwittingly followed the script of many other mega-popular clips that incite laughter by showing it on screen. Their success hinges on a deceptively simple trick: Do something slightly outré, add uncontrollable laughter and post.

The main principle is the same one at work in any tear-jerker or thriller. “When we see other people experiencing an emotion, we can experience it, too,” said Caleb Warren, an assistant professor of marketing at Texas A&M University who has studied the psychology and mechanics of comedy.

But humor is the feeling most likely to set others off. “When someone else laughs, we’re a lot more likely to laugh,” Mr. Warren said.

A whole subgenre of Internet videos has emerged to produce that effect. Before there was the Chewbacca mask, there was the “Skype Laughter Chain” (24 million views to date), an online experiment in which a chain of strangers were linked up by webcam, and each was driven to a fit of laughter upon watching the previous person laugh.

Onscreen laughter also factored into the success of the February viral video “Damn Daniel,” in which one high school boy aggressively surprises another boy with compliments — “Damn Daniel, back at it again with the white Vans” — filming each campus encounter guerrilla-style and posting it on Snapchat. Midway through the stunt, the merry saboteur cracks up, and Daniel laughs, too.

And a dedicated Reddit community, Contagious Laughter, collects videos that show uncontrollable laughter and are primed to elicit the same. The group was inspired by a 2011 video, “Lachen in der U-Bahn” (6.5 million views), which documents an outbreak that started with one lone giggling German and eventually consumed an entire Berlin subway car.

A similar effect can be produced by videos that feature other infectious, inappropriate sounds. Consider this YouTube video of a dog pressing a car horn in a parking lot.

Or this Vine of a person approaching a shopping basket full of squeezable toy geese, pressing on them all at once and producing a disquieting unified honk.

Or “Babies Scared of Farts Compilation 2013.”

But what the laugher is laughing at also matters. The uncontrollable giggles are prompted by events that feel slightly inappropriate. The laugh provides an emotional release from the tension.

“Laughter is a signal,” Mr. Warren said. Yes, a transgression has occurred, but the laugh “means that something that feels potentially threatening, off-putting or socially awkward is actually nothing to worry about.”

The “Damn Daniel” video is funny because a high school student who surprises a classmate, camera in hand, might well be playing a nasty trick, but in this case, he has come only to deliver a compliment. In the case of the Chewbacca video, the social transgression is extremely minor: “This grown woman is using a mask that’s supposed to be for kids,” Mr. Warren said. But when we see the pure, childlike joy it produces in Ms. Payne, a stay-at-home mother from Grand Prairie, Tex., the event feels gloriously silly instead of pathetic.

When laughter itself is the transgression, the videos pack a one-two punch. It’s not normal for a woman to laugh to herself at length in a crowded subway car, but it’s harmless, so as her laughing fit continues, others can’t help joining her. A similar thing happens when performers on “Saturday Night Live” break character and laugh, as Aidy Bryant and Vanessa Bayer did in a sketch last week featuring Fred Armisen: The audience laughs, too.

Online videos feel particularly intimate because they largely feature amateurs, are unscripted and are filmed up close and by hand. Ms. Payne “is a pleasant and attractive person to whom we freely lend our sympathies,” said Carl Plantinga, a professor of film and media at Calvin College who studies the psychology of cinema. “Her enthusiasm seems to be genuine and kind.”

And because she’s filming herself in close-up, her emotions are front and center — even once she puts on the mask, you can see her eyes glistening in delight. “Sympathetic viewers will involuntarily mimic her facial expressions, leading to emotional contagion,” Mr. Plantinga said. The use of Facebook Live — which streams live video instantly, with no opportunity to edit or scratch a take — only draws the viewer in closer.

In highly intimate settings, viewers don’t want to see a transgression too big — that would be frightening, not funny, Mr. Warren said. The inherent intimacy of viral social videos helps explain why they often hinge on events so idiosyncratic and slight that their humor almost defies explanation.

That very paradox forms the heart of “What is so funny?” (34 million views). As a baby laughs uncontrollably onscreen, an adult woman behind the camera tries to ask, “What’s so funny?” — only to break into laughter herself. Because everything constitutes a potential transgression to babies, they are the natural stars of the genre.

In “Mommy’s Nose Is Scary!,” a baby is struck with fear when his mother loudly blows her nose, then chuckles when he realizes that her face has survived the incident. The plot of “Baby Laughing Hysterically at Ripping Paper” (85 million views) is self-explanatory.

There’s one more thing that might have helped Ms. Payne’s video become an instant online classic. Facebook Live is a new product that the company is aggressively promoting. The video features an unofficial tie-in toy for the “Star Wars” franchise. And Ms. Payne mentions Kohl’s, the store where she bought the mask. These corporate properties could not have produced a viral video as intimate and infectious as Ms. Payne’s (and a Kohl’s spokeswoman said the company had no involvement in the video’s creation), but they have all been grateful for her inadvertent endorsements, and they have helped boost the video’s profile after it aired.

In the days since the video debuted, Ms. Payne has been showered with gifts from Kohl’s (an act of thanks caught on video and shared widely by the chain). She has also gallivanted around Facebook’s Menlo Park campus (photo opportunities of her in a Facebook-logo T-shirt abounded); posed with a Stormtrooper at Lucasfilm headquarters; and joined James Corden’s “Carpool Karaoke” segment on his “Late Late Show,” alongside “The Force Awakens” director J. J. Abrams.

Corporations will do anything for a laugh.


