


Over the next year, riders on the Washington Metro would cope with sparser service, earlier closings and some station shutdowns under an ambitious plan to clear an enormous backlog of deferred maintenance on the accident-prone, increasingly unreliable system, officials said on Friday.

For years, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority has tried to limit maintenance work to nights, when the system is closed, in order not to curtail service. That approach has failed, officials said, contributing to the Metro falling steadily deeper into disrepair.

“We need to do something different, and dramatically different,” Paul J. Wiedefeld, the authority’s general manager and chief executive, said at a news conference. He called the plan “a massive undertaking” that would disrupt the commutes of hundreds of thousands of people, but he added, “I don’t think any customer wants us to continue this process where the service is unreliable, unsafe, because we’re not doing the basics.”

Jack Evans, the authority’s chairman, made headlines this year by suggesting that the system might have to take entire lines out of service for months. The plan unveiled on Friday does nothing so drastic, and officials said that Metro would continue to offer service on every part of its system, but much less of it at times.

Mr. Evans, a District of Columbia council member, said that directors supported the plan. Mr. Wiedefeld said he expected board approval by mid-May, and the major work to begin in early June.

But officials were less clear about how to pay for the effort; Mr. Wiedefeld said he could not even put a price tag on it. He said that some of the money had already been obtained, but that the authority needed permission to spend it in the next year rather than over multiple years. Mr. Evans said the authority’s plans require action by Congress.

Washington’s subway, which extends into the Virginia and Maryland suburbs, was considered a showpiece when it opened in 1976. But in 2009, the worst accident in its history, the crash of two trains that killed nine people and injured dozens, cast a harsh light on its deterioration. In recent years, riders have suffered through broken escalators, breakdowns, water seepage and frequent fires caused by aging electrical equipment; there were two track fires on Thursday alone, and a fire last year killed one person.

This week, the National Transportation Safety Board issued a scathing report, saying that the authority had repeatedly failed to learn from safety lapses and correct them.

The repair plan would accelerate years’ worth of postponed repair and modernization into a single year, replacing aged tracks, ties and insulators and clearing miles of clogged drains just to get the system to the point that it can keep up with routine maintenance. That will actually lower the cost of the work, Mr. Wiedefeld said, because things that have been done piecemeal can be achieved without daily interruptions. The authority has already accelerated the replacement of its power cables, which he said will be completed this summer, a year ahead of the original timetable.

The plan addresses each of 15 particularly troubled parts of the system with what Mr. Wiedefeld called a “safety surge,” lasting a few weeks to a few months, which would have the greatest effect on service. In five cases, that would mean shutting down a stretch of track and a station, and the authority would provide shuttle bus service to bridge the gap. In the other 10 places, the line would be limited to a single track, so that trains could not pass each other in opposite directions, and the number of trains running there would drop sharply.

Systemwide, the Metro will close at midnight on weekends, rather than at 3 a.m. And in certain places, on weeknights it will close as early as 8 p.m. while work is underway, rather than at midnight.


