


Someone closed the wide glass doors and pulled the curtains — for privacy — and Hannah Kloepfer did what she had come to this store in SoHo to do. She took a shower.

She stepped beneath a row of 30 shower heads, all ready to spray, spritz or spurt, because all 30 were already hooked up to water lines. Ms. Kloepfer, an actress and playwright who had been invited to the store by an employee during a “friends and family” warm-up before the official opening on Saturday, had only to choose one.

Ms. Kloepfer, 25, strolled beneath the shower heads and talked about her sister, an interior designer who has been rebuilding a house in New Jersey that was devastated by Hurricane Sandy in 2012. “It was interesting watching her go to places like this,” Ms. Kloepfer said.

But there are not many places like this, a store, called Pirch. To some, it would seem yet another example of the excesses of these times, another example of class stratification and elitism.

In fact, Pirch presents itself as upscale and unapologetically expensive, a gilded Home Depot, a one-stop shopping destination for people with multimillion-dollar apartments and renovation budgets to match. Or, perhaps, an even more rarefied band on the economic and demographic spectrum: people with multimillion-dollar apartments in New York City and multimillion-dollar weekend homes in places like the Hamptons.

Pirch is trying to set itself apart from other kitchen-and-bath retailers by letting potential customers test-drive the various faucets, ovens, grills and bathtubs. Almost everything in the store works the way it would in an actual apartment or a house.

The prices set Pirch apart, too. There is a $157,000 range and a $3,995 outdoor grill, but customers would not know just by looking. There are no price tags on anything in the store. The demonstration kitchens look like the kitchens in the cooking segments on television shows, spacious, carefully laid out and well equipped. There is even a V.I.P. elevator of sorts.

Pirch is nothing like a big-box retailer, even though it occupies a big box: 32,000 square feet, about a third of the seven-story loft building at 200 Lafayette Street, at Broome.

Pirch’s owners and employees say they want to “reinvent the entire retail shopping experience.” Its chief executive says the store is “built around dream, play, choose,” concepts customers can work their way through, presumably in that order. It uses phrases — such as “live joyfully” — that are not generally heard in conversations about renovation projects.

Pirch’s news releases do not say it carries more than a dozen brands; it “curates” them. And it does not display its wares under fluorescent lights, as most retailers do. Displays are artistic, almost gallerylike. When Pirch lines up a row of dishwashers, they do not seem jammed together.

Every range is connected to real gas or electricity, and as Ms. Kloepfer discovered, every shower head is connected not only to real water but also to a touch-screen device that turns it on or off. The connectedness is another way that Pirch aims to be different from most competitors. It also means that Pirch’s floors are a bit like Swiss cheese, what with 484 holes for the water pipes and gas lines that lead to each appliance.

The store is the first New York City outpost of an eight-store chain that was established in California in 2011. In settling in high-priced SoHo, Pirch followed the shift in sensibility that pits downtown chic against uptown stature for big-money eminence, and Pirch has its boldface names. Its advertisements feature the 94-year-old fashion icon Iris Apfel, the cookbook author and reality television star Padma Lakshmi and the celebrity chef Geoffrey Zakarian.

Pirch also ventured into a singularly Manhattan social universe with a grand opening party on Thursday to benefit Housing Works, a nonprofit that assists people with H.I.V. and AIDS. The invitation listed a host committee that included Ms. Apfel, Ms. Lakshmi and Mr. Zakarian, as well as, among others, the interior designer Jamie Drake, whose high-profile clients include former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and the furniture designer Mitchell Gold, the chairman and co-founder of the retail chain Mitchell Gold & Bob Williams, Pirch’s next-door neighbor on Lafayette Street.

So perhaps it is no surprise that Pirch has a secret entrance, sort of (a door up the block from the store entrance). As for the V.I.P. elevator — it is really a freight elevator that doubles as a way in for “people who’re famous or think they’re famous,” Jeffery R. Sears, Pirch’s chief executive, said as he walked through the store.

But, he said, the store is not just about high-priced products. “Where a Home Depot leaves off, that’s where we start,” he said, adding that Pirch does sell a $700 dishwasher, “and it’s a wonderful piece of equipment.”

“You could come in and buy a kitchen set for $2,000,” he said. “Whether you’re a first time home buyer or building the last place you’ll ever live, the experience should be the same. A couple just starting out, they should feel just as special as someone who’s at a different point in their lives.”

That may be. But Mark A. Cohen, the director of retail studies at the Columbia Business School, said Pirch’s target audience of high-end customers could be endlessly demanding.

“There’s always a leak, a seam, a scratch, something that has to be remediated,” he said. “The more affluent the customer, the more demanding the customer. The more sophisticated the customer, ergo, the more they’ve paid for something, the more unacceptable the scratch.”

Ms. Kloepfer looked over the shower heads and stepped into an adjacent steam room, where the temperature was 117 degrees, according to a digital readout. Once again, she talked about her sister and the headache of finding the right fixtures for the house in New Jersey.

“She ended up returning so many things,” Ms. Kloepfer said.

“It’s difficult seeing it in a drawer,” she added, as opposed to actually trying a product out.

Back under the shower heads, she made her choice, No. 7 in the lineup, a device that looked a bit like a punching bag but is known as a raindrop, and starts at $1,346. The water flowed.

“It’s like I’m dancing,” she said. A moment later she added, “We should really be praising my waterproof mascara.”


