


Who doesn’t love a generous scoop of inside dope? Whether it comes in the form of “Primary Colors” or an anonymous Twitter account or the confessions of a former Scientologist, few things are more tantalizing than a backstage tour by someone in the know. We crave demystification, even when the topic is interesting only because of its mystique.

An instruction manual on how to be cool, for example, would seem to be at odds with coolness itself, which I’ve always understood to be shorthand for “unforced charisma.” Andrea Linett, the author of THE COOL FACTOR: A Guide to Achieving Effortless Style, With Secrets From the Women Who Have It (Artisan, paper, $24.95), has a stricter conception. She defines coolness as a mixture of “personalization and effortlessness,” at least when it comes to clothes. “No one looks cool blatantly copying someone else or trying too hard.”

Linett, the founding creative director of the now defunct Lucky magazine, had an excellent idea for a book: Make a list of the coolest women she knows, ask them to pick out their favorite clothes, photograph the women and the clothes, and grill them about the methods behind their style. There are, it turns out, plenty of rules for looking as if you’re not following any rules. Back pockets on jeans should be a minimum of four inches across. A corduroy blazer should be medium wale. A thin-knit turtleneck should be body-skimming, not tight. A trench coat should have epaulets, wrist belts that match the main belt, and a stitched leather-covered buckle (not plastic or metal; how dare you).

Linett’s writing is drier than a saltine cracker — a mixture of magazine clichés and technical denim analysis — but it fits the project at hand. Remember those diagrams of epidermal layers that were tacked to the walls of your high school science class? The book’s illustrated spreads contain approximately that level of detail, but applied to biker jackets and cotton shirts instead of dendritic cells. You wouldn’t necessarily pour yourself a glass of prosecco and sit down to read a medical textbook from cover to cover, and you probably shouldn’t do that with this tome either. But the density is what makes it a good reference volume. Next time I spend more than $40 on an article of clothing, I’ll run it by Linett first.

Chris Anderson, the curator of TED talks, has written TED TALKS: The Official TED Guide to Public Speaking (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $28) in hopes of transforming people from shuddering larvae to mesmeric wisdom-spouters willing to go on camera in body-skimming turtlenecks. Most people love public speaking as much as they love gastroenteritis or having their identity stolen, which is to say very little. These things also have in common a certain unpreventability: Life is booby-trapped with occasions for public speaking, whether they be wedding toasts or icebreaker games on the first day of a new job. Public speaking is so widely dreaded that there is even a topical drug you can apply to your cheeks to prevent the painful rapid-onset blushing it can induce; I know this because the drug was prescribed to me.

Anderson includes tips on what to avoid in order to be a good speaker: Don’t self-promote, don’t meander, don’t overshare and don’t strain to inspire. Frame your topic as an idea rather than as an issue. It’s not enough to spin a compelling anecdote; you must find a central thesis and present it artfully. Anderson cites examples from TED talks. His advice is not new, but it is solid.

The writing is shakier — sometimes imprecise and often jargony. “An idea is anything that can change how people see the world,” Anderson writes. (Nope. A contact lens can change the way I see the world.) Anderson hails the “moment of clarity” and calls eye contact “an amazing technology.” He allows tedious business-speak like “impactful” and “actionable” to muddy the message. The message is worthwhile, but this offering works better as a companion to the talks than as a stand-alone resource.

When it comes to any type of analysis, handwriting analysis is the least invasive form I can think of. In THE SECRETS OF YOUR HANDWRITING (Portico, $16.95), Allan Conway explains that practitioners of this discipline “interpret the strokes, pressures and loops of a person’s handwriting, which reveal their strengths, weaknesses and hidden motivations.” Like many people, I live in fear of inadvertently betraying my hidden motivations, and the idea that my Duane Reade list may broadcast them to a casual observer is alarming. Indeed, Conway says that graphology can be used to identify gifted children, sexual orientation (wince), and even suggest a career path. I’m less interested in the proposed uses here than in the tools of analysis, and, more specifically, in the harmless fun that might be obtained by wielding them.

To that end, here’s a crib sheet. There’s no such thing as a “murderer’s handwriting.” If you leave no margins when you fill a page, you have a tendency to miserliness. If you leave a lot of room at the top of the page, you possess an appreciation of art and culture. Cramped writing signals “talkative people seeking companionship.”

Your doodles are also significant, as we learn in a chapter titled “The Meaning of Doodles.” It turns out that a surprising range of common doodles are phallic symbols, including triangles, airplanes, inverted arrows and snakes. Well, I suppose that last one isn’t a mystery.

Mysteries that have haunted me throughout my adult years include the popularity of yoga pants as daywear, the fact that Internet service in America is run by a cartel, health care in general and French people. Until recently, I did not expect to solve any of these. I’m pleased to report that I have crossed the final item off my list thanks to ­Julie Barlow and Jean-Benoît Nadeau, who have decoded French mores in THE BONJOUR EFFECT: The Secret Codes of French Conversation Revealed (St. Martin’s, $25.99). The theory advanced by the two authors, a couple who spent a decade in and out of France, is that “the most universal stereotypes of the French — that they are arrogant and rude — come from the fact that foreigners miss the most basic of French codes.” The French, for example, say no when they mean yes. They are bored by political correctness and abhor self-deprecating humor, which they think makes a person sound stupid. When meeting a French person, it is rude to ask where he or she is from, because “the question will be interpreted as a subtle challenge to the person’s right to be in France.” What begins as a study of conversation becomes a study of national character.

The authors are careful to qualify their generalizations. “The French are not cookies from a factory,” they write, in a typically charming example of their prose style. “But all of them have been subjected to a specific type of French ‘formatting,’ through education and the transmission of a particular set of values that are practically universal across the country.” The book is dense with little marrons glacés of insight, like this tidbit about the French obsession with food: “In a country as politically and administratively centralized as France, food is a politically acceptable way to talk about one’s local origins.” The authors clearly had a ball researching the book, and their glee is infectious. The writing is as light as it is substantive, and if that sounds like a contradiction, I would refer you to a soufflé.


