


In a sharp and public escalation of its response to a raft of investigations, the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit political group tied to Mayor Bill de Blasio, said that it would refuse to comply with a subpoena issued by a New York State ethics panel.

The letter, written by the group’s lawyer, Laurence D. Laufer, accused the ethics panel of a “blatantly political exercise” in seeking further information related to possible lobbying activities.

The state panel, known as the Joint Commission on Public Ethics, has been investigating the activities of the Campaign for One New York since last year over concerns, voiced by good-government groups and in the news media, that the group may have violated state regulations by acting as a lobbyist without registering as one with the state. The group registered as a lobbyist in 2014, but did not do so in 2015.

In the 12-page letter, Mr. Laufer argued that Campaign for One New York did not perform any lobbying activities in 2015, and therefore was not required to register. He questioned several aspects of the investigation, its timing and its targets, noting that the panel sought information related to potential lobbying of the State Legislature, the mayor and the City Council, but not to any potential lobbying of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.

“We will no longer cooperate with what has obviously become a blatantly political exercise by an agency whose very independence is deeply in question,” Mr. Laufer wrote in the letter, provided to reporters and addressed to the panel’s executive director, Seth Agata.

Hours after receiving the letter, Mr. Agata suggested in a telephone interview that the panel would go to court to compel production of the documents, as early as next week.

“We have the option of going into court,” he said, adding that “regulated entities” do not get to chose their regulators. “We want the documents and we want them now.”

The letter, which provided some new details of the panel’s investigation, was the second time in two weeks that Mr. Laufer has accused a state investigative agency of a political motivation, amounting to a barely veiled suggestion that some of the inquiries targeting Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, in recent weeks were being orchestrated in Albany.

In both instances, Mr. Laufer questioned the political motivation of leaks of information to the news media and suggested that any member of the ethics panel who shared confidential information would be guilty of a crime.

“It’s an open threat,” said Mr. Agata, who declined to address the specifics of Mr. Laufer’s letter, saying he could not share details of the investigation. “I have one arm tied behind my back.”

The panel’s investigation began in May 2015, according to the letter, with a request to interview Bill Hyers, who managed Mr. de Blasio’s 2013 mayoral campaign and who helped establish the Campaign for One New York, which the mayor created to promote his agenda, the following year. The basis of the inquiry appeared to be fund-raising materials used by the group, including those that were related to school issues and would require state approval. The materials suggested to the panel a possible intent by the group to lobby in 2015, as it had done the year before.

Groups are required under state law to register with the panel within 15 days if they reasonably anticipate spending more than $5,000 on lobbying activities.

But Mr. Laufer argued that the investigation had gone beyond its original scope and, in seeking information about fund-raising, had drifted outside the panel’s jurisdiction. And he said the timing of an earlier subpoena, served in August, suggested it had been drafted sometime after an April dinner with Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, and just before the former executive director of the ethics panel left at the end of July to rejoin the executive branch, and therefore could have been influenced by the governor’s office.

A spokesman for Mr. Cuomo’s office said that its only knowledge of the investigation “is what has been reported in the news.”

The mayor’s group will continue to cooperate with investigations into other aspects of Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising, by the United States attorney’s office for the Southern District of New York and the Manhattan district attorney’s office, Mr. Laufer said.


