


After weeks of negotiations, House Republicans have drawn a road map to lead Puerto Rico out of its financial quagmire, with support from the Obama administration.

A bill introduced shortly before midnight on Wednesday would put Puerto Rico’s fiscal affairs under direct federal control and establish a legal framework for reducing its $72 billion load of debt. The rules would be similar to Chapter 9 municipal bankruptcy, but with differences intended to reassure those creditors who believe Chapter 9 is stacked against them.

If enacted as is, the bill would also pre-empt action by the United States Supreme Court, which has been called upon to interpret the laws governing Puerto Rico. Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code explicitly bars Puerto Rico from seeking debt relief, without revealing why. In March, the justices heard oral arguments in an expedited appeal by the island, but they expressed uncertainty about how to proceed.

The House bill would not change Puerto Rico’s exclusion, but instead would give Puerto Rico and other United States territories a set of rules for reducing their debts outside of bankruptcy. Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands and the Northern Mariana Islands could use the framework too, if necessary.

The bill was drafted by the House Committee on Natural Resources under direction from Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who told his fellow Republicans to work with Democrats. The result is a bipartisan compromise with provisions that different stakeholders have said they did not want but now seem willing to live with. The alternative seems to be the kind of open-ended legal and financial chaos that engulfed Greece in 2010.

Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said the bill showed signs of “meanspirited policy-making” by Republicans, as when it called for young minimum-wage earners on the island to take a pay cut. But he said the White House could accept that, and other shortcomings, to get a bill passed.

“The president has made assisting Puerto Rico and addressing their challenging economic situation a top priority, and sometimes, getting bipartisan progress in Congress requires supporting legislation that is not perfect,” Mr. Earnest said.

The bill would put Puerto Rico’s financial affairs under a powerful federal control board, despite warnings from elected officials in Puerto Rico that heavy-handed oversight from Washington would have unacceptable colonial connotations.

The bill bars Puerto Rico’s governor or legislature from exercising “any control, supervision, oversight or review over the Oversight Board or its activities.” It would also trump a bill enacted by Puerto Rico in April allowing the government to default on debt payments.

The control board would have seven members, selected by President Obama from candidates proposed by Republicans and Democrats in Congress. At least one of the seven members would be a resident of Puerto Rico.

Initially, the majority would be Republican nominees, and congressional aides said lengthy negotiations over what to do if the Democrats take control of the Senate after the fall election delayed the bill’s introduction until almost midnight on Wednesday.

The bill would give the control board authority to investigate what went wrong on the island, to demand reforms and to enforce credible budgets and fiscal plans. The board would have the power to subpoena records and hold hearings, something of potential concern to Puerto Rican officials past and present as well as the financial community.

Conceivably, the investigations could show that some of Puerto Rico’s debt was created unlawfully, and the island could seek to have it voided, leaving bondholders empty-handed.

The board would not be able to declare “mission accomplished” and leave until Puerto Rico regains normal access to the capital markets, something that could take years.

The board would also guide Puerto Rico through a court-supervised process of debt reduction. It would first sort through Puerto Rico’s bewildering array of bonds and put similar creditors together in classes, honoring Puerto Rico’s existing bond priorities.

Each class would then get a settlement offer and have the chance to vote on it. The offers would come from the board, not the government of Puerto Rico, reducing any possibility of local connections skewing deals.

The bill also contains a so-called collective action clause, making it possible to impose binding settlements on holdout creditors who want more.


