


EASTON, N.Y. — Gerry Barnhart named his new winery Victory View Vineyard because when he looks west from the top of a slope on his property, he can see the site where, in 1777, the Battles of Saratoga were fought.

And one of his wines is named Revolution because it is made from one of several new cold-hardy grape varieties that have flourished in parts of northern New York once considered inhospitable to winemaking, from Washington and Saratoga Counties, just above Albany, to Lake Champlain and the Thousand Islands.

“About two dozen new vineyards have started up in the last seven or eight years because of the availability of these new grapes,” Mr. Barnhart said. “Before, you couldn’t even think about growing wine grapes here.”

Red and white wines from grapes developed in Minnesota, Wisconsin and at Cornell University have allowed the North Country region to join more well-established New York wine-producing areas, such as the Finger Lakes and the North Fork of Long Island.

In 2008, Mr. Barnhart and his wife, Mary, planted 180 vines of marquette grapes, a variety first released in 2006 by the University of Minnesota. In 2010, before going into business, he harvested nearly a ton of grapes and gave away most of his first batch of 160 gallons of wine to family and friends, who all gave it favorable reviews.

“So we said, ‘Let’s keep going,’” Mr. Barnhart said.

They expanded their operation to three and a half acres from a quarter of an acre by adding maréchal foch, a cold-hardy red grape developed more than a century ago, along with white cultivars like la crescent, lacrosse and melody.

“Like any variety of grape they have their own essential character, whether it’s mouth feel or different kinds of flavors,” Mr. Barnhart said. “These northern grapes are different than some of the traditional European wine grapes like a cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay or riesling. They have different flavor profiles. For example, marquette has a real abundance of color and what people would characterize as red-fruit flavors such as black cherry, raspberry, strawberry or cherry.’’

Still, Ms. Barnhart added, “People will come in and ask, ‘Do you have merlot?’”

“We say, ‘No, we can’t grow those grapes here because they’re wimps when it comes to winter,’” Mr. Barnhart said. “‘But we do have this, this and this.’”

Tim E. Martinson is a senior extension associate at Cornell and the director of the Northern Grapes Project, which helps producers grow cold-hardy grapes and then teaches them how to make and market wines. Some of the new plants created through the project can withstand temperatures as low as minus 30 Fahrenheit.

“Will they ever become a new merlot? That’s beyond the point,” Mr. Martinson said. “The point is that people have created a viable business, making new wines and selling them out of their own tasting rooms.”

Connoisseurs might not be ready to rank these cold-weather wines among European classics, but cold-hardy varieties are quickly gaining recognition. At a recent international wine competition in Rochester that included 3,824 wines from 913 producers, one of Mr. Barnhart’s wines earned a double-gold medal and about a half-dozen more northern New York wineries earned gold medals.

“If you’re winning medals against the best vineyards in the world from 26 countries, you’re making some pretty good wine,” Peter Parts, the founder of the competition, said. “The key now is for producers to educate consumers about these wines and pairings.”

Ms. Barnhart said consumers in their 20s to early 30s were providing most of the support for their wines. “Baby boomers and older people stick with wines they know,” she said. “The younger generation is more global in their desires. They’re more adventurous. They actually like to try something new.”

Joseph Messina owns Amorici Vineyard, about five miles from the Barnharts’ operation. “Marquette is going to change the way the world sees New York as a wine region,” he said. “This grape loves the soil, loves the climate, loves everything that is going on here.”

Mr. Messina said he picked 25 pounds of marquette grapes per vine last fall, almost double the 13 to 15 pounds from a typical harvest.

“I had so many grapes I had to sell some,” he said. “I couldn’t produce wine from all the grapes we grew. I didn’t have enough room.”

The nascent wine regions have also benefited from Cornell’s highly regarded agricultural research program, Mr. Barnhart said. “They transfer what they learn and know to people like us who are relative rookies in this business,” he said.

Recent state initiatives, including changes within the New York State Liquor Authority, have also made a difference, Mr. Barnhart said. “It used to take months and months to get a winery license,” he said. “It no longer does. When we first applied in 2012, we got a temporary license in two weeks and a permanent license within 90 days. That was light-years faster than what the track record had been in the past.”

A 2014 state regulation increased the production limit for farm-based wineries to 200,000 gallons per year from 150,000 gallons and allowed the sale of wines at farm stands. Vineyards could also open satellite stores — two wineries in the Finger Lakes, for example, have opened stores in Saratoga Springs.

But to expand its customer base, this young sector of New York’s wine industry still needs more vineyards producing more wine and a better product, Mr. Barnhart said.

“True, it’s competition, but it also lets the area offer a greater variety of wines, which helps to make it a destination,” he said. “We’ve shown we can do it. Now we’ve just got to drill into the marketplace and become better known.”


