


A 48-year-old woman living in a Brooklyn Y.W.C.A. that offers housing to low-income and homeless women was fatally stabbed by another resident on Saturday, the police said.

Just before 7 a.m., the police responded to a dispute involving a knife at the Y.W.C.A., at 30 Third Avenue in the Boerum Hill neighborhood. Officers found the victim, Liza Millet, in her room with dozens of stab wounds to her back and torso, the police said.

A woman believed to be the assailant, Dorothy Curry, had barricaded herself inside her unit down the hall, officials said. She was taken into custody after officers from the Police Department’s Emergency Service Unit forced open the door.

Ms. Millet was taken to New York Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn, where she was pronounced dead.

Ms. Curry, 55, was taken to Kings County Hospital Center for a psychiatric evaluation and was charged later on Saturday with murder, the police said.

Investigators recovered a six-inch kitchen knife at the scene, the police said.

Ms. Millet and Ms. Curry had both lived for several years in the building, which provides housing for 285 women, according to Rolanda Telesford, a spokeswoman for the Y.W.C.A in Brooklyn. Neither woman had a history of violence or complaints filed against them, Ms. Telesford said.

The Y.W.C.A.’s security personnel responded to the assault, and no one else was hurt, she said.

“Since our founding in 1888, the organization has never experienced a violent event within its community of residents,” she said in a statement. “The organization is cooperating fully with the ongoing police investigation.”

The Y.W.C.A. moved to the 11-story building in 1927. It has provided housing for members of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater company, engineers, former prisoners and retired teachers. Current residents include low-income and homeless women, many of whom are also survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault, as well as older women, according to its website.

The victim’s friends and a divorce record gave her name as Liza Millett, but on social media, she spelled her given name as Lisa, with an “s,” and used her maiden name, Cordner.

She was from Port-of-Spain, the capital of Trinidad, and had recently returned from a visit there, said her longtime friends, Debra Longmire and Maggie Charles. They met when they lived in Trinidad, stayed in contact by phone and reunited on trips home, said Ms. Longmire, of Atlanta.

“She was a beautiful person,” she said. “She liked to talk crazy and make you laugh, but she was also very concerned if you had a problem and would give you advice.”

Ms. Millett divorced in 2003, according to public records, and her friends said she had a daughter in New York, as well as a son and a daughter in Trinidad. She was a certified nursing assistant who worked as a security guard and home health aide, Ms. Longmire said.

“I used to tell her she works too much,” she said.


