


ISTANBUL — A Turkish court handed down a long-awaited judgment against two prominent journalists on Friday, sentencing them to more than five years in prison for releasing “state secrets.” The verdict came just hours after one of the journalists narrowly escaped an attack by a gunman in front of the courthouse.

The two journalists, Can Dundar, the editor in chief of the opposition newspaper Cumhuriyet, and Erdem Gul, the newspaper’s Ankara bureau chief, were accused of espionage and attempting to topple the government through their reporting about weapons shipments by Turkey’s spy agency to rebels opposed to the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

The Istanbul court found the journalists guilty of revealing state secrets and sentenced them to five years and 10 months in prison. But they were acquitted of the more serious charges of trying to oust the government.

As the journalists awaited the court’s decision on Friday, an assailant tried to shoot Mr. Dundar, shouting “traitor” as he fired at him. Mr. Dundar was unharmed, but another reporter was wounded and taken to a hospital.

“In the space of two hours, we have experienced two assassination attempts: one was done with a gun, the other was judicial,” Mr. Dundar told reporters after the verdict.

“The jail sentences we received are not just to silence us,” he said. “The bullet was not just to silence us. This was done to all of us, to scare us into silence, to make us stop talking.”

The Cumhuriyet report about what the newspaper said were efforts to arm Syrian rebels was published last May. It infuriated President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, who filed a personal criminal complaint against Mr. Dundar and publicly threatened him, saying he would “pay a heavy price.”

Mr. Erdogan has claimed that trucks were carrying aid to members of the Turkmen ethnic community, and that the police who conducted a search had no right to do so.

The journalists are expected to appeal the verdict and will remain free until the end of the appellate process, Cumhuriyet reported.

The court also ruled that the journalists would face a separate trial over charges that they had “assisted an armed terror organization.” The government has accused them of collaborating with Fethullah Gulen, an exiled Muslim cleric and onetime Erdogan ally who has been accused of plotting a coup in Turkey.

In recent years, Turkey’s government has cracked down on freedom of expression: Dozens of journalists have been imprisoned or have lost their jobs for criticizing the government, and the Turkish authorities, backed by court orders, have seized opposition media outlets. Prosecutors have opened more than 1,800 cases against people on charges of insulting the president since Mr. Erdogan took office in 2014.

Journalists who work for opposition media outlets or are critical of the government are often labeled “traitors” or “terrorists,” making them vulnerable to attacks. Mr. Erdogan recently proposed that the government broaden the definition of a terrorist to include journalists, politicians and others who are deemed by the authorities to have provided support for terrorist acts.

“We don’t know the person who attacked us,” Mr. Dundar said in a Twitter post after the shooting on Friday. “But we know who is making us a target.”


