


Despite a 10 percent drop in pretax profits (and a related fall in share price) at Burberry, it will continue with the grand experiment that was the promotion in 2013 of its designer, Christopher Bailey, to chief executive and chief creative officer — a move that made him the first designer at a publicly listed global luxury company to hold both posts.

On Wednesday at its annual results presentation, Burberry moved to squash — or at least sidestep — rumors first reported in The Financial Times that after rumblings from dissatisfied shareholders, a senior executive would be brought in to support Mr. Bailey on the corporate side.

Speaking on a conference call, Carol Fairweather, Burberry’s chief financial officer, said that while appointments were planned, especially in the retail and digital sides of the business, no such senior-level addition was anticipated.

Change, however, was — specifically in the Burberry fashion offering.

Mr. Bailey’s new three-year turnaround plan, which envisions £100 million (about $146.4 million) in cost savings, reorganization of the company structure, and investment to improve the retail and e-tail experience, also continues what has been a pretty meaningful shake-up of how Burberry thinks about what it makes.

This may seem obvious given Mr. Bailey’s background in fashion. But in recent years, most of Burberry’s news, and the attention on the brand, has been focused on its digital initiatives (to the extent that Mr. Bailey’s predecessor as C.E.O., Angela Ahrendts, moved to Apple in 2014).

In the shadow of the drumroll over the Art of the Trench blog, and the Burberry channel on Apple music, and shows previewed on Snapchat, the clothes and accessories often seemed like something of an afterthought, and the runway like an exercise in repetition.

Things are bad in China (especially for Burberry, which has more exposure than many of its competitors to the country). And with an uncertain political environment, growth in the luxury sector is slow over all, points the brand made in its presentation. But it’s worth remembering that when people aren’t buying, it nearly always comes down to what’s on the racks. Especially in an industry in which purchases are based not on need, but desire.

As a result, in the third of a series of moves designed to streamline and simplify Burberry’s offerings, Ms. Fairweather said the product lineup would be reduced by 15 to 20 percent over the next year, the better to focus consumer attention on new and special pieces: the products that define the brand’s point of difference. Or, as the company put it in its webcast, not product “breadth,” but product depth. And handbags! Burberry thinks there is lots of opportunity in bags.

This follows earlier decisions to combine Burberry’s three lines — Prorsum, London and Brit — into one, as well as to unite the men’s and women’s wear shows into a seasonless collection that would be sold immediately after it was unveiled on the runway, the better to tap into the see-now-want-now urge.

There will also be a renewed focus on retail offerings, especially “localization” of product: not, in other words, selling winter clothes in a hemisphere where it is summer. (Before you say “duh!” consider that fashion works on its own schedule, which often seems far removed from temporal logic. It is currently delivering prefall clothes to stores, and in a recent conversation with one e-tailer, I was told it had just received a fur collection.)

It boils down to an acknowledgment that, at least at the high end of the market, an excess of stuff may not necessarily add up to more than the sum of its parts, but rather less. Optionality is not always optimum. Or at least that’s how it sounds.

When the first joint show is revealed in September, and people are free to rush to their iPads to purchase, we’ll have a better sense of whether it is working.


