


Dozens of water rescues played out in the Houston area overnight Sunday after a powerful line of thunderstorms unleashed as much as two feet of rain, forcing much of the city to tread water.

By Monday, the rain had paralyzed vehicle traffic and transit, forced the closures of schools and colleges across southeast Texas and cut off power to about 110,000 customers. A number of businesses and government buildings were also closed.

At its most intense, the downpour was falling at about four inches an hour, said Andrew Orrison, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service.

“That is a lot of rain in one hour. That will cause a flash flood almost instantly,” he said.

The suburbs northwest of Houston were hit hardest, and the city’s emergency services deployed high-water vehicles and boats to rescue trapped residents. The City of Houston has also opened a number of shelters.

For several hours overnight Sunday, between five and 15 water rescues were underway at any given time, said Jay Evans, a spokesman for the Houston Fire Department.

“It’s been extremely dangerous here,” he said. “We got most everybody out that we could get out.”

In a tense scene that played out on a local news broadcast, a reporter waded into a flooded road, microphone in hand, to help pull a man to safety after he was trapped by fast-rising water. Moments later, KTRK-TV reported, the water swallowed the man’s vehicle.

No deaths have been reported, Mr. Evans said. The number of injuries, if any, was unknown.

Mr. Evans noted that Houston, part of the Gulf Coast region, and the surrounding area are crisscrossed by a number of creeks and bayous.

“All of those are flooded this morning,” he said. Other cities in Texas including San Antonio have reported high waters on Monday.

Houston’s George Bush Intercontinental Airport reported more than 400 flight cancellations, and at 7 a.m. grounded all departing and arriving planes.

Mr. Orrison said the rain was expected to gradually taper off across southeast Texas over the next two days as the storms move east .


