


A monthslong conflict over a plan to send eight chimpanzees from a laboratory in the United States to a wildlife park in England intensified this week when animal welfare groups and primate sanctuaries went to court for the second time to stop the move.

The New England Anti-Vivisection Society, an animal rights group, is leading the effort to block the United States Fish and Wildlife Service from allowing the move. After the society brought a similar lawsuit in November to stop the transfer, the wildlife service pulled back from its initial decision to grant the permit and reopened public comment.

The chimpanzees in question are longtime residents of the Yerkes National Primate Research Center at Emory University in Atlanta.

Yerkes is trying to reduce the number of its chimpanzees because of a change in research focus. Also, medical experiments using chimpanzees have become almost impossible because of new regulations. Yerkes gave seven chimps to the Chattanooga Zoo in Tennessee, but still has more than 50 and arranged to donate eight to Wingham Wildlife Park in Kent, England.

On Thursday, the agency told Yerkes and animal welfare groups that, having finished the second comment period, it had decided to grant a permit as soon as May 1 to allow Yerkes to give eight chimps to the wildlife park. On Monday, the antivivisection society and others responded with a new complaint in Federal District Court in Washington that aims to get more information and stop the permit from being granted.

At the heart of the issue are protections granted to captive chimps because of their endangered status. The protections went into effect in September.

Any export of chimps must further the survival of the species, according to the Endangered Species Act. Theodora Capaldo, the president and executive director of the antivivisection society, said this move offered no benefit to the species, adding that five sanctuaries in the United States were ready to take the chimps. She called the Fish and Wildlife decision “a betrayal of the public trust.”

Yerkes has contended all along that Wingham would be a good location for the chimps, and simply noted Monday that it was aware of the legal complaint and would continue to move toward the goal of moving them to England.

Tim Van Norman, in charge of international permits for the Fish and Wildlife Service, said he was confident that the move “would enhance the survival in the wild” of chimpanzees because of a donation that Yerkes had agreed to make to the Population and Sustainability Network, an international nonprofit group.

A long list of zoos, sanctuaries and primatologists in the United States, Europe and Africa objected to the move, including Richard W. Wrangham at Harvard, Brian Hare at Duke and Richard Leakey in Kenya.

The wildlife park is not accredited by the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria, and the European Endangered Species Program opposes the move because there is already a surplus of chimpanzees in Europe.

But Jane Goodall, perhaps the person most identified with chimpanzees in the public mind, filed a comment with the Fish and Wildlife Service saying she supported the move after having visited Wingham and seeing “firsthand the wonderful extensive indoor and outdoor housing which has been purpose-built to receive chimpanzees.”

When Yerkes first applied for a permit, it was going to donate money to a sanctuary in Africa run by Dr. Wrangham. The sanctuary refused the donation and opposed the transfer.

Then Yerkes, with the assistance of the Fish and Wildlife Service, arranged to pledge $45,000 a year to the Population and Sustainability Network.

The network agreed to create a project for chimpanzees “modeled on a current program in Uganda bringing health and livelihood interventions to people, while protecting mountain gorillas.”

Ms. Capaldo criticized the use of the donation as a way to promote species survival. “Can people pay for an export permit?” she said.

Not all of the plaintiffs in the complaint are human. Georgia, for instance, is one of the eight chimpanzees at Yerkes.


