


ALBANY — The residents of Hoosick Falls came to the State Capitol on Wednesday with the numbers hung around their necks, scribbled on their arms, and described on hand-drawn posters:

“Dad, 68.”

“Grandma, 85.”

“Teacher, 137.”

The numbers represented how much a toxic chemical, measured in parts per billion, has infiltrated their bodies as it has contaminated their village’s water.

Located about 30 miles northeast of Albany, Hoosick Falls has been the epicenter for growing statewide concerns about perfluorooctanoic acid, or PFOA, the toxic chemical that has been linked in some studies to increased risk for cancer and other serious ailments.

Last year, PFOA was confirmed in dangerously high levels in the village’s drinking water, which comes from municipal wells. Late January, more than a month after a federal warning about the water, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo ordered the installation of new filtration systems, blood testing, and other measures.

In recent weeks, those in and around Hoosick Falls have been receiving the blood test results, and the news, for some, has been troubling: On Wednesday, several who came to Albany reported test levels as much as 100 times the national average. Such results have reignited fears in Hoosick Falls, and infuriated residents like Loreen Hackett, who denounced Mr. Cuomo and the state’s reaction, particularly in light of other water contamination crises in places like Flint, Mich.

“We are his Flint,” said Ms. Hackett, holding a photograph of her grandchildren, Corey and Alyssa, both of whom tested at more than 50 times the national average.

Moments after she spoke, Ms. Hackett and others from Hoosick Falls were invited to an hourlong meeting with Jim Malatras, the state’s director of operations, who has headed much of the state’s response to the PFOA crisis. Afterward, several residents expressed gratitude for the meeting, which resulted in promises to disclose more results from testing, and bringing staff to Hoosick Falls from Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan to consult with residents.

Left unfulfilled, however, was a wish for legislative hearings on the state’s reaction to the contamination, even as the Legislature prepares to wrap up its session for the year on Thursday. (Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, was not available to meet with residents, according to his office, because of meetings with legislative leaders.)

The decision not to hold hearings earned the derision of State Assemblyman Steve McLaughlin, whose district includes Hoosick Falls and who has criticized the State Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan, a fellow Republican. And while Mr. McLaughlin thanked Mr. Cuomo’s office for the meeting on Wednesday, he did not ease up on Senator Flanagan, who he said was ignoring the plight of children in the village.

“How do you look at them and not have hearings?” he said.

Scott Reif, a spokesman for Mr. Flanagan, said that “our primary focus is on ensuring that the progress that has been made on behalf of the residents of Hoosick Falls continues,” and that he had been in almost daily contact with the local state senator, Kathy Marchione, about Hoosick Falls.

Michael Whyland, a spokesman for the Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, a Democrat, said that the primary concern was getting clean water, but that “if hearings are warranted in the future then we can do that.”

The State Health Department in early June found that the median number for 2,081 residents who were tested was a little more than 28 parts per billion, or nearly 15 times the national median for those 12 or older.

Hoosick Falls was once a center for production of products treated with Teflon, whose production involves PFOA. The state has said that a local plant — Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics — was the source of the contamination. The company has said it is cooperating with the authorities, and paid for a new carbon-filtration system and bottled water for the village.

Mr. Cuomo declared the village a state Superfund site in January, but was also criticized for not visiting Hoosick Falls until mid-March, when that system became operational. On Wednesday, Mr. Malatras defended the administration’s response and noted that “the Legislature deals with legislative hearings.”

But he also seemed sympathetic to the village’s residents. “In any situation like this anxiety and emotions are running very high,” he said.

Before their meeting with Mr. Malatras, one resident, MaryAnn Jacobs, was in tears talking about test results, showing her children’s levels at more than 20 times the national median. Her 10-year-old daughter, Hailey, wrote a letter to the governor; it read, in part: “My mom came to Hoosick Falls for a good reason, but now she knows the whole time she was trying to raise us we were being poisoned. She feels it’s her fault. But it’s not her fault.”


