


The Undefeated, ESPN’s long-gestating website on race and sports, is expected to finally come to life on Tuesday morning, nearly three years after the media giant conceived it.

The stand-alone site is a significant gamble by ESPN to appeal to African-Americans with daily and long-form journalism, commentary, podcasts, music, comedy, blogs, video and live coverage of events. The site will have four sections: sports, culture, historically black colleges and universities, and a stream of joyful items called The Uplift. Each day, the site plans to have 10 to 15 new pieces of content.

The debut will be on the 62nd anniversary of the Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education, which declared racial segregation in public schools unconstitutional.

“We’ve all been getting ready for this huge thing to happen,” said Danielle Cadet, a senior editor who joined The Undefeated in September 2014. “I don’t know if I’ve realized it yet. It’s all very surreal.”

Kevin Merida, a former managing editor of The Washington Post who was named the site’s editor in chief in October after the original one was dismissed, said, “We hope it will feel robust.”

One of the site’s goals, Merida said, is to be expansive about its view of the world it is covering. At a meeting Tuesday in Manhattan with members of the news media, he said: “There is no one way to be black. No one way to be white. No one way to be a millennial. And no one way to be a sports fan.”

For a time it was reasonable to think that ESPN would shutter The Undefeated and chalk up a loss in its boutique website business.

First, there was the reign of its founding editor in chief, Jason Whitlock, a longtime columnist whose lack of management experience caused internal strife and prompted his dismissal from the site last June (and his subsequent departure from ESPN for FS1). Then came the closing last October of Grantland, ESPN’s acclaimed, four-year-old sports-and-culture site, months after the sports-media giant’s split with its editor in chief, Bill Simmons.

If Grantland could not survive long without Simmons or pull its weight financially, would ESPN proceed with The Undefeated?

It has, which suggests that ESPN might be very indulgent if The Undefeated is not an advertising or audience magnet. To do what Whitlock could not, ESPN hired Merida, a calm, experienced leader who was the first African-American managing editor at The Washington Post. But ESPN retained The Undefeated name, which comes from a quotation by Maya Angelou, and its original mission to be a prominent voice on race.

“Race is the subject of our time,” Merida said, when asked why he wanted to tackle the subject. “We can’t escape it. I wouldn’t be here if I didn’t have that confidence.”

Describing his desire for the site to be “unapologetic and brave,” he added: “I will be fearless but not reckless. We want to be smart and cool. We want to be a thought leader.”

At one point during the gathering, Marie Donoghue, the ESPN executive vice president who oversees The Undefeated, looked at Merida and said, “This is my most successful deal ever — to bring Kevin over here.”

Donoghue’s trust in Merida underscores how much ESPN believes in his ability to produce a compelling and, more important, enduring site that will be original, independent and complementary to ESPN’s television programming and digital properties like espn.com.

Merida’s success will rest on people embracing a site that is far more ruminative than espn.com, which is packed with scores, game stories, analysis and highlights — as well as narrative journalism. He wants people talking about it in his barbershop — and many other places, virtual or otherwise. “And if they’re on Snapchat or Twitter,” he said, “I’d want The Undefeated’s work to find them.”

Donoghue added: “We want to engage an audience that finds something we’re not currently offering at ESPN.”

In a subsequent interview, she said that expectations for The Undefeated were based partly on its ability to sell sponsorships by being active on other ESPN platforms. “The benefit and value of The Undefeated to the company will be beyond the site,” she said.

The nearly three years it has taken to start The Undefeated has caused the site to miss opportunities to cover subjects of interest to its potential audience, including the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement, the 10th anniversary of Hurricane Katrina, Prince’s death and Stephen Curry’s back-to-back M.V.P. seasons. But covering the political conventions and examining President Obama’s cultural legacy await, as does Merida’s plan to ask Obama to contribute to the site after Jan. 20.

The site’s delay has been a slog for Cadet and the six writers who were hired during Whitlock’s regime and have stayed — putting stories in a bank but seeing the site remain stubbornly dormant. They have been joined recently by several new hires made by Merida.

“For a lot of us, it’s been sort of mentally keeping our heads above water, professionally, personally and mentally,” Cadet said by telephone.

When she left The Huffington Post, where she edited its Black Voices section, Cadet recalled thinking, “This could go really well or it could go really badly.” But even as the internal drama played out, she thought that the site would eventually launch.

“I thought it might happen but I wouldn’t be here for it,” she said. “I felt I might be cheering it on from a different stage of my life.”

Now that the site is days away from reality, she said: “The craziest thing about The Undefeated is that it could be a movie. And we haven’t started yet.”


