


Times Insider shares insights into how we work at The New York Times. In this article, John Leland, a Metro reporter, examines how spending 12 months with his subjects eroded his objectivity, in a good way.

Fred Jones couldn’t change a light bulb in his apartment. Ping Wong wanted help with her building manager. John Sorensen loved the opera but was homebound and had no way of getting new music. As a journalist writing about these people — trained to cover events, not change them — what do you do?

Fred, Ping and John are three of the six older New Yorkers I followed last year for the series “85 & Up,” which looked at daily life for one of the fastest-growing age groups in the city. For 12 months, I visited them at home and in hospital rooms, and followed them to doctor appointments and poetry readings. I went to birthday gatherings and family outings in Chinatown for dim sum; I interviewed their physicians and caregivers and children.

As with any reporting project, I established an objective distance from the people I was writing about. It worked perfectly, until it didn’t.

Just how attached I became was made clear to me this month, when I learned that Fred Jones had died. He was just past his 89th birthday, and still confident he would make it to 110, despite numerous health problems. We’d talked regularly since the series had ended, and I’d continued to visit him in his walk-up apartment, where he struggled gamely with the stairs. He always cheered me up.

I’d broken some rules with Fred. On one visit during the series, several of his ceiling lights had burned out. I had a choice to make. Here was a raw fact of life: an old man stuck in permanent twilight because he couldn’t climb a ladder to change a bulb. It was a poignant detail to share with readers, exactly what the series was intended to document — it was the reason I’d put in so much time. On the other hand, how could I let Fred, who had shared so much of his life, sit in the dark? The choice wasn’t really a choice. I changed the bulb and told readers that I had done so, so that I wasn’t secretly altering the life I was documenting. It wouldn’t pass muster in journalism school, but I trusted that Times readers could perceive the precariousness of Fred’s situation without his having to live in darkness.

The series was full of such small decisions.

Going in I knew that loneliness and isolation — or sometimes just a human need for someone to talk to — were major issues for older people, especially those who lived alone. Usually I visited with no agenda, content to let them steer the conversation to whatever was important to them, even if it was exactly what they’d told me on my last visit. They were my guides to their world; I was, for them, a regular visitor in a life that usually didn’t have enough of them. By the middle of the year I had six new elders to visit and keep company, each with his or her individual needs. Jonas Mekas, the oldest, was the outlier, his life stuffed with people and purpose before I arrived. I told them about my own elderly mother and about my personal life. Sometimes they called me: When was I coming over?

Under these circumstances, what was the meaning of journalistic distance? It seemed hypothetical. The act of visiting, of paying attention to their lives at a time when they often felt invisible — except to their doctors or aides — changed their lives. You can’t be invisible when your picture is in the newspaper every month or two, and people call you to say they saw it.

I reminded them that ours remained a journalistic relationship, and that it had a beginning and an end. But I don’t think that ever registered. Part of the wisdom of the elderly is not getting too upset about things that haven’t happened yet, because maybe you won’t be around when they do. I hoped my six elders wouldn’t give me stuff to write about: wouldn’t fall or get sick or worse, all the things that make for riveting copy. No news was good news.

What I didn’t expect was how much the visits would change me: how much I would learn about life and gratitude and resilience and purpose from Fred, Ping, John, Helen Moses, Jonas Mekas and Ruth Willig. They taught me how to write about their lives, even if it sometimes meant screwing in a light bulb or tracking down a missing set of keys.

I didn’t intervene with Ping’s building manager; once, when Fred started crying in the middle of an interview we were videotaping, I didn’t hug him, even though I wanted to. Some boundaries held.

I did give John some CDs by the tenor Jonas Kaufmann, who was his favorite. It was at a party for his birthday, the day the final article in the series ran. I don’t know if he ever listened to them; his memory has declined significantly since year’s end, and I doubt he even remembers I gave them to him. As I write this, John is in a nursing home recovering from a fall. I’ll visit him sometime over the next few days. Maybe I’ll ask him then. Or maybe I’ll just let him steer the conversation to whatever’s important to him. That always worked out well in the past.


