


Wendell Pierce, the actor known for portraying Bunk, a world-weary detective in the television drama “The Wire,” was arrested on Saturday in Atlanta and charged with battery after a discussion about politics turned heated, according to the police and witnesses.

According to Maggie Elena Baca, who was staying at the Loews Atlanta Hotel with two friends, Mr. Pierce struck her in the head during a confrontation that culminated at the door to her room.

Mr. Pierce, also a guest at the hotel, was with his girlfriend when he encountered Ms. Baca, who was sitting with friends in a hallway on the 23rd floor, she told the police. As the two groups began to talk politics, Mr. Pierce became upset, she said.

The actor then began to push her, Ms. Baca told the police, and as she and her friends walked away to their room, Mr. Pierce followed them and tried to force his way in. In the tussle, Ms. Baca said, Mr. Pierce “began to hit her in the head and grab her hoodie, ripping the hood off.”

Mr. Pierce disputed that account, telling the police that he had followed the group to the room, but that they had attempted to pull him in.

Ms. Baca did not immediately respond to a phone message seeking comment.

Both Ms. Baca and Mr. Pierce declined medical assistance, the police said.

Mr. Pierce, 52, was taken into custody early Saturday at the hotel, the police said. He was booked and released on $1,000 bail.

The Atlanta Police Department said in a statement that the arrest “was treated like any other arrest a patrol officer conducts.”

“Mr. Pierce made no indication he was famous nor did the officer inquire,” it said.

Rachel Peavy, a spokeswoman for Loews, said the hotel would not comment, citing the privacy of its guests. A representative for Mr. Pierce could not be reached immediately for comment.

As news of his arrest rippled across the web on Monday, Mr. Pierce withdrew from plans to receive an honorary degree and deliver the commencement address at the Newark campus of Rutgers University on Wednesday. The university said Soledad O’Brien, the broadcast journalist, would speak in his place.

In addition to his role on “The Wire,” Mr. Pierce is also well known as a star of the HBO series “Treme,” set in his hometown, New Orleans, and recently portrayed Clarence Thomas in the political drama “Confirmation,” which had its premiere last month on HBO. He also plays a recurring character on the revival of the situation comedy “The Odd Couple” on CBS.


