


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. Happy May Day. This is Billy Bragg, “Which Side Are You On,” live in Germany in 1985. To the kitchen barricades!

We’re cooking Melissa Clark’s recipe for tandoori-style chicken this morning so we can eat it at room temperature tonight. To go with: Mark Bittman’s recipe for baingan bharta, a kind of South Asian baba ghanouj, and a tall stack of the British food writer Meera Sodha’s crackly-soft naan. Maybe we could make some basmati rice and a bowl of fiery mango chutney to boot. Won’t you join us?

Don’t just cook for today, though. Sundays, if you plan them right, can lead to incredible meals later in the week. You can, for instance, make pizza dough so that you can have a pizza night on Tuesday; those with sourdough starters in the fridge or on the sideboard can use some to make sourdough pizza dough instead.

You may assemble Regina Schrambling’s ace recipe for lasagna, and serve it on Monday night. (Those eschewing meat can use David Tanis’s recipe for a broccoli rabe lasagna.)

Set some rice to steaming today, slide it warm into a freezer-safe plastic bag when it’s done, and you’ll be in clover come Wednesday, when you use it to make my endlessly adaptable recipe for fried rice.

And as long as you’re beavering away in the kitchen, why not set yourself up with a full order of Mark Bittman’s McBitty bean burgers as well, for a Thursday night veggie-burger feast. Serve with all the usual fixings and maybe a big platter of oven-baked French fries as well. (Cover the potatoes with a few ladles of bulgogi sloppy-Joe meat, melty cheese and scallion salsa for a kind of cross-cultural disco-fries situation on the side.)

All this advance preparation will free you up to buy some salmon on Friday after work, and greet the weekend with a cool recipe Pete Wells got the chef Eric Ripert to devise off a $40 budget and free rein in a Jack’s 99-Cent Store, for baked salmon with coconut tomato sauce and creamy jasmine rice. It’s awesome.

You can find other recipes to cook in coming days on Cooking. (If we can find some rhubarb to go with the beautiful strawberries we’re starting to see, we may make Molly O’Neill’s recipe for a strawberry-rhubarb upside-down cake, which has been a proud resident of our database since 1994.) Browse our collections and save the recipes that pique your interest. Then make them! We’re all in this together.

Now, is this Kickstarter for a cat cafe in St. Louis genius or super-upsetting? Likewise, this mesmerizing puppy massage? We’re thrilling to Amanda Hess’s profile of Warsan Shire, the young poet who gave many words to Beyoncé’s “Lemonade.” And to end near where we began, have you read Emerson’s “May-Day” lately? “Soft! A sultry morning breaks” – that’s our desire, above all, for the week to come. See you tomorrow. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com if you need us.


