


The Justice Department said Monday that there was not enough evidence to support federal criminal charges in the case of a teenager found dead inside a rolled-up gym mat at a Georgia high school. Federal officials reviewed the 2013 death of Kendrick Johnson, 17, of Valdosta. The local and state authorities had ruled that the death was an accident, concluding that Mr. Johnson had been unable to breathe after getting stuck upside down in the middle of the rolled-up mat while reaching for a gym shoe. But his parents insisted that someone must have killed their son, and they pushed to reopen the investigation. They got a judge’s order to exhume the body so a second autopsy could be performed. The private pathologist hired by the family reported finding hemorrhaging beneath the skin of Mr. Johnson’s jaw and neck and concluded that he had suffered a fatal blow near his carotid artery that appeared to be “nonaccidental.” The Justice Department said an independent federal investigation had “found insufficient evidence” to support federal criminal charges. (AP)

Former Speaker J. Dennis Hastert will report to a federal prison in Minnesota this week to begin a 15-month sentence in his hush-money case, his lawyer said. Mr. Hastert, who served in the House as a Republican from Illinois, has a Wednesday afternoon deadline to report to the Rochester Federal Medical Center. Judge Thomas M. Durkin said at Mr. Hastert’s April sentencing in Federal District Court in Chicago that the facility would be a good fit, in part because it specializes in health care and is near Mayo Clinic. Mr. Hastert, 74, is diabetic and had a stroke last year. (AP)

A veteran of the F.B.I. has been named to head the United States Border Patrol, an agency traditionally led by agents who rise through the ranks. The new chief, Mark Morgan, briefly led the internal affairs department at Customs and Border Protection, the Border Patrol’s parent agency. He will oversee about 20,000 agents who patrol the nation’s land borders with Canada and Mexico and its maritime boundaries. R. Gil Kerlikowske, the Customs and Border Protection commissioner, told staff of the appointment in a memo on Monday. In 2014, Mr. Kerlikowske tapped Mr. Morgan to help review complaints of excessive force and misconduct by Customs and Border Protection employees. Mr. Morgan replaces Michael Fisher, who retired last year. The National Border Patrol Council, which represents 18,000 agents, said it was disappointed the commissioner passed over several highly qualified internal candidates. (AP)


