


In the days leading up to the presidential primaries in New York, both Democratic candidates visited public developments operated by the New York City Housing Authority. Hillary Clinton went to the Corsi Houses, a complex for older people in East Harlem, and Bernie Sanders traveled to the Howard Houses in Brownsville, Brooklyn, where two years ago a 21-year-old was shot to death, his body found outside an early learning center on the ground floor. Senator Sanders, who had been shocked to learn that the Housing Authority, the largest in the country, was in need of $17 billion in capital repairs, followed that visit with one to another complex, Twin Parks West, in the Bronx, where he observed an abandoned community center and lamented the general state of affairs that could lead to such decay.

“He saw a 10-story building with one elevator and asked, ‘What happens if this elevator breaks down?’” Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, who accompanied the senator to Brownsville, told me. “Being on the ground and walking through gave him an opportunity to see three things: one, that the people who live in the projects are no different from anyone else; two, how much we have really divested from public housing; and three, just how much that divestment impacts people’s lives every day. I live in a building where I press the elevator button and it comes.”

Both Mrs. Clinton and Senator Sanders made their visits only after local activist groups and politicians pressed them to do so, which in itself suggests the extent to which even liberal candidates on the national stage view public housing as a malady from which it is safest to maintain a distance — a grim architecture of benighted and failed idealism. Neither Nicholas Bloom nor Edward G. Goetz, academics and leading historians of the country’s public housing system, could recall the last time a presidential candidate made such an appearance. “It is really rare, and it’s a politically risky thing to do,” Mr. Bloom remarked to me. “The environment isn’t controlled, and if you go, you become urban identified.”

It is in one obvious sense a striking paradox, that in a country in which nearly two-thirds of the population live in cities, urbanism and particularly the problems of urban poverty receive so little attention during presidential election cycles. Catering to the urban underclass is hardly politically expedient, on one level because the poor vote in far fewer numbers than the affluent, and on another because poverty is not an obsession of people with money. A study released last fall by the Pew Research Center, which surveyed 1,504 people around the country, found that the “poor and needy” ranked 10th as a public policy priority, behind crime (despite the fact that it is at historic lows), the budget deficit and terrorism, which held first place.

Both candidates used their visits to pledge more federal funding to the country’s ailing public housing system, where more than one million people — approximately a third of them in New York City — reside. This is a promise whose execution would, of course, rely on a compliant Congress. In terms of immediate impact, though, the visits demonstrated the power of attention to beget engagement. In all three of the housing complexes visited by the two candidates, voter turnout rates increased significantly over those recorded during the 2008 presidential primary, even though residents then had the chance to cast a vote for the candidate who would be the first black president. Of the 466 registered Democrats living in the Howard Houses, 112 voted on Tuesday — a lower turnout rate than the one for Democrats citywide, which was 37 percent, but an increase over the 2008 figures, when only 81 voted. (These figures, calculated by the political consultancy Prime New York, also show Hillary Clinton having won all three housing developments.)

Even Franklin Delano Roosevelt, under whose administration the federal public housing system was born, had a certain hesitation about getting too close. It wasn’t until 1937, when liberals in New York pushed his administration to build by organizing mass rallies and housing exhibitions (as Mr. Bloom recounts in his book “Public Housing That Worked: New York in the Twentieth Century”), that the president finally acquiesced, having believed all along that Americans should own their own homes, “however modest,” as he put it. As early as 1963, Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller, a committed urbanist who held on to utopian ideas about renewal, began to back away from the idea of housing subsidies, saying in a speech to the New York State Women’s Legislative Forum that he was trying to get taxpayer money out of housing, and private capital into it, to create “an irrigation system, as you do getting water to an arid area.”

No matter what sort of fiscal innovations public housing officials conceive, the government spigot needs, in effect, to run. Now, at least, the conversation has been revived.


