


Mets third baseman David Wright walked onto the grass at Citi Field shortly after 4 p.m. on Tuesday, smiling, ready to take batting practice. Moments later, he was upset after being told by Manager Terry Collins that he was being scratched from the lineup, joining first baseman Lucas Duda on the bench for the opener of a three-game series against the first-place Washington Nationals.

“I went over and checked with him and he was not feeling well,” Collins said of Wright.

Collins added that Wright said he felt he had to play since Duda was also out.

“I just said I can’t do that to you,” Collins said he told Wright. “I can’t do that to us, the organization. You sacrificing yourself tonight could lead to a month, who knows how long of not being in our lineup.”

Wright, who has spinal stenosis, finally agreed. “It’s probably the right decision,” Wright said. “Just in the heat of the moment you want to play.”

Wright, who was used as a pinch-hitter Sunday in the Mets’ last game at Colorado, said the situation was frustrating.

“You never know how it’s going to feel waking up,” he said of his back.

Duda first complained of a stiff back during the weekend series with the Rockies and was examined on Monday. Collins said that Duda was still “pretty sore today.”

Duda most likely would have sat out Wednesday’s game against the left-hander Gio Gonzalez. Collins said he hoped an extra two days of rest would help Duda’s sore back.

Eric Campbell started at first base in place of Duda, while the rookie Matt Reynolds made his major league debut, replacing Wright. They both went 0 for 3.

After Chase Utley broke Ruben Tejada’s right leg with a hard slide in Game 2 of a National League division series against the Los Angeles Dodgers last season, Reynolds was summoned as a backup. He did not appear in any playoff games and was dropped from the World Series roster for Juan Uribe, who had been out with a chest injury.

Reynolds, 25, was a second-round pick in the 2012 draft. He was hitting .238 with two home runs at Class AAA Las Vegas.

MATZ MAY RETURN FRIDAY Steven Matz is scheduled to throw a side session on Wednesday, which would set him up to return Friday, after he missed his last start with a sore left elbow.

General Manager Sandy Alderson said that Matz was examined at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan and that “any issues that may have existed, we felt were addressed and not significant,” classifying Matz’s ailment as discomfort.

Alderson added that there had been an “abundance of caution” taken after Matz notified the team of the soreness, because of the location of the pain and the importance of pitching to the team’s success.

Alderson said that the Mets were still learning how to balance “being cautious and reasonable on the one hand and not necessarily overreacting at every opportunity.”

Alderson displayed that discipline when asked about the nagging issue of Jacob deGrom’s drop in velocity from last season, when he regularly hit the mid-90s on the radar gun. Alderson said deGrom was “pitching his tail off” and that sometimes too much was made of measurements like velocity. He also pointed to deGrom’s 2.50 earned run average.

Manager Terry Collins suggested that extra rest might be in store for deGrom and for Matt Harvey, who has more visibly struggled this season.

“Even though the other day he only gave up three or four hits, you could just tell he wasn’t putting guys away like he usually does, and neither is Matt,” Collins said of deGrom and Harvey. “Are those extra days helpful? They’ve got to be, because we just came out of a 17-day stretch where they pitched consistently and we didn’t see a big jump. Maybe it’s time for an extra day.”

REHABBING ON THE ROAD Two Mets on the 15-day disabled list are rehabbing away from the team.

Wilmer Flores, who has a strained left hamstring strain, is at the team’s complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla. Alderson said Flores was able to do some work “pain-free” on Tuesday.

Travis d’Arnaud is in California with what Alderson called d’Arnaud’s “off-season therapist/trainer” to address his strained right rotator cuff

When asked why d’Arnaud was not also in Florida, Alderson said, “I think that he’s more or less as well off out there with somebody that knows him as well as our guys would know him.”

Alderson later added that the club had to be “a little more generous in how we approach the next three or four weeks with Travis.”

In addition, Alderson said that Zack Wheeler, who is on the 60-day disabled list after having Tommy John surgery last year, was on target for a July 1 return, but that there was less cushion surrounding that date now than there was before he had a procedure in April to remove a stitch in his right elbow.

“If we went back to the beginning of spring training, I would have said that there was a little bit of fat in that schedule,” Alderson said. “I’d say right now, there’s not a lot of fat in that schedule.”


