


An Iranian refugee set fire to himself on Wednesday on a remote Pacific island where Australia sends people who try to reach its shores by sea, apparently to protest that policy and conditions on the island.

The man, 23, whose name was not released, was listed in critical condition, and officials on the island nation of Nauru said they had requested his immediate evacuation to Australia for treatment.

Nauru is one of two offshore locations where Australia sends people who have tried to reach the country by boat. That policy, which Australia says is meant to discourage migrants from attempting the dangerous voyage, has been criticized by the United Nations and by human rights groups.

A detention center at the other site, on Manus Island in Papua New Guinea, will be closed, that country’s prime minister, Peter O’Neill, said on Wednesday. Papua New Guinea’s Supreme Court had declared the center illegal the day before.

Mr. O’Neill said Papua New Guinea would “immediately ask the Australian government to make alternative arrangements for the asylum seekers.” But it was not clear what would happen to the more than 800 men now held on Manus Island. Australia’s immigration minister, Peter Dutton, said that none of them would be allowed to come to Australia.

“I can’t provide a definitive road map from here,” Australia’s prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, told reporters on Wednesday, the Australian Associated Press reported.

One possibility that has been raised for the Papua New Guinea detainees is to send them to Nauru, where more than 450 men, women and children are now being held. Last year, the detention center on Nauru was turned into an open camp, with refugees and asylum seekers free to move about the 8-square-mile island.

But conditions on Nauru remain difficult. The man who set himself on fire there Wednesday did so during a visit by officials from the United Nations refugee agency, in an apparent effort to draw attention to the plight of asylum seekers on the island.

Catherine Stubberfield, spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’ regional representation in Canberra, the Australian capital, said by email that the agency “remains seriously concerned about the grave mental health status of the asylum seekers and refugees.”

“Comprehensive measures are required as a matter of urgency to prevent further unnecessary suffering and address ongoing mental health deterioration,” she said.

The Nauru government said in a statement that it had invested “considerable time and money into services to assist the refugee community” and ensure people’s safety.

“Unfortunately we have seen protests like this during high-profile visits, as some from within the refugee community try and influence the Australian government’s offshore processing policies,” the statement said.

The self-immolation was captured on video, and still images showing a man in flames were published by Australian news outlets. “This is how tired we are,” the man said before setting himself on fire, The Sydney Morning Herald reported. “This action will prove how exhausted we are. I cannot take it anymore.”

Refugee advocates say that conditions at both offshore detention centers maintained by Australia are inhumane, but Australian leaders say the policy — including the refusal to let migrants settle in Australia — has led to a sharp decline in asylum seekers attempting dangerous boat journeys, which in past years have sometimes ended in mass drownings.

Efforts to resettle some of the detainees in third countries have seen little success. Just five were resettled in Cambodia under a $29 million agreement. Of those five, a man from Myanmar and a couple from Iran have returned home, The Guardian reported in March.

Papua New Guinea has offered to allow the detainees to resettle there, but thus far only a handful have accepted.

“It is up to the Australian government to bear responsibility for these people, given Australia is the country that transferred people to Papua New Guinea in the first place,” said Elaine Pearson, Australia director for Human Rights Watch. “It is clear after this human experiment has lasted three years that it is an abject failure. Out of 1,000 men, only six or seven have resettled in Papua New Guinea.”


