


Elizabeth Sherlock Lewis and Geoffrey Norris Tollett were married June 11 on the Atlantica, a chartered yacht, as it circled the Statue of Liberty. The Rev. Sharon K. Dittmar, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated.

The bride, 26, teaches ballet at Ballet School of Stamford in Connecticut, and is a classical ballet and contemporary dancer who is a member of Cherylyn Lavagnino Dance in New York and Thomas/Ortiz Dance in New Canaan, Conn. In April, she appeared in the role of the ballroom dancer in Donald Mahler’s “Cinderella” with New York Theater Ballet. She graduated from N.Y.U.

She is the daughter of Diane L. Sherlock of Weston, Mass., and Alfred B. Lewis of Newton, Mass., and the stepdaughter of Mary S. Troxell and of Michael J. Grusby. The bride’s father works in Newton and New York as the chief executive of Quizzify, an app based in New York that teaches employees about health care. Her mother is an independent television producer and the director of recruitment and communications at Cambridge School Volunteers, which provides one-to-one support for students from the Cambridge, Mass., public schools.

The bride’s stepmother is an associate professor of the practice of philosophy at Boston College, and her stepfather is the senior associate dean for academic affairs at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health in Boston.

Mr. Tollett, 31, is a vice president of Moelis & Company, an investment bank in New York, where he specializes in mergers and acquisitions. He graduated from Case Western Reserve.

He is the son of Carol Norris Schoner of Jackson Hole, Wyo., and Robin M. Tollett of Winter Park, Colo., and the stepson of E. Jane Tollett and of Philip J. Schoner, who are all engineers retired from Procter & Gamble in Cincinnati. The groom’s mother worked in the beauty care division; his father in the corporate engineering department; and the groom’s stepmother and stepfather worked in the paper division.

The couple met in March 2011 at an East Village bar.


