


Later this week, President Obama plans to visit a memorial in Hiroshima, Japan, that displays a large photograph of the city’s destruction seven decades ago. The striking image is typically identified as a mushroom cloud. But nuclear experts say it actually shows billowing smoke from a raging firestorm.

“This is not a mushroom cloud,” said Richard L. Garwin, a noted bomb designer and longtime adviser to Washington on nuclear arms.

Kevin Roark, a spokesman at the Los Alamos weapons laboratory in New Mexico, which made the Hiroshima bomb, known as Little Boy, said the image showed “a smoke plume from the fires that followed.”

Military experts say the cloud and its dark shadow can be seen as a kind of sundial that suggests when an American plane took the photograph. John Coster-Mullen, an expert on the Hiroshima bomb, put the time as just before noon — more than three hours after the strike on the morning of Aug. 6, 1945.

The towering plume, he said in an email, “is most definitely not the original mushroom cloud, which had long since dissipated.”

Mr. Roark said the cloud, if it were nuclear in nature, would be larger than the one resulting from the most powerful bomb the United States ever detonated, which was a thousand times stronger than Little Boy.

This is the most famous image of the Hiroshima mushroom cloud, which was taken minutes after the Enola Gay, a B-29 bomber, dropped the bomb that changed history. The photographer was the plane’s tail gunner, Bob Caron, a native of Brooklyn. The photograph he took shows the area near the ground beginning to boil with dark smoke.

“I saw fires springing up,” Mr. Caron once recalled. “Pretty soon, it was hard to see anything because of the smoke.”

Hiroshima was a tinderbox. Survivors said paper, wood, and blackout curtains burst into flames. The firestorm raged over miles.

After the war, the United States conducted more than 200 tests of nuclear devices in the atmosphere and carefully photographed their mushroom clouds. One of the most powerful was code-named Ivy Mike, pictured here.

“The Effects of Nuclear Weapons,” a federal guide, said the mushroom clouds typically reached their maximum heights in about 10 minutes and could linger “for about an hour or more before being dispersed by the winds.”

The first thing a visitor sees at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum is a large blowup of the towering cloud. It stretches floor to ceiling. Period lettering in its lower-right-hand corner identifies the scene as “Hiroshima (atomic) strike.” Otherwise, the image speaks for itself, a grim prelude to the museum’s tour of destruction.

The museum distributes the image to news agencies that give the photograph’s original source as the United States Army, which in 1945 ran the Air Force. Recently, The Associated Press called the image a mushroom cloud, as did a caption for the A.P. photograph accompanying an article in The New York Times about Mr. Obama’s impending visit.

So too, “The Making of the Atomic Bomb,” a 1986 book that received a Pulitzer, described the image as “the mushroom cloud over Hiroshima.”

Mr. Coster-Mullen, author of “Atom Bombs” and, in his youth, a photographer for the Daily News in Beloit, Wis., called the recurring misidentification a case of simple confusion.

“It’s dramatic,” he said of the photograph. “People compare it to the wimpy little mushroom cloud and say: ‘Let’s show this one. It’s really big.’”


