


When Gregory Porter was a young man beginning to find his way in the world — specifically, the part of the world known as Southern California — he often encountered reminders of the danger that flowed unseen around him. This wasn’t unusual for a 20-something African-American man built like an outside linebacker, the position Mr. Porter played on scholarship at San Diego State. In certain situations, his mere presence could produce a shifty unease, a tension he felt obliged to disarm.

“My brother used humor,” he said. “I used my voice.”

Mr. Porter, a singer-songwriter known for his rafters-raising baritone, was speaking in a Times Square hotel room a few months ago, on the eve of his third annual Valentine’s Day concert at Town Hall. “If I was walking behind a woman, or if I walked into a store,” he went on, “I would just sing some intelligent song. A criminal wouldn’t do that. Somebody who’s about to hit you over the head wouldn’t be singing ‘Waltz for Debby.’”

A powerful voice used to soothing effect: It’s an approach with special resonance for Mr. Porter as he rolls out his fourth album, “Take Me to the Alley.” Released on Friday on Blue Note, it features a dozen original songs with grown-up themes: social conscience, filial devotion, the solicitous work that helps sustain a lasting romance. It’s an assured, unflashy follow-up to “Liquid Spirit,” which won the 2014 Grammy Award for best jazz vocal album and has sold nearly a million copies worldwide.

With its deep confluence of jazz, gospel and soul, it’s a reassertion of core values after Mr. Porter’s breakout success in electronic dance music, thanks to “Holding On,” his collaboration with the British duo Disclosure last year, and a continuing rash of remixes by D.J.s and producers. “Liquid Spirit (Claptone Remix)” reached No. 1 on the Beatport Top 100, leading to the incongruous sight of Mr. Porter, in shorts and a golf polo, performing to a sea-breezy young crowd in Ibiza.

“Take Me to the Alley” opens with a version of “Holding On” that could be Mr. Porter’s own organic remix: easeful, acoustic, with a beat that’s more insinuated than declared. As a whole, the album contains some of his loveliest singing on record, rooted in the comfort of an artist who knows that his audience will lean in to him. The title track is a hymn of service and compassion largely inspired by the memory of his mother, a storefront minister.

Mr. Porter, 44, spends an enormous amount of time on the road — 200 shows last year, 270 the year before — and recently moved with his wife, Victoria, and 3-year-old son from Brooklyn to Bakersfield, Calif., where he spent his youth. “It’s a stone’s throw from where my mother had her churches,” he said. “I find that the closer I get to her energy, the truer I am to myself.”

Bakersfield was a crucible for Mr. Porter, who grew up in a close-knit African-American minority that had mostly migrated from the rural South. He experienced harrowing racism. “My brother got shot because he was walking in an all-white neighborhood,” he said. “Weekend after weekend, they would urinate in beer bottles and throw them through our windows. They threw pumpkins and watermelons through the windows. They burned a cross on the front yard.”

The image of a broken window crops up on Mr. Porter’s new album, but under strikingly different circumstances: “Break a window and let the sun in,” he sings in “Fan the Flames,” which he wrote on the road last year, after watching footage of protests in Ferguson, Mo. The song’s title turns out to be a head fake, as Mr. Porter urges a flare-up of nonviolence: “Stand up on your seat with your dirty feet/Raise your fist in the air — and be sweet.”

Mr. Porter has memorably sung about civil rights protests before — his song “1960 What?” is a soulful, righteous howl — but here, in a charged present tense, he ends up sounding like an admonishing elder. A fist raised in sweetness, which might seem quaint in the face of the Black Lives Matter movement, is nevertheless consistent with his ethic of magnanimous restraint.

Music always came naturally to Mr. Porter, but he took a roundabout path to pursuing it with any focus. After an injury sidelined his college football career, he worked odd jobs and sat in at local clubs, with guidance from a music mentor, the saxophonist and pianist Kamau Kenyatta. Mr. Porter also found a home in theater, appearing in “It Ain’t Nothin’ but the Blues,” a revue that ran on Broadway, and then developing a one-man show, “Nat King Cole & Me: A Musical Healing.”

He found his jazz footing in New York the old-fashioned way, becoming a fixture at uptown jam sessions. “Water,” his 2010 debut on the Motéma label, introduced him as both a commanding singer and (more unusually) an insightful songwriter. “There were strong suggestions from all corners that said, ‘Your first record should be standards,’” Mr. Porter recalled. “But the overwhelming energy of what I was feeling inside of me was what I wanted to say.”

Like one of his heroes, Bill Withers, Mr. Porter writes songs about family and everyday struggle, sketching a continuity. “Don’t Lose Your Steam,” from the new album, could be a behest from his mother and a message to his son. “Young man, I’m counting on you,” goes the refrain; in the music video, set in a barbershop, Mr. Porter bounces his son, Demyan, on one knee.

His overwhelming subject is love, in its myriad forms and stages. At Town Hall, after wishing the crowd a happy Valentine’s Day, he announced his intention to “celebrate love not only in a romantic sense, but also love for your brother or your neighborhood.” Later in the show, he noted that a couple who got engaged at last year’s concert was in the audience.

“I’m always lobbying for the irrepressible strength of love,” Mr. Porter said. That platform has been consistent, whether he’s singing at Buckingham Palace, as he did in 2014, or on an outdoor festival bill, as he will in the coming months. “This thing has gotten me out of trouble,” he added, referring to his voice. “And this sound that emanates from the church, or from work songs or field hollers, has found its way to so many places that I let it go where it’s going to go.”


