


The Finnish conductor John Storgards, 52, thrived at the Helsinki Philharmonic for seven seasons and has long appeared to acclaim with major orchestras in Europe. In America he’s conducted in St. Louis, Detroit, Atlanta and elsewhere.

His work is not well known in New York, however, which may explain the large number of empty seats for his debut with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday at David Geffen Hall. He had a major success, ending with a gripping and profound account of Sibelius’s Second Symphony.

In recent years, the Philharmonic has been too slow in introducing some exceptional conductors to its roster. The impressive Susanna Malkki, who succeeds Mr. Storgards at the Helsinki Philharmonic this year, made her overdue debut here only last spring.

But from the way they played for Mr. Storgards, the Philharmonic musicians seem to have a natural rapport with this technically adept and dynamic maestro. The program opened with a richly textured, vibrant account of Schumann’s impetuous overture to “Genoveva,” his only opera.

The soloist for six songs from Mahler’s “Des Knaben Wunderhorn” was to have been the bass-baritone Eric Owens, the Philharmonic’s artist in residence this season. But he withdrew on Tuesday, citing illness. The mezzo-soprano Michelle DeYoung, who excelled as Venus in Wagner’s “Tannhäuser” this season at the Metropolitan Opera, stepped in. It took a little time during the first song, “Revelge,” for her voice to warm up and gain its innate depth and power. But by the next one, “Trost im Unglück,” Ms. DeYoung sang with dusky sound and vivid character. Mr. Storgards brought exceptional transparency and crisp articulation to Mahler’s colorful orchestral music.

In a way, it’s a risk for a Finnish conductor to make an important debut with Sibelius’s Second, the best-known Finnish symphony, completed in 1902. The final four of the composer’s seven symphonies are such visionary, unconventional works that the familiar Second can seem bucolic and accessible by contrast. This revelatory performance was a reminder of how strange, elusive and full of stark contradictions this score actually is.

All of the rustic beauties in the piece came through vividly, from the warm way the strings played the series of opening chords in the first movement to the brassy fanfare flourishes of the finale. But in passage after passage, Mr. Storgards emphasized the discontinuities and jarring turns of the music, as well as the piercing shards of dissonance that Sibelius folds into his deceptively sonorous harmonic language.

Yet there was no sense of manipulation about the interpretation. Nothing was oversold or pumped up. The Philharmonic sounded sensational. During the standing ovation, the players clapped along with the audience every time Mr. Storgards took a bow.


