


A 23-year-old man has been charged with murder in the death of a top aide in the Cuomo administration who was fatally shot last year in the crossfire between dueling gangs during a celebration before a popular Caribbean festival in Brooklyn, law enforcement officials said on Friday.

The man, Micah Alleyne, who lives in a homeless shelter in Jamaica, Queens, was arraigned in Brooklyn Criminal Court and ordered held in custody, according to the Brooklyn district attorney’s office. The police initially said Mr. Alleyne was 25.

The police said that witnesses and Mr. Alleyne’s own statements helped to identify him as one of several gunmen who had engaged in “mutual combat” with multiple firearms on Sept. 7, 2015, with one of the bullets striking and killing the Cuomo administration aide, Carey W. Gabay, according to a criminal complaint. Mr. Alleyne was arrested early on Thursday at the 71st Precinct station in Brooklyn and charged with murder, criminal possession of a firearm and reckless endangerment.

Mr. Gabay’s death resonated far beyond New York, with many seeing it as the senseless killing of a man whose life embodied a time-honored version of the American success story: a son of immigrants who grew up in public housing, earned an Ivy League education and dedicated himself to public service.

Mr. Gabay, 43, was the first deputy counsel for the Empire State Development Corporation, the state’s chief economic development agency. He was walking home early last Labor Day from J’ouvert, a predawn celebration that precedes the annual West Indian American Day Parade, when a gunfight broke out between rival gangs. He was shot in the head as he sought cover behind a car and died on Sept. 16.

Mr. Gabay’s relatives reacted to the arrest by praising the police and the district attorney. “Our family is still grieving Carey’s loss but we are encouraged that the justice process is finally moving forward,” the family said in a statement. “We remain thankful to all those who continue to support us during this difficult time.”

Mr. Gabay’s death prompted Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who delivered his eulogy, to reassert himself in the debate over gun violence.

“Today’s arrest is a major step forward in the pursuit of justice for Carey’s family and loved ones,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement on Friday. “I commend the investigators and prosecutors for their tireless efforts to ensure those responsible for Carey’s death are held fully accountable for their actions.”

The police said they were still seeking two men and a woman in Mr. Gabay’s killing.

Mr. Alleyne was previously arrested on assault charges in April 2015. The police said he punched a 21-year-old woman in the face in October 2014, leaving her with a split lip. The disposition of that case could not be determined because it is sealed.

“As I have said from the beginning, we are determined to get justice for Mr. Gabay and his family,” Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, said in a statement. “And we will continue to press forward until we hold everyone responsible for his death accountable.”

Another man, Denentro Josiah, 19, was fatally stabbed earlier the same day during the festivities. His killing is unsolved.

Mr. Alleyne has been living at the Lincoln Motor Inn, a motel in Queens that is used by New York City to house homeless families that can not be accommodated in city shelters. Living there with him were his 2-year-old daughter, Skyla, and her mother, Tasha Morgan, other residents said.

Mr. Alleyne recently graduated from a phlebotomy program and had worked as a health aide, other shelter residents said. A woman who described herself as a close friend of Ms. Morgan’s said Mr. Alleyne had started “bugging out” after seeing a grainy surveillance photo of one of the shooting suspects in Mr. Gabay’s killing.

The woman, who declined to provide her name because she feared retaliation by friends of Mr. Alleyne, said that after the shooting, Ms. Morgan showed signs of great stress, crying often and losing considerable weight. “She did a lot of crying about it, she didn’t know what’s going on,” the woman said, adding, “She lay beside him in bed at night like, ‘I don’t know who you are.’”

In the wake of the shooting, Mr. Gabay was remembered as a dedicated public servant whose drive had propelled him to overcome challenging circumstances.

His parents were Jamaican immigrants, and he was raised in the Boston Secor Houses, a public-housing complex in the Bronx. He went to Harvard, where he studied government and was elected student government president in his senior year. After graduation, he attended Harvard Law School. After getting his law degree, he worked at several firms in New York, specializing in corporate finance law.

He became an assistant counsel to Mr. Cuomo in 2011, and was appointed in January 2015 as first deputy counsel for the development corporation.

He married his wife, Trenelle, a hair and makeup artist, in 2012, in Brooklyn. They settled in the borough’s Clinton Hill neighborhood and worshiped at the Emmanuel Baptist Church, where Mr. Cuomo delivered a forceful rebuke of gun violence at Mr. Gabay’s funeral.

“The violence has become so brutal, so aimless,” he said, “that the most innocent can be struck down anytime, anywhere.”


