


I always knew I wanted to try alcohol. It represented independence and sophistication. It was about breaking the rules and having fun, and as a teenager, I wanted nothing else. But I had never even seen alcohol in real life. I had only seen a photo of an alcoholic drink in a frayed photo album: It was of my father, with a big smile on his face, in a cabaret in Tehran before the revolution.

By the time I was born, long after the establishment of the Islamic republic in Iran and the prohibition of alcohol, my father had joined the Iranian military, and it was impossible to have alcohol in our home. So it wasn’t until I was 19 and in school at the University of Tehran that I had my first drink.

At the university, it seemed to me that most of the students there had already started drinking. And in that typical way of a teenager, I felt left out. I knew I wanted to drink; I just didn’t know how it would happen. I wasn’t friends with the students who could freely drink at home with their parents, and I hadn’t yet been invited to the house parties where alcohol was served.

Then one spring day, my boyfriend, A., asked me if I wanted to drink with him. I was very much in love with him and didn’t want him to think I was naïve, so I tried to act casual when I said yes.

“Great!” he said, promising to bring something to school the next week.

“At the university?” I asked him in disbelief.

But it made sense. A. didn’t have his own place, and our parents wouldn’t have allowed us to have each other over (throughout our five-year relationship, my parents never knew he existed). Like many couples of our generation in Iran, we struggled to find time alone. The university was the only place we could be together for long periods. A. said we would find a place to drink together in the park next to our main building, where my girlfriends and I often hid to smoke cigarettes.

Even though I tried to act cool, I worried about handling the effects of alcohol. I was scared that the university guards would catch us and that we’d be expelled, maybe much worse — a lashing is the punishment under Islamic law. And yet there was something about being at the university, with all those rules, that made such brashly illegal acts so very desirable.

One day the next week, A. whispered to me with a big smile that he had it. He told me to meet him at 3 in the afternoon. I had butterflies all morning and couldn’t concentrate in any of my classes. We met up and walked to the park next to the university. After we found a secluded bench far from the guards, A. pulled out a Sprite bottle from his book bag; he had filled it with moonshine in the dorm­itory the night before. The men’s dorm was always less strict than ours. They weren’t checked by the guards at the doors, so they smuggled in alcohol, cigarettes, weed, hash, opium, anything you can imagine. It was safer to drink and do drugs there because no one would tell the guards. But women were checked when they entered their dorms, and my hall mates ­constantly ratted out my friends and me just for smoking cigarettes.

A. pulled out a disposable cup and poured. He took a few sips before offering it to me. I kept looking around to make sure no guards were walking by. I nervously took a very small sip and then waited. I thought something would happen to me right away. But nothing did, and so I drank a bit more. I took an even bigger gulp, until A. told me to slow down. By that point, I knew he had figured out that this was my first time.

We drank the bottle together that afternoon, and we had a blast. We joked and told each other stories until the guards told us with sour faces to leave so they could close the university gates. We were so tipsy and in such a good mood that we didn’t even mind their bad attitude. A. often snapped back at the guards — he hated how stern they were with all of us — but he laughed that day, throwing his arms up triumphantly and saying: “Take it easy, man. It’s not that serious. We’re leaving.” I leaned into him, resting my head on his shoulder, and we went off arm in arm as if nothing were amiss.

After giggling all the way to our usual spot to get something to eat, A. walked me back to my dorm before our curfew at 9. A block away, he squeezed my hand and gave me a wink. Looking back on it now, I know that we didn’t even have that much to drink, but I felt so lightheaded and giddy and free.

After that, A. brought alcohol to campus a few more times, and I befriended a classmate who had her own apartment and great parties with lots of alcohol. But that first time is etched in my memory — doing it in such a public way on the university grounds. I would never do that today. I was much less fearful then.


