


Agents posing online as young girls and women helped lead investigators in Tennessee to the arrests of nearly three dozen people, including two ministers, this month, part of an intensified yearlong effort to combat prostitution and human trafficking in minors.

The two ministers had responded to ads on backpage.com, a website often used to solicit sex partners, placed by what they believed to be a 15-year-old girl, and were charged with felony human trafficking and prostitution, the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation said in a statement issued last Friday.

In addition, 25 men were arrested on charges of promoting prostitution, a felony, or patronizing a prostitute, which is a misdemeanor. Five women were cited for prostitution, the statement said.

This sting, called “Operation Someone Like Me,” was the fifth effort of its kind since Gov. Bill Haslam signed legislation into law in May 2015 giving jurisdiction over trafficking cases to Tennessee’s bureau of investigation. The 32 arrested this month represent the largest group yet, an assistant special agent in charge, Margie Quin, said on Thursday.

The operation was conducted mostly in the northern and eastern regions of the state, including in Knoxville and Chattanooga, and in one instance included investigators from Georgia.

The operation’s name, “Someone Like Me”, was borrowed from the words of an 18-year old woman who had become a victim of a prostitution ring, a 15-year old runaway, Agent Quin said. The young woman went on to help agents prepare for their work by teaching them the language of the online sex trade.

“For an hour we talked with her in minute detail; how they end up agreeing to meet, the slang,” Agent Quin said. At the end of the training conference call, the agents thanked her. After a silence, according to the agent, she said: “No, thank you: You don’t know what it means to someone like me that the T.B.I. is willing to go out and rescue these girls.”

The operation took place between May 17 and 20, when agents investigated, posted and answered online advertisements related to commercial sex, Ms. Quin said. More than 300 contacts were made during that period, and 30 people were arrested.

One of the agents posted ads pretending to be 15 years old. Two dozen people replied, but just two men were arrested on felony trafficking charges, Jason Kennedy, 46, and Zubin Parakh, 32, the T.B.I. statement said.

This was because Mr. Kennedy, a youth minister at Grace Baptist Church, and Mr. Parakh, whom Agent Quin said was a volunteer minister who was training to be a pastor, followed through in separate instances by going to a hotel where they assumed they would find the teenager, but were met by agents instead, Agent Quin said.

“Finding these people who are trying to buy Tennessee children is a priority for us,” Mark Gwyn, the bureau’s director, said in the statement. “We want anyone responding to these ads to think there may be a T.B.I. Agent on the other end of it.”

Ms. Quin said Mr. Kennedy was in the Knoxville County jail on Thursday and Mr. Parakh was free on bond. It was not immediately clear when their court appearances were scheduled or whether they had lawyers.

Mr. Parakh, who was affiliated with the Lifehouse Church in Oak Ridge, had initially been cited for patronizing prostitution, The Knoxville News Sentinel reported. The charges were upgraded to a felony warrant for trafficking after he was released, it said.


