


Shayndi Raice, a daughter of Dr. Deborah Raice Fox of Suffern, N.Y., and Pinchus D. Raice of Manhattan, is to be married May 29 to Dov Weiss, the son of Toby Hilsenrad Weiss and Rabbi Avi Weiss of Riverdale, the Bronx. The groom's father is to lead the ceremony at the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale, a synagogue in the Bronx.

The couple graduated from Yeshiva University, he cum laude.They also received master’s degrees in modern Jewish history, and he a rabbinical ordination.

Ms. Raice, 34, who will keep her name, works in Chicago as a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, covering the Federal Reserve and the United States economy. She received master’s degrees in journalism and politics from Columbia.

Her father is a partner in the Manhattan law firm Pryor Cashman, where he oversees its financial-institutions practice. The bride’s mother is an endocrinologist at Endocrine Associates of Rockland, a group practice in Pomona, N.Y.

Mr. Weiss, 43, is an assistant professor of Jewish thought at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. His book, “Pious Irreverence: Confronting God in Rabbinic Judaism,” is to be published by the University of Pennsylvania this fall. He received a Ph.D. with distinction in the history of Judaism from the University of Chicago Divinity School.

His mother retired as the director of alumni affairs at Yeshiva University. The groom’s father is the founding rabbi of the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale, from which he retired as the senior rabbi and continues as the rabbi-in-residence. He also founded Yeshivat Chovevei Torah, an Orthodox rabbinical school for men, as well as Yeshivat Maharat, an Orthodox rabbinical school that ordains women, both in the Bronx.

In 1999, Ms. Raice said she noticed Mr. Weiss, then a rabbinical student, playing guitar during the Jewish holiday Sukkot, with a rabbi who taught at her high school, at one of the school’s events. She became infatuated with him from afar, but romance would wait until 2015, when a mutual friend set them up on a date.


