


While some people consider grilling over charcoal to be cumbersome, we love every part of it. To us, it’s like an old friend who demands a certain measure of care and attention.

We enjoy not just the end result (to our taste, it beats out anything cooked over gas), but also the whole process. We like building the fire; we like positioning the lighted coals to direct the heat; we like maneuvering the food around the grill. We even get some perverse pleasure from cleaning out the ashes.

So it always seems a shame that a lot of the grilling fire’s power goes to waste. Even if you are industrious and grill some potatoes or corn for a side dish at the same time as your chops or steak, there’s still plenty of heat left after all that cooking is done. The coals just sadly burn out as you eat, and that’s no way to treat a friend.

It doesn’t have to be that way. You can use the heat of a waning fire to supply your pantry for the week to come. Just put a couple of ingredients on the grill as you take your dinner off and let them cook until you feel like coming back and harvesting them.

The general idea is to get a little char on the food over the remaining coals, then move it off to the side and let it cook slow and low. The best choices are items that only get better as they become more tender, so you don’t have to worry about overcooking. You also want food that can last for several days in the refrigerator without a loss of flavor or texture.

There are many ingredients that fill this particular bill. Bell peppers, eggplants and tomatoes are all good choices; they can spend a long time over low heat without suffering, and their uses are many.

But we are fans of bold flavors, so our favorites for this approach are citrus, chiles and onions.

Thin slices of lemon work fine on the grill, but we prefer to halve them for this technique. The lemons are ready when they have some good char on the cut surfaces (black stripes are good here, not bad) and have softened enough to collapse easily when gently squeezed with tongs. The lemon juice adds a warm, subtle smokiness to chimichurri, the all-purpose Argentine green sauce.

Grilled in the same fashion, smoky limes have an even more distinctive flavor than lemons. We are partial to the sharp smokiness their juice adds to a Vietnamese-style dipping sauce.

There are many possible options for the chiles, but we tend to use jalapeños because they are large enough to handle easily on the grill.

When it comes to onions, the slightly sweeter red ones are our choice. Sliced into rings about a half-inch thick, they can just be plunked directly onto the grill, if you are particularly handy at flipping things with tongs. Less dexterous grillers can simply slide a skewer through the onions horizontally to keep the rings together. After grilling, roughly chop the onions and make yourself smoky barbecue-flavored chutney.

But you get the point: Respect the fire, and it will in turn reward you with livelier dinners later in the week. This, as Humphrey Bogart might have said, could be the beginning of a beautiful friendship.

Recipes: Barbecue Red Onion Chutney | Smoky Lime-Chile Dipping Sauce | Smoky Chimichurri | How to Grill


