


JERUSALEM — In a sharp turnaround, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu sought on Wednesday to bring the ultranationalist Yisrael Beiteinu party into his governing coalition by offering to name its leader, Avigdor Lieberman, defense minister, according to politicians across Israel’s political map.

An Israeli government official confirmed that Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Lieberman had met and formed negotiating teams with the aim of reaching a coalition deal “in the coming days.”

Just hours before meeting Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Netanyahu seemed to have been closing in on a coalition agreement with Isaac Herzog, the leader of the center-left Zionist Union and the head of the opposition in the Knesset, or Israeli parliament. After days of intense back-room negotiations, Mr. Herzog, whose party advocates accommodation with the Palestinians, had been expected to serve as foreign minister, an appointment that was partly intended to ease international pressure on Israel.

By contrast, Mr. Lieberman, 57, foreign minister in two previous governments led by Mr. Netanyahu, is known as a blunt-talking, polarizing figure. He demands the death penalty for Palestinians convicted of acts of terrorism; has called in the past for the toppling of Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls Gaza; and once suggested that Israel could bomb the Aswan Dam in any future military confrontation with Egypt. Israel signed a peace treaty with Egypt in 1979.

Benny Begin, a legislator from Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud party, told Israel’s Channel 2 television that the idea of Mr. Lieberman’s serving as defense minister was “delusional.” He said, “This step expresses irresponsibility towards the security establishment and towards all the citizens of Israel.”

Mr. Netanyahu has been seeking to stabilize and strengthen his governing coalition, which is dominated by right-wing and religious parties, because it currently holds a majority of only one in the 120-seat Knesset. The addition of Yisrael Beiteinu would give Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition 67 seats.

The Israeli government official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the delicate coalition negotiations publicly, asserted that Mr. Lieberman’s joining the government could advance prospects for peace with the Palestinians.

The official noted that Mr. Lieberman, who immigrated to Israel from the Soviet Union in the 1970s and lives in a West Bank settlement, had voiced support for a Palestinian state and that a right-wing government would have more credibility with the Israeli public to take difficult steps for peace without fear of compromising Israel’s security. He noted that it was Menachem Begin, the former Likud leader (and father of the current legislator) who made peace with Egypt in the 1970s.

But Mr. Lieberman has been scathing in his criticism of President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority. He has called for the ouster of Mr. Abbas and denounced his campaign for upgraded Palestinian status at the United Nations as “diplomatic terrorism.” He has also called for reducing Israel’s Arab population by transferring Arab areas of Israel to Palestinian control.

If he becomes defense minister, Mr. Lieberman will replace Moshe Yaalon, a Likud politician and former chief of staff of the Israeli military.

Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition zigzag has left Mr. Herzog’s Zionist Union, an alliance of the Labor Party and Tzipi Livni’s centrist Hatnua, in turmoil. A leading Labor rival, Shelly Yacimovich, who has been vocal in her opposition to joining the Netanyahu coalition, accused Mr. Herzog of shaming the party by pursuing a deal.

Mr. Herzog said he had ceased negotiating with Mr. Netanyahu late Tuesday night after reaching a dead end. He added that Ms. Yacimovich, by openly opposing an accord, should be held responsible for Mr. Lieberman’s becoming defense minister.

Finding himself on the defensive, Mr. Herzog held two news conferences on Wednesday. In the second, he rebuffed calls in his party to resign as Labor leader.

Mr. Lieberman, who was acquitted in a longstanding corruption case in 2013, has been an ally and a fierce critic of Mr. Netanyahu.

Their parties ran together in the 2013 elections but separately in 2015. Yisrael Beiteinu shrank to six seats in the Knesset from a high of 15 in 2009. At the height of coalition talks a year ago, Mr. Lieberman shocked the political establishment by announcing that he would not join the new government, saying he was choosing principles over ministerial portfolios.

The change came suddenly on Wednesday when Mr. Lieberman, speaking to reporters at noon, challenged Mr. Netanyahu to make him a serious offer to join the coalition. “The prime minister knows my phone numbers,” he said.

The prime minister and Mr. Lieberman met at 4 p.m.


