


For decades, the weekly call-in radio show with the mayor was a New York City tradition. It provided a chance for Sal from Brooklyn or anyone else from the five boroughs to get on the line directly with the city’s chief executive, and for the mayor at the time to reveal, inadvertently or deliberately, his personality and style of thinking.

But whereas his predecessors Rudolph W. Giuliani and Michael R. Bloomberg took calls throughout their terms, Mayor Bill de Blasio chose not to take up the mantle when he came to office in 2014, preferring, his aides say, to focus on deeds rather than words.

That changed on Friday. Even as Mr. de Blasio said that “the ultimate form of communications is action,” he began the first of what he said would be a weekly call-in segment with Brian Lehrer on the public radio station WNYC.

The about-face, which was not announced until Mr. de Blasio joined Mr. Lehrer on the air on Friday at 10 a.m., came the day after the mayor’s press secretary, Karen Hinton, publicly acknowledged that she would be resigning from her post next month amid investigations, negative headlines and struggles in the City Hall press operation.

“This comes at a tricky time for you,” Mr. Lehrer observed at the start of the show, referring to the impending departure of Ms. Hinton. “To be transparent to the listeners, we had offered this invitation at the beginning of your administration, and your team didn’t want it then.”

Mr. de Blasio, who called into the show, appeared intent on presenting himself as his own best spokesman. “I’m going to be doing lots of things to communicate directly to my fellow New Yorkers,” he said.

In recent weeks, the mayor has been a regular on the radio and, last month, began a quarterly television appearance on WNBC-TV, responding to pretaped questions from New Yorkers. The television program, and the radio appearances with Mr. Lehrer, have both been titled “Ask the Mayor.”

Mr. Lehrer, in an interview after the show, said Ms. Hinton approached his staff on Thursday about a regular appearance by the mayor; details were made final by early Friday. “It happened very quickly after the idea was floated,” he said.

Ms. Hinton said the mayor decided to do the weekly show a few days ago, adding that he and Mr. Lehrer have “a good rapport.”

Over the course of his two terms, Mr. Giuliani logged about 55 hours sparring with callers on his Friday show, “Live from City Hall … With Rudy Giuliani.” His often unbridled and occasionally insulting conversations with New Yorkers — “your excessive concern for weasels is a sign of something wrong in your personality,” he told one repeat caller — came to symbolize Mr. Giuliani’s brashness. Mr. Bloomberg, during his tenure, would join the radio host John Gambling to take calls, also on Friday mornings.

“The archetype is La Guardia reading the funny pages into the radio during the newspaper strike,” said Stu Loeser, a longtime spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg and a media consultant, referring to former Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia. “Like it or not, people expect their mayor to be in their face.”

Mr. de Blasio, speaking with Mr. Lehrer on Friday, dismissed the notion that his decision to make the weekly appearance was an effort by City Hall to improve its public relations. “Insiders may want to characterize, you know, the communications strategy,” he said. “But I think the people are receiving the realities of our policies.”

The 30-minute segment included a question on the City Council’s passage of a bill, supported by Mr. de Blasio, requiring stores to begin charging 5 cents per plastic or paper bag.

“Mayor, the bags that you’re talking about charging for, those bags get recycled, we use them in our garbage,” said the caller, identified as Mel in the Bronx. “And if we don’t have those bags for the garbage, we’re going to buy them.”

Mr. de Blasio acknowledged that was a “fair statement to say,” but he also took time to describe the environmental reasoning behind the bill. “Well, Mel, I appreciate the question, I would argue it a little differently,” he said.


