


Anna Karina was only 19 years old when she met the director Jean-Luc Godard. In the two years since she had moved to Paris from Copenhagen, where she was born, Karina had gone from being penniless on the streets to an in-demand model. After Godard cast her in “Le Petit Soldat,” she quickly became an emblem of the French New Wave through her performances in Godard’s films — and also his wife and muse. Their relationship was, by all accounts, tumultuous, and they divorced in 1965. But the films, and especially Karina’s performances, have only gained in esteem over time. “I could be their grandmother,” she says with a smile about the fans that still approach her. In a recent conversation before an event in her honor at the Brooklyn Academy of Music earlier this week (she’ll also appear at Film Forum tomorrow to kick off a series dedicated to her work with Godard), Karina talked about her early days modeling, how she got her name and the pleasure and pain of her time with Godard.

How did you first get into modeling?

I went to Paris when I was 17 and would sit in a cafe called Les Deux Magots, in the Latin Quarter. I spoke English, but not a word of French. This lady came up to me and said, “Do you want to do some fashion pictures?” I was scared. I told her that if she came with a lot of people, I would do it. Maybe I was naïve, but being naïve can help once in awhile. Those pictures were for a newspaper called Jours de France, and I needed the money. But they couldn’t pay me until they were published, so I took copies of the pictures and went by foot — in white high heels that were dirty because I didn’t have another pair — to Elle magazine. Soon after, I got the cover of Elle, and suddenly everyone wanted me, like a miracle.

How did you get the name Anna Karina?

When I was doing a shoot for Elle, I was telling the makeup lady that I wanted to be an actress. Suddenly, this other lady comes into the room that looked very smart, with a big hat and a cigarette in her mouth. She heard me say I wanted to be an actress and said, “What’s your name?” I said, “Hanne Karin Bayer.” She said, “You should call yourself Anna Karina.” It was Coco Chanel. I only knew her from the perfume.

How did you meet Godard?

I got a telegram asking to do a part in “Breathless.” But he told me I needed to take my clothes off. So I said to this strange person with dark glasses — nobody was wearing dark glasses like that at the time — that I wouldn’t do it. Three or four months later I got another telegram; this time he said wanted me to play the main part in a film. I showed it to some of my friends, they said: “Godard! You have to see him!” I thought, “The strange guy with the dark glasses?”

What was your working relationship like?

It was always the same thing — no script, dialogue at the last minute. Everyone always thought we just said anything we wanted. It’s difficult to explain — some actors want to know why they have to do this and that. It was so simple and natural with Godard.

You’ve said that working on “Band of Outsiders” saved your life.

It’s a long and sad story. Godard and I got married because I got pregnant. Then I lost the child and they couldn’t do anything about it. So I went to a kind of, not a crazy house, but a place where you have to relax. I hated it. One day Godard came and got me out because I had tried to commit suicide. He said, “I’m doing a new film and you’re going to play the lead. It’s called ‘Band of Outsiders.’” It was then that I came alive.

Despite the hardships, do you have fond memories of that period?

We never thought the films would be so famous for so long. We were just happy to do things. It was more bohemian. We knew we were doing something we liked and it was not like everyone else. It was a happy world.


