


Priorities USA Action, the main “super PAC” supporting Hillary Clinton, raised $8.6 million in April, the group said on Friday, bringing the total it has raised to more than $76 million.

The group has about $47 million on hand, much of which will be used to savage Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, with negative ads that will not stop until Election Day.

The prospect of a grueling campaign against Mr. Trump has helped the group break its fund-raising records and bring in more money than it did in 2012 to help President Obama win re-election against Mitt Romney. Donors have pledged an additional $45 million in future donations, signaling that the race to defeat Mr. Trump will continue to be exceedingly well funded.

The group started running ads this week in Ohio, Florida, Virginia and Nevada, which attempt to use Mr. Trump’s previous statements about women against him. But Guy Cecil, the group’s chief strategist, has said it plans to expand its lines of attack to Mr. Trump’s business record, in an effort to portray him as out of touch with the working-class Americans who form a large base of his support.

Outside groups have only begun to raise money for Mr. Trump, and he has not officially blessed any of these operations. Great America PAC reported Friday that it had no debt last month and had raised more than $1 million. “For the sake of our children and grandchildren, Hillary Clinton most not be allowed to take our nation in a dangerous direction,” Stanley Hubbard, a businessman supporting the group, said in a statement.

Mr. Cecil said those Republican efforts prompted Priorities to move quickly to make its case against Mr. Trump. “As Republican special interests begin to coalesce around their nominee, our continued fund-raising success is crucial to our efforts to take the fight to Trump from now until November,” he said.

The Clinton campaign cannot directly coordinate with Priorities, but it is relying on the outside group to attack Mr. Trump so that Mrs. Clinton can try to avoid directly delivering the negative message. In 2012, the group adeptly crafted an early — and effective — narrative that highlighted some of Mr. Romney’s dealings at Bain Capital to make economically struggling voters believe the Republican nominee was a cold corporate titan.


