


ALBANY — State lawmakers were assembling the skeleton of a long-awaited deal on a number of issues on Thursday evening, including a one-year extension of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s control of New York City schools and an ethics reform measure that would strip state pensions from elected officials convicted of a felony.

A final announcement seemed just out of reach as the Legislature settled in for a late night on Thursday, the last official day of the 2016 legislative calendar, and lawmakers were told to return on Friday for a final gallop of votes.

Still, the silhouette of the package started to appear on Thursday, with lawmakers in serious discussions about supplying extra funding for the State University of New York and the City University of New York and releasing millions in state money for supportive housing for the homeless.

The chairman of the Assembly Committee on Racing and Wagering, J. Gary Pretlow, a Democrat from Mount Vernon, announced on Thursday that there would be a vote on a bill to legalize daily fantasy sports, the multibillion-dollar sports-betting industry that was bulldozed from New York last year after the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, ordered its two largest purveyors, DraftKings and FanDuel, to stop operating. It was unclear how Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, would receive the proposal, though its sponsor in the State Senate, John J. Bonacic, a Hudson Valley Republican, said late on Thursday that the governor’s office had reviewed it and suggested changes that were incorporated.

A few once-promising items seemed to have lost their momentum in the closing days of the session. A proposal to bring ride-hailing apps like Uber and Lyft to upstate New York, though popular, was snarled on an insurance issue. Supporters of a bill that would require schools to test for lead in water were trying to overcome the concerns of a single assemblywoman, Catherine T. Nolan, a Democrat from Queens who is chairwoman of the Committee on Education. But the Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, a Bronx Democrat, said his chamber would pass it if the Senate did.

For a state capitol that began the legislative session shellshocked by the convictions on corruption charges of two of its most powerful leaders, Sheldon Silver and Dean G. Skelos, the most significant action was perhaps the pension-forfeiture measure, which had fizzled last year. The Assembly passed a resolution approving pension forfeiture late Thursday, and the Senate was expected to follow suit on Friday.

Yet the ethics deal was also conspicuous for its gaps: Despite discussions early in the session about more ambitious reforms that would limit the income legislators could make from other jobs or even transform the Legislature into a full-time institution, lawmakers could ultimately muster agreement only on what many described as a no-brainer. More than 30 New York elected officials have been forced to leave the Legislature after corruption scandals or other misconduct since 2000.

With the major reforms he had proposed struggling to make it out of theoretical territory, Mr. Cuomo suggested a more manageable campaign finance measure that would tighten rules surrounding independent expenditure committees. He was still pushing for it on Thursday evening.

The Republican-led Senate approved a broad version of pension forfeiture last year, only for it to wither in the Democrat-dominated Assembly, where some have worried that it could affect members of public-employee unions as well as elected officials.

In order to become a constitutional amendment, the resolution must pass both houses this year and after a new Legislature is seated next year. It must then be approved by the voters.

The Legislature’s workweek — which began on Tuesday, because the Jewish holiday Shavuot fell on Monday — was preceded by a symbolic lowering of expectations from the governor’s office, which issued a letter to lawmakers with six end-of-session priorities.

While his administration can claim several major accomplishments from the session, including raising the minimum wage and establishing paid family leave, the scope of Mr. Cuomo’s end-of-session wish list seemed somewhat diminished next to the vision he outlined at his State of the State address in January, which included nearly 150 proposals.

Mr. Cuomo seemed to anticipate this unfavorable comparison in his letter. “With all we have done, we have more to do,” he wrote.

“As the old skeptic’s adage goes, ‘That’s great, but what have you done for me lately?’” he continued. “We can’t rest on our laurels.”

The deals he and the legislative leaders struck earlier this week included a package of efforts to combat opioid and heroin addiction, a growing scourge across the state; a push to expand access to mammograms and other methods of breast-cancer detection; and an agreement on improving safety at rail crossings, which carried all the political excitement of, well, rail crossings.

A fourth effort enjoyed even broader public support: a measure, called the “brunch bill” that would let restaurants and bars serve alcohol at 10 a.m. on Sundays, two hours earlier than is currently allowed.

Watchdogs, however, fumed that precious time had been spent debating mimosas instead of ethics reforms.

But there was much else for lawmakers to consider.

Advocates for the homeless were urging the governor and legislative leaders to sign an agreement that would release millions of dollars in state funding for 20,000 supportive-housing units statewide, saying that with lawmakers headed home to campaign for re-election this fall, there was little chance that the deal would materialize after the session ended.

Though lawmakers had also promised to revisit an expired tax break, known as 421-a, that was supposed to spur affordable-housing development in New York City, it, too, seemed to be languishing in the end-of-session rush.


