


FRONT PAGE

The About New York column on Friday, about the way in which the Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan, who died last week at 94, focused his life on deeds rather than worldly possessions, misstated his date of birth in some copies. He was born on May 9, 1921 — not on May 7.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on April 7 about revelations that at least three of the seven people on the Chinese Communist Party’s most powerful committee have relatives who have controlled secretive offshore companies gave an outdated title for Liu Lefei, whose wife was once a shareholder and director of a company registered in the British Virgin Islands, and whose father, Liu Yunshan, is a member of the committee. Although the younger Mr. Liu heads one of China’s leading private equity firms, he is no longer a vice chairman of Citic Securities.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Tuesday about the gala at the Metropolitan Museum of Art misidentified the entity that organized the exhibit about fashion in an age of technology. It is the Costume Institute, not the Anna Wintour Costume Center. The article also misstated Andrew Bolton’s title. He is head curator of the institute, not of the museum. Because of an editing error, the article misspelled, in some copies, the given name of the person who designed Madonna’s dress on first reference. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, he is Riccardo Tisci, not Ricardo.

WEEKEND

A picture caption on Friday with an art review of Frieze New York, on Randalls Island in Manhattan, misstated the given name of an artist. He is François Morellet, not Nancy François Morellet.

•

The Friday File on Friday, about an invitation from Fidel Castro to American tourists and businessmen in 1959 to visit Cuba and a subsequent New York Times article about American tourists there, referred incorrectly to the reporter who wrote that article, R. Hart Phillips. The reporter was a woman, and thus Ms. Phillips, not Mr.

SPECIAL SECTION: MEN’S STYLE

An article on Friday about recent changes made to the classic Brooks Brothers button-down shirt, including a more tapered fit — and not one tailored to the torso of the Tin Man in “The Wizard of Oz” — misidentified the actor who played that role. He was Jack Haley, not Ray Bolger.

OPINION

An Op-Ed article on Wednesday, about the need for a foreign-policy elite, misstated the number of American soldiers who died in the Vietnam War. It was 58,000, not 50,000.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


