


BAGHDAD — Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq announced the beginning of military operations to retake the Islamic State-held city of Falluja, west of Baghdad, in a televised address late Sunday night.

Iraqi forces were “approaching a moment of great victory” against the Islamic State, said Mr. Abadi, who was surrounded by top military commanders and the country’s elite counterterrorism forces. Falluja is about 40 miles west of Baghdad and has been under the control of the militant group for more than two years.

The announcement comes at a time of deepening political and social unrest in Baghdad.

Clashes between protesters and Iraqi security forces inside Baghdad’s highly fortified Green Zone compound on Friday left two people dead after security forces fired tear gas, water cannons and live ammunition in an attempt to disperse the crowds. More than 100 people were wounded, said hospital and police officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to the news media. The Green Zone houses most Iraqi government ministries and foreign embassies.

Many of the protesters were supporters of the powerful Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr, who has led months of demonstrations and sit-ins calling for government reforms. He has since issued a statement condemning the use of force against “peaceful” demonstrations and has vowed to continue to support the “revolution” against the government.

In the midst of the political crisis, Iraqi ground forces, backed by American-led coalition air support, have achieved a number of territorial gains against the Islamic State, most recently in Iraq’s vast western Anbar Province.

Last week, Iraqi forces pushed the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, out of the western town of Rutba, 240 miles west of Baghdad, on the edge of Anbar Province. Last month, Iraqi forces cleared territory along the Euphrates River valley in Anbar after the provincial capital, Ramadi, was declared fully liberated earlier this year.

But the fight for Falluja is expected to be complicated.

The city is still home to tens of thousands of civilians and has been under Islamic State rule longer than any other territory recently retaken by Iraqi forces. Iraqi security forces repeated calls for civilians trapped inside Falluja to leave on Sunday, but residents said checkpoints controlled by the extremists along all roads leading out of the city prevented most from fleeing.

Despite a string of territorial defeats, the Islamic State still controls significant patches of territory in the Iraq’s north and west, including the country’s second-largest city of Mosul. The militant group also has claimed responsibility for a series of large bombings in and around Baghdad recently that killed hundreds of people.


