


In 2004 a Dutch artist named Jasper van den Brink had an idea: He would release a large flock of pigeons with LED lights attached to their legs to fly up into the night skies over Stockholm.

He decided the project was not logistically viable, but described it in the New York-based magazine Cabinet.

“People walking below could observe a marvelous light dance in the sky,” Mr. van den Brink wrote in the spring 2006 issue. The magazine’s cover featured a photograph he took of a stuffed pigeon with lights on its legs, titled “Pigeons Don’t Fly at Night.”

A few weeks ago, word of a new and widely celebrated artwork, called “Fly by Night,” by the American artist Duke Riley, reached Mr. van den Brink. It also involves a flock of pigeons with lights attached to their legs, in this case wheeling across the night sky over the Brooklyn Navy Yard on weekends through June 12.

This gave Mr. van den Brink another idea: Mr. Riley, he thought, might have ripped him off.

“At first I thought, hey, this is really weird,” Mr. van den Brink said by telephone. “And then I was like, how is this possible?”

His legal adviser wrote a letter to the organization presenting Mr. Riley’s work, Creative Time, extending a “friendly invitation” to discuss Mr. Riley’s obligation to credit Mr. van den Brink and license his work.

Creative Time’s executive director, Katie Hollander, declined the invitation. Mr. van den Brink’s photo of a pigeon, she wrote in response, “is not at all like the entire flock of pigeons that are integral to ‘Fly by Night.’” Furthermore, she continued, “under U.S. law, ‘ideas’ are not protected by copyright.” Only executed works are.

She added, “There is no need to obtain a license of Mr. van den Brink because, as noted above, he has nothing to license.”

Mr. Riley said he had never heard of Mr. van den Brink or his work. “I definitely was not influenced by his work in any way whatsoever,” he said.

Artwork involving illuminated night-flying pigeons, Mr. Riley said, “has been something that’s been a reoccurring vision in my head for probably over three decades.” As proof, he dug out a drawing he did as a teenager around 1988, showing a pigeon surrounded by light, flying above a waterfront at night.

Amy Adler, a New York University Law School professor specializing in art law, said that American law sided firmly with Mr. Riley.

“You can’t copyright an idea,” she said. “If you allowed anyone with an idea to stop other people from making work, creative expression would grind to a halt.”


