


Ronald Reagan was a movie star who became a politician; John F. Kennedy was a politician who took on the glamour of a movie star.

The process began before Senator Kennedy’s election to the presidency in 1960, when he gave Robert Drew, a producer of news films for Time Inc., permission to document his campaign during the Wisconsin primary. Kennedy’s opponent, Senator Hubert H. Humphrey of Minnesota, had no choice but to follow that lead.

The result was the 53-minute film “Primary” (1960), which Mr. Drew (1924-2014) followed with two TV documentaries about the Kennedy presidency, “Adventures on the New Frontier” (1961) and “Crisis” (1963). All three, along with Mr. Drew’s short “Faces of November” (1964), a reflection on public grief in response to Kennedy’s assassination, have been reissued on disc as “The Kennedy Films of Robert Drew & Associates” (Criterion).

Of the four, “Primary” has the most historical value — not just as a record of Kennedy in campaign mode but also as a pioneering example of American cinéma vérité. In 1961, Film Culture magazine awarded “Primary” its third independent film award, for heralding an era “when a filmmaker can shoot his film, with sound, alone and by himself and unobtrusively, almost the same way as a poet observing a scene.”

Certainly, “Primary” helped change the nature of documentary filmmaking. Empowered by hand-held cameras and portable sound equipment, three members of Mr. Drew’s team — Richard Leacock, Albert Maysles and D. A. Pennebaker — would soon be recognized as leading practitioners of the form.

Cinéma vérité supported the sense, prevalent in the 1960s (and again current with reality TV) that life itself was a sort of movie. Anything captured on film was part of the spectacle; anyone was potentially worth watching. Thus “Primary” is mainly a study in personality types. Humphrey, whose first conversation with a supporter includes an enthusiastic “You betcha!,” seems like a character out of “Fargo,” while Kennedy, a magnet for crowds, already has the aura of a celebrity. Each campaign has its own theme song, both adopted from soundtracks: Humphrey’s reworked “The Ballad of Davy Crockett,” from a Disney television mini-series, while Kennedy’s peppier anthem drew on “High Hopes,” from the 1959 Frank Sinatra film “A Hole in the Head.”

Although comparable to Robert Frank’s 1950s photographs in its feel for the American heartland, “Primary” has been criticized for a lack of analysis. In his 1995 history of documentary film, “Claiming the Real,” Brian Winston criticizes it as “one of the most significant media failures of our time,” writing that “what looked like the opening of previously closed doors turned out to be no such thing.”

The door “Primary” opened led to a hall of mirrors. A photograph taken by Garry Winogrand at the 1960 Democratic Convention catches Kennedy flanked by, yet apart from, four animated supporters. His practiced smile and distant gaze suggest he is already a figure on a postage stamp. Documenting a similar preternatural poise, “Primary” is less an image of history unfolding than it is the history of an image.

Kennedy, not surprisingly, was pleased and, once president, facilitated a second Drew documentary. Broadcast early in his administration, “Adventures on the New Frontier” is basically a puff piece; its most revealing scoop is the self-portrait Kennedy has up in the Oval Office. “Crisis,” produced two and a half years later, is more performative — although here Kennedy is upstaged by Alabama’s new governor, George C. Wallace.

An inflammatory segregationist, Wallace flew the Confederate flag over his statehouse and promised to defy federal law by personally turning away any black student who tried to integrate the University of Alabama. As with “Primary,” Mr. Drew secured permission to document both sides of the conflict.

Wallace postures and invokes the Civil War, while Kennedy; his brother Robert, at the time the attorney general; and Nicholas Katzenbach, the deputy attorney general, map their legal strategy. The promised physical confrontation never occurs. Instead, the movie ends with the president, in a televised address to the nation, taking a personal stand against segregation. (Hours later, the N.A.A.C.P. leader Medgar Evers was assassinated in Mississippi, a political murder that the movie does not mention.)

Shown at the first New York Film Festival on a program with Robert Bresson’s “The Trial of Joan of Arc,” and subsequently broadcast by ABC, “Crisis” was not well received. The New York Times television critic Jack Gould called it “a prime example of governmental surrender to the ceaseless and often thoughtless demands of the entertainment world.” If, in some ways, “Crisis” remains current, Mr. Gould’s criticism is even more so.

“Panic in Year Zero!,” a quintessential Kennedy-era movie, was released to drive-ins by American-International in the summer of 1962 (on a double bill with Roger Corman’s “Tales of Terror”). Now on disc from Kino Lorber, it anxiously ponders both the threat of nuclear war and the survival of the nuclear family.

Dad (Ray Milland) and Mom (Jean Hagen, Danny Thomas’s wife in the 1950s sitcom “Make Room for Daddy”) and their teenage children (the pop star Frankie Avalon and Mary Mitchel, Wally Cleaver’s girlfriend on two episodes of “Leave It to Beaver”) have set out on a camping trip when Los Angeles blows up behind them. Thereafter, “Panic” concerns survival in a lawless post-apocalyptic world. The problem is less radioactive fallout than the rapes and murders committed by feral teenagers, abetted by Les Baxter’s strident ersatz jazz score.

Mr. Milland, who also directed the film, plays the paterfamilias with a dyspeptic bossiness appropriate to his dual capacity. Thanks to his unrelenting grouchiness, “Panic” is an occasionally risible nightmare version of “Father Knows Best,” but the temper of the times may be gauged by the tone of Variety’s reviewer: “The aftermath of a nuclear attack is the subject pursued by this serious, sobering and engrossing film.” Like a documentary waiting to happen.

NEWLY RELEASED

EXODUS A master of publicity, the producer and director Otto Preminger made news when he announced that his 1960 adaptation of Leon Uris’s best-selling novel, set amid the turmoil of Israel’s creation and reissued on Blu-ray, was written by the blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo. It didn’t hurt that Paul Newman was his star, playing a character partly modeled on the young Yitzhak Rabin. (Twilight Time)

JACKIE ROBINSON Ken Burns, Sarah Burns and David McMahon divide their subject’s career in two: The first part shows how Mr. Robinson came to integratemodern Major League Baseball; the second details his life afterward. Reviewing the film in The New York Times when it was televised earlier this month, Neil Genzlinger described Part 2 as “completing a portrait of an eventful life that, in the popular mind, is often confined to the ball field.” Available on Blu-ray and DVD. (PBS)

THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE Directed in 1962 by John Frankenheimer from Richard Condon’s political thriller, Hollywood’s wittiest, most resonant contribution to the Kennedy era is an anthology of Cold War concerns including Red China, McCarthyism, brainwashing and assassination. The president’s buddy Frank Sinatra plays the good guy. Reissued on Blu-ray and DVD. (Criterion)

THE TRIP Roger Corman’s deliciously cheesy drive-in evocation of mind-altered madness, directed from a script by Jack Nicholson, scored with psychedelic panache by the Electric Flag and released during the 1967 Summer of Love, is more than a time capsule — it’s an acid flashback. Peter Fonda stars as an intrepid tripster, with Bruce Dern and Dennis Hopper as two sketchy gurus. On Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video. (Olive)

TRUMBO This biopic from Jay Roach takes Trumbo from the top of the Hollywood heap through the depths of the blacklist to ultimate vindication, although Bryan Cranston’s showy turn in the title role is regularly eclipsed by Helen Mirren’s impersonation of the gossip columnist Hedda Hopper. The film “sometimes evokes an old Looney Tunes sendup of Tinsel Town, though without the beauty, wit, visual style or economy,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times in November 2015. On Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video. (Universal)


