


FRONT PAGE

An article on Monday about the Affordable Care Act referred imprecisely to the eligibility rules under the law for legal immigrants. While legal immigrants must typically wait for five years before they can qualify for Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor, there is no waiting period for legal immigrants to qualify for subsidies in the health insurance exchanges, where policies are purchased.

NEW YORK

An article in some editions on Monday about a budget crisis in Connecticut that has included layoffs of state employees misidentified the group that started the “One Connecticut” television campaign, which was meant to put a face on state workers. It was a union representing health care workers, not a consortium of 16 unions. The article also referred incorrectly to the people featured in one of the campaign’s commercials. Only one of the people featured was a client of a social services agency, not all three.

•

The Side Street column in some editions on Monday, about St. Ann’s Corner of Harm Reduction, a needle exchange program in the Bronx, misidentified the officials who helped the founder, Joyce A. Rivera, with the program. They were New York State health officials, not New York City health officials.

•

An article on Tuesday about campaign appearances for Hillary Clinton by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio referred incorrectly in some editions to Mr. de Blasio’s appearances on behalf of her campaign on Sunday. He spoke at two churches in Brooklyn and appeared with Mrs. Clinton at a get-out-the-vote event; he did not appear at the churches with Mrs. Clinton.

•

An article on Tuesday about the 2016 Pulitzer Prizes misstated the number of photography prizes that The New York Times has won in the last three years. It has won four, not three.

SPORTS

An article in some editions on Friday about the Yankees’ 4-2 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays misstated the given name of the Detroit Tigers pitcher who gave up Alex Rodriguez’s home run on April 9. He is Mike Pelfrey, not John.

•

An article last Wednesday about the role Justin Williams has played on the Washington Capitals since signing as a free agent from the Los Angeles Kings misstated the circumstances of the Kings’ comeback against the Chicago Blackhawks in the 2014 playoffs. They trailed in the third period of Game 7; they did not face a 3-2 series deficit.

OBITUARIES

Because of an editing error, an obituary on Sunday about the basketball star Nera White referred incorrectly to Lusia Harris-Stuart, who was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame along with White in 1992. She played basketball about two decades after White did; she was not a player of White’s era.

FOOD

The Wines of the Times column last Wednesday, about cru Beaujolais from Fleurie and Morgon, misstated the location of Petit Pois/Sussex Wines, the importer of Domaine de Robert/Patrick Brunet Fleurie 2014. It is Moorestown, N.J., not Morristown.

•

An article last Wednesday about the growing number of small dairies that sell directly to consumers misstated the role of Dairy Management Incorporated, a national trade group, in the “Got Milk?” advertising campaign. It helped promote the effort; it did not start the campaign, which was created by the California Milk Processor Board.

OPINION

An editorial on Tuesday misstated in some copies the length of the term Dilma Rousseff of Brazil won in 2014 and when it is set to end. It is four years, not five, ending in 2018, not 2019.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


