


OKLAHOMA CITY — Hal Smith first met Kevin Durant four years ago, when a mutual acquaintance informed him that the basketball superstar was thinking about opening a restaurant.

Smith, 69, runs a restaurant group based in Norman, Okla., that employs about 7,000 people across seven states. From their very first talk, the two men established an easy rapport, and within a year and a half they opened KD’s, a sleek spot in downtown Oklahoma City serving Southern comfort food.

But while the restaurant has done well, in recent months a matter of basketball business has been prickling Smith’s mind. After spending nine seasons with the same franchise, Durant will become a free agent this summer. Smith, therefore, has been forced to ponder the possibility that his famous business partner, the face of their food brand, could leave the city.

“I think about it every day,” Smith said, laughing. “What am I going to do? Are we going to keep it as KD’s? Are we going to change the name if he leaves?”

Smith’s concerns are a microcosm of the wider anxiety that has taken hold of the populace here. The Oklahoma City Thunder, fresh off another excellent regular season, are locked in heated battle with the San Antonio Spurs in the Western Conference semifinals. And in the background every day has been the whispering of an unavoidable question: Could these be Durant’s final days in the team’s blue and orange uniform?

Tension is inevitable when the possibility looms that a star athlete might switch teams. Yet the stakes somehow feel higher, more profound, than normal in Oklahoma City, where Durant and the Thunder are so tightly interwoven with the city’s identity.

The players’ likenesses decorate buildings and storefronts downtown, and the franchise’s influence is plainly discernible in the city’s small-business nomenclature: Thunder Donuts, Thunder Nails, Thunder Bail Bonds, Thunder Cab, Thunder Vapor, Thunder Ducts, Thunder Concrete Plumbing Service, Thunder Towing.

“We’ve got this reputation as an up-and-coming city, and a lot of that is tied around the Thunder, and the success of the team is obviously directly tied to Kevin Durant,” said Curtis Fitzpatrick, a morning host on the WWLS the Sports Animal radio station. “So, yeah, there’s lots of anxiety. There’s nervous energy. A lot of people don’t talk about it. But there’s no avoiding it on the horizon.

“There’s a whole local economy based in oil and gas,” Fitzpatrick added. “But there’s a Kevin Durant economy, too.”

Durant’s stature in the area has been growing since 2008, when the Seattle SuperSonics, who drafted him the year before, relocated to Oklahoma City. The restaurant, in which Durant owns a 25 percent share, symbolizes the roots he has established. When KD’s was still being conceptualized, Durant sent Smith on a three-city tour — from Miami to Los Angeles to Washington — to sample seven of his favorite restaurants. Even now, Smith said, Durant evaluates new dishes before they are added to the menu.

The restaurant itself is situated just a few blocks from the team’s arena. Memorabilia from Durant’s career dots its walls. At a news conference at the start of the restaurant’s construction, Durant elicited laughter when he said, “If somebody has a complaint, I’ll try to go in the back in the kitchen and help fix it, if I can.”

Oklahoma City has never seemed like an obvious place for a major professional sports franchise, but Durant, 27, who lives downtown, has fit in here about as well as any global sports superstar could. Anyone asked to elucidate his local standing will often point to the $1 million donation he made to the American Red Cross in 2013 the day after a tornado devastated Moore, an Oklahoma City suburb. Durant, who was in Minneapolis at the time, had Smith deliver the check to the local Red Cross office.

“People were crying that day,” Smith said, “and so thankful.”

Early in his career, Durant’s ingenuous demeanor endeared him to fans. There was the time during the 2011 N.B.A. lockout when Durant, after connecting on Twitter with an Oklahoma State graduate student named George Overbey, drove an hour to Stillwater to play in an intramural flag football game for Overbey’s fraternity team. Video of the game, and the huge crowd that gathered to watch it, made the rounds in the blogosphere the following day.

“He was locked in,” said Overbey, whose squad, despite winning, was disqualified from the tournament for fielding Durant, the most obvious of ringers. “He didn’t care about all the girls there, the people who came to watch. We were talking strategy in the car the whole time on the way to the game.”

For Overbey, it was a small glimpse of the competitiveness that has helped Durant collect seven All-Star selections, four scoring titles and the 2014 Most Valuable Player Award.

Durant’s public image has morphed a bit as he has matured. A little over three years ago, the ad agency Wieden & Kennedy devised a campaign for Nike titled “KD is Not Nice,” a quirky effort to show that Durant, while generally modest and shy, did not lack fire on the court.

Indeed, he has shown an ornery side, at times. He bristled at reporters at the All-Star Game last year, for example, telling them, “Y’all not my friends.” During the first round of the postseason this year, he was retroactively issued a technical for deliberately elbowing a Dallas Mavericks player.

Regardless, the support for him in Oklahoma City has hardly ever wavered. Two years ago, when The Oklahoman printed the headline “Mr. Unreliable” in reference to Durant’s struggles during a playoff series against the Memphis Grizzlies, the local backlash was severe enough to prompt an apology from the newspaper. The sports editor said in a statement then that the paper had “failed” its readership, calling the headline “overstated and unduly harsh.”

“He could be the mayor, if he wanted,” said Nick Collison, Durant’s teammate since the Seattle days.

Durant has quashed inquiries about his future plans whenever the subject has arisen. To the uninformed outsider — that is, possibly, everyone besides Durant — the possibilities seem multitudinous to the point that discussing them feels like a pointless pursuit. Still, it can be entertaining: Reports have hinted at interest from elite teams like the Golden State Warriors and the Spurs. Some wonder whether Durant would move to Los Angeles, where he often spends his summers. The idea that Durant might prefer the Eastern Conference, where the playoff road tends to be more forgiving, seems intriguing, too.

People here are praying he stays. But many also insist that if a separation were to occur, it would be mostly amicable — nothing resembling the nastiness that occurred after LeBron James left the Cleveland Cavaliers in 2010.

“I can tell you people won’t be burning his jersey in Oklahoma the way people did for LeBron in Cleveland,” Overbey said. “People will be devastated. They’ll be sad. But they have too much respect for what he’s done for the city.”

For now, then, all people can do is wait until free agency starts on July 1. Smith, the restaurateur, said he hoped to sit down with Durant next month to brainstorm possible additions to the menu. He also wants to discuss plans to open a KD’s in Austin, Tex., where they might reformat the restaurant as an upscale steakhouse.

In an ideal world, Smith said, the Oklahoma City location would keep its name no matter what Durant decides this summer. But he will have to wait and see.

“I think the city loves him enough not to hold a grudge,” Smith said. “But if he leaves, and people are disgruntled, I’ll have to make another decision, and I don’t have that decision in my mind just yet.”


