


Fredi Gonzalez had breakfast on Monday with an astronaut, Michael J. Massimino, who has flown two missions to service the Hubble Space Telescope. Massimino, a longtime friend, asked Gonzalez how someone could possibly stand at the plate and hit a 99-mile-an-hour fastball.

Gonzalez, the manager of the Atlanta Braves, was incredulous. How, he asked rhetorically, do you walk in space?

“You’ve got to have some pride and ego and a little cockiness about yourself to be able to do that,” Gonzalez said. “You’ve got to be pretty sure about yourself, Mike.”

After a black hole of an opening month, these Braves have found that self-assurance does not come easily. They lost 18 games in April, the most in franchise history (since 1900), and arrived in Flushing with just five home runs— or half the total of Trevor Story, the Colorado Rockies’ rookie shortstop.

The Braves, who open a new ballpark next season and have traded most veterans of value, did not expect to contend. But they did not plan to struggle like this. They made seven roster moves Monday, including the demotion of second baseman Jace Peterson, who was batting .182. His replacement, Reid Brignac, had a rough night: When he leaned down for a grounder in the fourth inning, the ball hopped off the base and smashed him in the face.

It’s been that kind of season for the Braves, whose 4-1 loss dropped their record to 6-19, the worst in the majors.

“It’s not what we expected,” General Manager John Coppolella said in an email. “We felt we would have a better team than we did last year because of a deeper lineup and a better bullpen. It seems like we keep saying the same thing, but we can’t make excuses and we just have to play better.”

Chances are, they will. The Braves’ winning percentage is .240, an outlier that would come in even lower than the 1962 Mets’ standard of futility. They have had bad luck: a rugged early schedule, eight losses by one or two runs, a hamstring injury to outfielder Ender Inciarte. But even the veterans recognize that the major league team is not the priority now.

The average age of the Braves’ position players, according to Baseball-Reference, is 29.7 years, the oldest in the National League. The emphasis in the organization is on long-term assets that can lead to sustained success.

“They’ve made it fairly clear where they’re at,” said infielder Kelly Johnson, who compared the Braves to his previous team, the Mets, for their talent in the minors. “They had to treat it like a full-on rebuild from the bottom up, and it’s going to take time. Hopefully, guys force their hand and play out of their minds. They’ve already moved up the shortstops. Anytime you get guys competing and pushing each other, that’s what the team wants.”

Those shortstops — Ozzie Albies at Class AAA Gwinnett and Dansby Swanson at Class AA Mississippi — are part of a farm system that vaulted to third over all this spring from 29th in Baseball America’s 2015 rankings. The Braves got there largely by trading Jason Heyward, Craig Kimbrel, Justin Upton, Evan Gattis, Andrelton Simmons, Shelby Miller and several others.

Just four Braves are signed past 2017, including third baseman Hector Olivera, who is on the restricted list after he was arrested in April and charged with assaulting a woman. The others are right fielder Nick Markakis, starter Julio Teheran and first baseman Freddie Freeman, who have generally played well this season.

Freeman signed an eight-year, $135 million contract two years ago, making him the centerpiece of a franchise that abruptly pulled off the tablecloth. There was a personal toll, said Freeman, who was close friends with many of the traded players. But now he understands.

“I had to grasp the business side of it,” Freeman said. “I finally kind of got to see that this off-season, with the hauls we got for Shelby and Andrelton. It’s hard to see those guys go, because they were such a huge part of our team. But everything comes full circle when you start to see some guys get called up here who are going to help us long term.”

The right-hander Aaron Blair — who arrived from Arizona, with Swanson and Inciarte, in a trade for Miller — has pitched well in his first two starts, joining a rotation that includes Matt Wisler and Mike Foltynewicz, who gave up three homers in the first inning Monday. Wisler came from San Diego in the Upton trade, and Foltynewicz from Houston in the Gattis deal.

Other top pitching prospects, like Sean Newcomb (who came from the Angels for Simmons) and Lucas Sims, are thriving in the minors.

“I think you see how the Mets kind of rebuilt the thing,” said Jeff Francoeur, a veteran outfielder. “And they’re trying to do the same thing here: Get a bunch of young pitchers. You can never have enough. Think about it: You get seven, eight, nine young pitchers, a few of them turn out to be a deGrom and a Syndergaard, and you never go on long losing streaks. Look at the Mets right now. There’s no way they’ll ever go on a long losing streak, because one of those guys is going to go out and throw a gem.”

The Braves, alas, have endured two long streaks: nine losses to start the season, and eight in a row from April 20 to 27. Gonzalez said the clubhouse had the right kind of veterans — Francoeur, catcher A. J. Pierzynski, reliever Jason Grilli and others — to keep the attitude upbeat.

The direction of the franchise has been set, and there is no deviating now.

“If anything, these struggles reinforce the belief system and core values that define our long-term vision,” said Coppolella, adding that his bosses had been through this before. “Ask any of the teams who have gone through similar processes — the Royals, Cubs, Pirates, Astros, Mets — and they would say, ‘Don’t lose sight of what’s important, no matter how difficult the adversity.’ ”


