


Times Insider shares historic insights from The New York Times. In this piece, David W. Dunlap, a Metro reporter, looks back at how The Times learned of, and prepared for, the dawn of the atomic age.

No managing editor has ever received a letter from a reporter like the one that dropped on the desk of Edwin L. James in July 1945 from William L. Laurence, who had been out of the office for months, having been seconded to the United States Army by The New York Times’s publisher.

Mr. Laurence’s assignment and whereabouts were a secret, even from his wife.

The letter did not betray the secret. But it hinted at its dimensions.

“This story is much bigger than I could imagine, fantastic, bizarre, fascinating and terrifying,” Mr. Laurence told Mr. James. “When it breaks, it will be an eighth day wonder, a sort of Second Coming of Christ yarn. It will be one of the big stories of our generation and it will run for some time.”

Remember that this was a generation that had survived the Great Depression and most of World War II. And now, Mr. Laurence was suggesting, he had a really big story.

“I am going to do my best to arrange to give you sufficient notice in advance (through the proper channels) so that you may have the time to prepare for it,” he wrote.

“The world will not be the same after the day of the big event,” Mr. Laurence continued. “A new era in our civilization will have started, with enormous implications for the post-war period, both from a military and industrial standpoint.”

These were not the ravings of a byline-hungry neophyte, but of a Pulitzer Prize-winning science reporter who had discerned the implications of research into atomic energy years earlier. He was to be taken seriously.

Four days after writing the letter, Mr. Laurence witnessed the first detonation of an atomic bomb, in the Trinity test, at what is now the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. He filed nothing about it to The Times and said nothing to his colleagues.

Technically, he was not working for Mr. James but, temporarily, for Maj. Gen. Leslie R. Groves, director of the Manhattan Project, who had chosen Mr. Laurence to be the public’s eyewitness, on the condition that he report nothing until the bomb was used.

After the Trinity test, Mr. Laurence was flown to the Northern Mariana Islands in the Pacific Ocean to await the departure of the first B-29 Superfortress bomber to carry the unimaginably destructive payload.

In New York, an Army captain who was acquainted with the assistant managing editor, Turner Catledge, showed up at the newspaper’s headquarters off Times Square. It was Wednesday, Aug. 1. He wore civilian clothes. Mr. Catledge recalled what happened next in his memoir, “My Life and The Times”:

“He sat down beside my desk and asked if I knew what Bill Laurence had been doing. I said I did not, and he replied that I would soon find out. He instructed, or rather ordered, me to report to a certain building in Washington the next day.”

Doing as he was told, Mr. Catledge was ushered the next day into a large conference room in the capital where General Groves and a half-dozen other men waited.

Mr. Shalett covered the War Department, so it was a logical fit, though it sounded as if the general was the one doing the designating.

In any case, Mr. Catledge headed straight for The Times’s bureau in Washington and ordered Mr. Shalett to be ready, any time of the day or night, for a big story. Then he returned to New York and ordered the night-side editors to call him personally if President Truman’s name popped up on the news wires for any reason, though he could not tell them why they were to do so. (One editor briefly balked at accommodating a day-side executive without knowing more. Mr. Catledge pulled rank.)

On Friday, Aug. 3, Mr. Catledge headed to Hillandale, the country home of Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger and her husband, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, the publisher of The Times, in Westchester County.

“Mrs. Sulzberger was giving a luncheon for several women and the publisher was out on the lawn with them,” Mr. Catledge wrote.

“I called him aside and we walked down by the swimming pool, where I told him the story. He was visibly shaken, and I found he knew quite a bit about the bomb. When we rejoined the women they could see the concern in his face and they quietly dispersed. As it turned out, the announcement of the bombing of Hiroshima came at 11 a.m. the next Monday, Aug. 6.”

And Mr. Laurence was right.


