


WASHINGTON — A prominent Obama administration nominee was extended a courtesy Wednesday that has become increasingly rare this election year: a Senate hearing.

Carla D. Hayden, the head of Baltimore’s public library, whom President Obama nominated in February to lead the Library of Congress, testified before the Senate Rules Committee, and after a little more than an hour of questioning, all signs pointed to a nomination process proceeding as, well, normal.

“I think this nomination is on a separate track,” Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri, the committee’s chairman, said after the hearing, acknowledging that Dr. Hayden was receiving different treatment than another prominent nominee, Judge Merrick B. Garland.

“Today will be no day to reach conclusions except, I think, that her background makes her well-suited for coming up with a vision for the library,” Mr. Blunt said.

If confirmed, Dr. Hayden, 63, would be the first woman and the first African-American to hold the position. The committee is expected to vote on the nomination in the coming weeks. Should the committee recommend Dr. Hayden’s nomination to the full Senate, the body would likely vote before its summer recess.

Dr. Hayden would be the first new Librarian of Congress since the Reagan administration, inheriting a library whose digital collections and technological capabilities have been outstripped by its peers and raised concerns among its overseers in Congress.

That reality provided the backdrop for a hearing that largely centered on Dr. Hayden’s experience and concerns overa issues like the library’s technological infrastructure and the status of the United States Copyright Office it oversees.

“The next Librarian of Congress will lead an organization that has really had significant physical and technological limitations and is struggling, really, to adapt to a new century,” Mr. Blunt said in his introductory remarks.

In her testimony, Dr. Hayden said she was mindful of those concerns and would champion efforts to restore its technological infrastructure. Along the way, she also gave hints of what the library, one of the world’s leading repositories of information and culture, might look like under her leadership, calling for continued private and public partnerships and increased outreach to smaller libraries around the country.

“As I envision the future of this venerable institution, I see it growing its stature as a leader not only in librarianship but in how people view libraries in general,” Dr. Hayden said in her opening remarks. “As more of its resources are readily available to view online, users will not need to be in Washington, D.C.”

The hearing’s most pointed questioning centered on the copyright office, which has had its own technological failings in recent months, prompting some to suggest that it should be made into its own agency.

Dr. Hayden said she was well aware of its needed improvements and the importance of a responsive copyright office, but did not commit to a stance on separating the office.

Senator Shelley Moore Capito, Republican of West Virginia, pressed Dr. Hayden to take a stance on granting the public access to reports conducted by the Congressional Research Service, which provides policy and legal analysis to Congress. The nominee said that while she was supportive of making nonconfidential portions of such reports accessible, it would require further discussion.

The Library has a staff of about 3,100 employees, an annual budget of almost $600 million and a collection of 160 million items, the majority of which have not yet been digitized. It has been without a permanent leader since September, when James H. Billington, a prominent scholar who oversaw a dramatic expansion in the library’s collection, resigned amid accusations of growing mismanagement.

Dr. Hayden, who has held high-ranking positions at some of the nation’s largest libraries as well as the American Library Association, is thought to have been nominated, in part, because of her administrative experience and formal training in library science — two qualities Dr. Billington lacked.

“I have no doubt about your qualifications or your ability to lead the Library of Congress,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the committee’s ranking Democrat, told Dr. Hayden.

Senator Thad Cochran, Republican of Mississippi, likewise congratulated Dr. Hayden on being considered for the post, and he suggested it was a good fit.

“I think this is a great day for the Library of Congress, it is a great day for the United States Senate,” he said, without questioning the nominee.

Dr. Hayden’s nomination has also received widespread support among the country’s librarians. In a letter on Tuesday, the American Library Association and dozens of organizations, urged the committee to quickly approve the nomination based on the “unique combination of professional skills and sensibilities that Dr. Hayden will bring to the post.”


