


Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s what-to-watch guide. We comb through releases big and small, famous and esoteric, to email readers twice a week with our timely recommendations. Our most recent suggestions also appear below. To receive our guide straight to your inbox, sign up here.

On a recent episode of “The Mindy Project,” Morgan described himself as “a person of filth,” and it’s a term I identify with completely and totally. I’ve rewatched so much “Southland” in the last few days that I feel like my spirit is made of empty Doritos bags and dirty looks. It’s such a good show, but it can bring someone down. Especially someone like me, a person of filth.

All is not lost, of course. One of my favorite shows is back this week! Plus, out there in the world are literary yo-mama jokes and amazing hand-lettering videos (warning: there is a Coldplay song), and magical “Simpsons” tattoos.

If you’ve started watching anything because of this newsletter, I’d absolutely love to know: I’m at watching@nytimes.com.

Watch if you like behind-the-scenes stories, addictive soaps and shows that feel right for summertime.

I wrote about “UnREAL” in this space in April, but its return is one of the highlights of my TV summer. The sudsy drama stars Shiri Appleby as Rachel, a reality TV producer on a “Bachelor”–style show. The new season (read our review here) picks up not too long after Season 1, with “Everlasting” making a bold move and enlisting its first black “suitor.” Sophomore seasons in general make me nervous — lots of good shows stumble in the second go-round — but based on the first two episodes, “UnReal” looks like it’s as smart and cynical as ever. The show’s at its best when we see Rachel play puppet-master with the contestants, and we see that in full force. (Monday, 10 p.m., Lifetime)

Watch if you like “Naked Gun”–type humor, Rashida Jones and especially sight gags.

Season 1 only ended in March, so “Angie” fans have not had to wait long, but back is back. It’s “Don’t Call Me Shirley: The TV Show,” and that’s either hugely enticing to you as a fan of “Police Squad!” et al, or it’s a total turnoff and you’re someone who hates “Airplane.” I am told it takes all kinds. If you’re somewhere in the middle, give it a go for the clear delight that everyone involved is taking in making this show. “Angie” is much more fun in small doses than in a binge, but TBS is airing two episodes back-to-back anyway. (Monday, 9 p.m., TBS, Watch Season 1 on Hulu)

Watch if you like dark dramas, foreign series, gutsy ensemble shows, and violent tales of vengeance.

“Orange Is the New Black” returns June 17 — and it picks right up where it left off, so if you were planning a rewatch or never finished last season, now’s the time. But if you’re jonesing for another show set in a women’s prison — one with a much harsher, darker tone, behold “Wentworth,” a ruthlessly bleak Australian drama. Three seasons, 34 total episodes, are available on Netflix.

The show centers on Bea Smith (Danielle Cormack), recently convicted of the attempted murder of her husband. We meet other inmates as well as the guards and prison staffers, and no one comes across all that well. Many, though not all, of Bea’s fellow inmates have been convicted of a violent crime; most, though not all, of the prison employees are corrupt or vicious in some way; much, though not all, of their (and frankly our) world is just wild horrendousness. “Wentworth” is very comfortable with its characters’ dark sides and bad impulses, but unlike a lot of other shows, it doesn’t secretly fetishize that brutality.

Even as “Wentworth” depicts the entropy that exists within prison walls, the show itself is impressively methodical, pulling off subtle season-long games and genuine shocks. It also holds the record for the hand-smashingest show I’ve ever seen.

The show’s fourth season is currently airing in Australia, so if you are extremely spoiler phobic, Google carefully. More than four episodes in a row, and you’ll be tempted to slam someone’s hand in an industrial washing machine, so pace yourself. If you miss the intricate plotting, unholy alliances, and fascinating depravity of “Breaking Bad,” give “Wentworth” a try.

• “Casual” returns for its second season. Hulu’s stab at the L.A.-talky-dramedy still feels unoriginal, and no one episode seems to have enough story in it. But Michaela Watkins’s performance is so good, it’s hard to write off the show completely. Wait until the end of the season (the episodes come out weekly) and watch it all at once. (Tuesdays on Hulu, where Season 1 is currently available)

• “The Americans” season finale airs Wednesday — and runs 14 minutes over, so make sure your DVR is set correctly. This season has been extraordinary (read our recaps here), and the finale continues apace. Hurry back, show. (Wednesday, 10 p.m., FX)

• The N.B.A. finals continue this week with Game 3 on Wednesday and Game 4 on Friday. (9 p.m., ABC)

“Morality is fluid in ‘Game of Thrones’; the one cardinal sin seems to be to refuse to deal with the world as it is. (Ned Stark is the enduring example of this),” Jeremy Egner writes. Plus from Vanity Fair, “What are the women of Westeros really up to?”

“‘Veep’ can rarely be called triumphant, but toward the end of this episode, when a dazzlingly attired President Meyer is demolishing her enemies with devastating words and a killer smile … well, for a few moments she actually is the most powerful person in the free world. She’s stunning, in every sense of the world,” according to Noel Murray.

“That’s the benefit of ‘Silicon Valley’ constantly bogging down its characters with setbacks and high-stakes conflict: Their response clarifies who they are and brings their relationships into sharper focus,” Scott Tobias says.

“‘Outlander’ has now comfortably settled back into its old rhythm. After the immense upheaval of the last few episodes it feels good for the show to slow down and calibrate the emotional dynamics of its characters,” Angelica Jade Bastién writes.


