


DUBLIN — Prime Minister Enda Kenny of Ireland was re-elected Friday on his fourth try, ending 70 days of deadlock and clearing the way for an exceptionally fragile minority government.

Mr. Kenny received 59 votes, with 49 against, in the 158-member Parliament — by far the fewest votes ever received for a winning prime minister in Ireland, a nation used to coalition governments with stable majorities. Speculation mounted on how long this government, dozens of votes short of a majority, might survive.

In his victory speech, a subdued Mr. Kenny appealed to opposition lawmakers to “work in partnership together to build a better Ireland.”

“It will be a real test of our democracy, of our character and indeed of this house — a test I am convinced we will pass,” he said.

Mr. Kenny had governed Ireland for the past five years atop a two-party government that controlled the biggest majority in Irish history. But voters angered by the economic burden of Ireland’s successful 2013 exit from an international bailout scattered their support to socialist protest parties and independents in the Feb. 26 election.

Mr. Kenny’s center-right party, Fine Gael, suffered losses but retained its top position in Parliament. However, Mr. Kenny’s coalition ally in the left-wing Labour Party fared poorly, leaving him without a viable majority partner.

Now, Fine Gael will stay in power only with external support from its age-old rival party, Fianna Fail.

The parties have never shared power since Ireland’s independence from Britain in the 1920s, when the two took opposite sides in a civil war. Fianna Fail rebuffed Mr. Kenny’s effort to form a majority coalition.

Friday’s breakthrough become possible once Fianna Fail accepted a compromise plan according to which its lawmakers pledged to support Fine Gail from outside the government ranks on a vote-by-vote basis over the coming three years.

Mr. Kenny had lost three previous leadership votes since the election as Fianna Fail’s 44 lawmakers blocked his nomination. This time they abstained, opening the door for him to win a majority of votes cast. Mr. Kenny received 50 from his own party and nine from independents, three of whom are expected to receive cabinet seats as part of the bargain.


