


Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.

Good morning. I’d like you to consider the lobster today. The stocks are good, the fishery more sustainable than most, and the prices are pretty fair at most markets along the East Coast right now – around $10 to $14 a pound for the pound-and-a-quarter fellows we most like to cook.

That’s expensive! Yes, but Cooking has stratagems for amortizing the cost. Buy one or two little lobsters for dinner this evening, to serve four to six in Florence Fabricant’s ace recipe for linguine with lobster and avocado. But please, do not discard the shells after you’ve cooked them. Save them instead for stock that you could use later in the week, say for a Tuesday night lobster risotto, or to make into lobster butter for a feast of chilled shrimp, or to drizzle over fried scallops. You’ll be living like a millionaire, even on a journalist’s salary.

On Monday night, perhaps you could keep up the maritime theme. David Tanis’s recipe for a seaweed salad makes great use of the dried seaweeds increasingly available in our supermarkets (and always available online). Dulse! Wakame! One of them is going to be, as NPR suggested last week, the new kale.

Tuesday is taken care of, on account of the lobster situation you set up tonight. (Though if you’re just not going to cook lobster, not ever, try Pierre Franey’s simple recipe for linguine with lemon sauce instead.)

Some stir-fry for Wednesday? Mark Bittman’s recipe for stir-fried lamb with eggplant and chiles comes together quick – faster than it would come from the delivery restaurant, and with about 10 times the flavor. Shop for that today.

And then maybe you could pick up a roast chicken on the way home on Thursday, and shred it for use in my recipe for enchiladas verdes. It’s a recipe that can be assembled in under an hour (well under an hour the second or third time you make it) and yields a one-pan dinner of great distinction. “My husband said this might be the best dish I’ve ever made,” a user named Nanbrand wrote on Cooking this week. We’re blushing.

And by Friday we’ll be exhausted, too. So how about a simple kale salad with cranberries and cashews to end the week, with a slow melt into the couch after dinner, watching “Feed the Beast” on AMC?

You can find lots more to cook this week on Cooking. I hope you’ll save the recipes you like to your recipe box, and share them with family and friends to boot. But if you run into trouble, please don’t hesitate to ask for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com. (Or you can reach out to me on Twitter or Facebook, or harass my feeds on Pinterest and Instagram.)

Now, where are you on Virginia Heffernan’s “Magic and Loss: The Internet as Art”? Here’s a review in The Times. And an excerpt at Vice. Maybe you’d like to read a new Stephen King story, “Cookie Jar,” in The Virginia Quarterly Review. Or listen to Jessica Molaskey and John Pizzarelli on their “Radio Deluxe” show, talking about food in the American songbook. It’s Sunday, after all. You should do something for yourself, in and out of the kitchen. See you tomorrow.


