


BERLIN — A 27-year-old German killed one man and injured three others with a knife while shouting “Allahu akbar” in a suburb of Munich early Tuesday, but hours later, after questioning him, the authorities said that he had no known links to Islamic extremism and that they believed he was mentally disturbed.

The attack, which occurred shortly before 5 a.m. on a commuter train and platform in the bucolic suburb of Grafing, nearly 20 miles east of Munich, shocked and unsettled many Germans who had already been on edge since the terrorist attacks in and around Paris on Nov. 13 and at an airport and a subway station in Brussels on March 22. The authorities responded swiftly to calls for help, and the man was arrested shortly after carrying out the attacks.

The lead investigator for the Bavarian state police, Lothar Köhler, told reporters on Tuesday afternoon that after initial questioning of the suspect, whom the authorities did not identify, officials had no “compelling evidence or plausible conclusions” as to a motive.

“We have no indication that he had any contact to Islamic or Salafist groups, individuals or organizations,” Mr. Köhler said. The investigator confirmed that witnesses had heard the attacker shouting “Allahu akbar” — “God is great” — and, in German, “You infidels must die,” but as the context emerged, the attack seemed less and less likely to be motivated by extremism.

Mr. Köhler said the attacker had undergone psychological treatment and used drugs on Sunday, though it was not clear whether he was under the influence of narcotics when he carried out the attack, which left a 56-year-old man dead and three other men — ages 43, 55 and 58 — injured, one of them severely.

The investigation will continue, Mr. Köhler said, and will include a search of the suspect’s home in Giessen, near Frankfurt, as well as further questioning.

The attacker traveled by train to Munich on Monday, Mr. Köhler said. Because he did not have enough money to stay in a hotel, he spent part of the night near the main train station, before heading to Grafing. The suspect had no police record, Mr. Köhler said, but had come to the attention of the authorities in Giessen for comments that Mr. Köhler described as “talking drivel.” The investigator did not elaborate.

Ken Heidenreich, a spokesman for prosecutors in Munich, who took over the investigation on suspicion that the attack might have been politically motivated, said the suspect had seemed confused during his interrogation. He said prosecutors would try to determine whether the man was criminally liable.

The attacker told investigators that he had taken off his shoes before the attack, because his feet had felt warm and because he had been afraid of blisters, the authorities said. He lunged at his first victim on the train, then at another on the platform when the train stopped at the station in Grafing. As he fled across the square outside the station, he stabbed two more men, who were riding bicycles.

Germany has so far managed to avoid large-scale terrorist attacks on the level of those suffered by Paris in 2015, London in 2005 and Madrid in 2004, but the authorities have remained on alert amid suspicion that the threat of an attack remains high, although not concrete.

In the days after the Paris attacks, security officials decided to call off an international soccer match in Hanover, following reports that it had been a possible target for terrorists. The authorities in Munich evacuated two of the city’s main train stations on New Year’s Eve and warned people to avoid large groups, despite the celebrations, amid warnings of a possible terrorist threat.

And in February, the head of Germany’s domestic intelligence agency, Hans-Georg Maassen, warned that the Islamic State was using the wave of newcomers to infiltrate Europe. The authorities in Europe have “seen repeatedly that terrorists are being smuggled in, camouflaged as refugees,” Mr. Maassen said on ZDF public television.

The authorities say they have foiled nearly a dozen plots to target the country since the turn of the millennium. But in 2011, a 21-year-old man from Kosovo, who said he was radicalized over the Internet, fatally shot two United States service members at the Frankfurt airport.

The Islamic State recently called on German Muslims to carry out Brussels-style attacks in Germany, posting images of the federal chancellery in Berlin, where Chancellor Angela Merkel works, and of the Cologne Bonn Airport, in Germany’s most populated state, North Rhine-Westphalia.

Travel on the rail line where the attack took place was briefly interrupted, then continued with some delays, because of the investigation. The line is one of the main commuter connections for people living southeast of Munich.


